---
title: Alice Percy: Happy Pigs Taste Better
---

### Farmerama  (2019-07-25)  
### Author(s): Farmerama  

**[0:00:00-0:00:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:00:00):**  Hello and welcome to this special interview with author and farmer Alice Percy.  This episode is part of our Women of the Land series with Chelsea Green Publishing.  The Women of the Land series shares the voices of women who are fuelled by their connection with the land.  
**[0:00:14-0:00:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:00:14):**  To build businesses, garner movements and share their stories.  They're standing up for what they know works and crafting a better future for us all.  I raised sheep briefly. They drove me insane. They were so, they were skittish.  
**[0:00:32-0:00:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:00:32):**  I've met very nice sheep but in general they weren't very personable.  Pigs are highly individual. They're very intelligent.  And they will, I think there was a quote from G.K. Chesterton, the British Christian apologist,  
**[0:00:55-0:01:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:00:55):**  who said that a cat will look down on you, a dog will look up to you and a pig will look you straight in the eye.  And that's very true. Pigs like to hang out.  And if you have a group of pigs, they don't act as a unit the way sheep or cattle will.  
**[0:01:12-0:01:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:01:12):**  They're very independent animals.  And so I respect that about them. I think it makes them more fun to handle and spend time with.  They're very easy to have a conversation with.  
**[0:01:30-0:01:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:01:30):**  You can talk to them about where they're going or what they're eating or what they're looking for.  Pigs are so curious. They're always looking around for something and exploring their environment.  And also just like a child, it's kind of fun to talk to them about what they're seeing and what they're finding.  
**[0:01:54-0:01:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:01:54):**  In her new book, Happy Pigs Taste Better, published by Chelsea Green Publishing,  Alice draws on a decade of experience raising pigs on pasture in Maine, the most northeasterly state in the USA.  A land of long and cold winters, beautifully hot summers,  
**[0:02:09-0:02:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:02:09):**  it's not the first place you would look to set up an outdoor pig farm.  But that's exactly what Alice and her partner did straight out of university in 2005.  There was many an up and down, lots to be learned along the way.  
**[0:02:21-0:02:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:02:21):**  But luckily, Alice has pulled it all together and her book is the first of its kind  to bring you an in-depth guide to organic high welfare pig farming on both smaller and larger scales.  We love how comprehensive Alice's book is, covering every aspect of raising pigs on pasture,  
**[0:02:38-0:02:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:02:38):**  from swine midwifery to humane bookturing and everything in between.  In this interview, Abby sits down with Alice to talk about how pigs raised on pasture are different to intensively reared ones,  and how to utilise their rooting instinct as part of a holistic system.  
**[0:02:54-0:02:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:02:54):**  And the joy of new piglets.  Maybe we could go through a few of the things you cover in your book,  because obviously some of your research is really helpful and informative to people wanting to raise their own pigs.  
**[0:03:15-0:03:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:03:15):**  So I think it was really interesting to hear how the physiology of domesticated pigs has changed,  and how, maybe you could tell us a bit about how a pasture raised pig is different to one that's bred intensively?  When any organism is bred to grow and reproduce in a highly controlled environment,  
**[0:03:37-0:03:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:03:37):**  then you can push certain traits to a further extent than you could otherwise.  And so when you have these animals that are bred within these systems where the temperature is controlled,  the moisture is controlled, the nutrition is controlled down to the microgram,  
**[0:03:57-0:04:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:03:57):**  then you can push growth rates and lean growth rates specifically much harder than you can  when you're breeding animals that have jobs besides just growing and reproducing to the maximum extent.  When you're raising your animals on pasture, they have to be able to cope with fluctuating temperatures,  
**[0:04:23-0:04:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:04:23):**  they have to cope with maybe less controlled moisture conditions,  and if part of their diet is grass or table scraps, restaurant waste, anything like that,  where you don't really necessarily know down to the nth percentile exactly what they're eating,  
**[0:04:47-0:04:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:04:47):**  then you are going to be making some sacrifices in growth rate.  You see behavioral differences.  Animals that are bred to thrive on pasture will have, they'll be active, they'll have a strong foraging instinct,  
**[0:05:03-0:05:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:05:03):**  whereas in a confinement facility, activity is not desirable.  That means you've got animals jostling into each other, you increase the risk of aggression,  the animals are burning energy that could otherwise go into lean growth,  
**[0:05:19-0:05:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:05:19):**  and there's just absolutely no need for them to forage.  All of their nutritional needs are being pumped through an auger and directly into a bin,  so it doesn't do you any good for them to know how to root for their own food.  
**[0:05:32-0:05:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:05:32):**  Do you have a, I mean, obviously you've probably tried out a few different breeds in your time,  and do you have a favorite breed, and maybe you could explain a little bit about why and their characteristics.  My strong preference is for cross-bred animals.  
**[0:05:49-0:05:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:05:49):**  Partly that is, quite honestly, maybe the main reason for that is I like looking at them.  I love having a variegated herd that has different colors, different patterns, different faces.  That's just, it increased my pleasure in farming to have those, a diverse-looking herd of hogs.  
**[0:06:12-0:06:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:06:12):**  The practical side of that, too, is hybrid vigor, which I'm sure you're familiar with.  You have the advantage of taking the good aspects from multiple breeds and combining them into single animals,  creating a herd that functions well in your area and under your management techniques.  
**[0:06:36-0:06:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:06:36):**  The Gloucestershire Oldspot was originally bred to thrive in southern England in apple orchards,  so if you are in Maine in pine forest, a purebred Gloucestershire Oldspot is probably,  they might do great, but they are probably not going to be optimized to your environment.  
**[0:06:52-0:07:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:06:52):**  That being said, I have kept a number of purebred animals, and I would say my favorite purebreds were the large blacks.  They're just really sweet-tempered animals, really good mothers, very calm.  While there's a lot of strains of large blacks, so this isn't true of all of them,  
**[0:07:16-0:07:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:07:16):**  but some strains of large black are among the most efficient of the heritage breeds.  When you're trying to actually make money at it, that's always a good thing.  I was wondering if we could maybe talk a little bit about the idea of pastured pigs.  
**[0:07:41-0:07:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:07:41):**  It's obviously, conventionally, people, well, certainly today, most pigs are not raised on pasture,  and it seems to be somewhat of a dying art, and with a renewed interest that's just come in the last five years or so.  Maybe you could explain a bit about what pastured pigs mean, and some of the challenges,  
**[0:08:05-0:08:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:08:05):**  and some of the advantages, and some of the good experiences.  One thing that I hammered in over and over in my book, because I had to hammer it into my customers over and over,  was that pasture-raised pigs are not grass-fed pigs.  
**[0:08:19-0:08:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:08:19):**  I think that a lot of the interest on the consumer end in pasture-raised pigs was an outgrowth of the growing interest in grass-fed beef.  They're literally entirely different animals, so to speak.  I think there are distinct advantages in raising pigs on pasture.  
**[0:08:46-0:08:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:08:46):**  It does not imply a wildly different diet in most cases than what they would be eating if they were confined to a barn,  or to a barn with a paved heavy use area, because pigs have stomachs like humans,  much very close to humans to the extent that they're used as models for medical studies before things pass on to human testing,  
**[0:09:14-0:09:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:09:14):**  whereas a cow is a ruminant that is designed to eat grass.  A pig in the wild is certainly nibbling on grass, but they're mostly rooting under the ground and looking for roots.  They're looking for bugs. They're scavenging carcasses, and they're eating eggs.  
**[0:09:32-0:09:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:09:32):**  They're eating little baby animals. They require energy-rich, protein-rich feed.  So if you try to feed a pig on grass and hay, they will starve to death.  The advantage of raising them on pasture is that they enjoy being out there.  
**[0:09:53-0:10:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:09:53):**  It's a difficult thing to prove, but it is wonderful to watch a healthy herd of pigs out on clean pasture.  It gives them an opportunity to exercise their natural instincts of roaming and rooting and foraging,  and it just lets them be pigs to a much fuller extent than being locked up inside.  
**[0:10:17-0:10:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:10:17):**  It gives them a more varied diet, which has a strong effect on the flavor of the pork.  Many consumers, including myself, think it's better, it's more interesting.  Pigs, to a large extent, the flavor of pork reflects the diet of the animals more so, I would say, than in beef or lamb.  
**[0:10:40-0:10:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:10:40):**  For example, most of the fatty acids that they eat are reflected very strongly in the fatty acid profile of the fat in the finished animal.  You can identify the differences in flavor between corn-fed pork and barley-fed pork and pork that's been heavily ranged.  Maybe you could just tell us, because you said that it allows them to really express their behaviors more being out in pasture.  
**[0:11:08-0:11:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:11:08):**  I don't know if you have any stories or memories of particular occasions that made you giggle?  My favorite part of the year was always when the pigs went out on pasture for the first time in the spring.  It was so much fun letting them out of the trailer, and they'd step out and see fresh clover and be like,  
**[0:11:28-0:11:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:11:28):**  Ooh, what's this? Oh, this is cool. And they knew instantly what to do.  They're just like, Oh, I'm going to stick my nose in that.  Other times we had some old field areas that were growing. It was like old grass and scrubby little trees, and we wanted to clean those up.  
**[0:11:49-0:11:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:11:49):**  We used the pigs to help out with that. I remember one area that the underbrush was so high.  I think we erected a new pasture in August when all the vegetative growth was as high as it could possibly be.  I went out to the, and we put some sows out there, a sow who was about to farrow.  
**[0:12:10-0:12:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:12:10):**  I went out there and I thought she had escaped.  I looked closer and she was just hiding in this patch of goldenrod that was so high that you could just barely see her spine among all the yellow flowers.  Obviously, you talked a lot about that the pigs like the rooting and digging down and they're a form of cultivator in a way.  
**[0:12:50-0:12:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:12:50):**  Obviously, there's this huge push and drive towards soil health and building soil health on farms at the moment.  Again, it's very different from grass fed cows that as they graze in a well-managed system, they are actively improving the soil quality.  They're encouraging underground root growth. They're trampling dead organic matter into the soil.  
**[0:13:14-0:13:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:13:14):**  I can't say that pigs have as positive an effect on soil health as pastured animals.  I have some skepticism about the push in organic agriculture circles right now to avoid tillage entirely because most of the plants that we grow for food are annuals.  In vegetable systems, they're mostly broadleaf annuals.  
**[0:13:45-0:14:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:13:45):**  One thing that I learned in college in my environmental studies classes is that, I don't know if you've heard of the concept of ecological succession and the types of plants that tend to take over at various stages of ecological succession.  It is natural for there to be disturbance events like wildfires. That's the major example.  After a disturbance event, the plants that dominate are annuals and especially broadleaf annuals.  
**[0:14:26-0:14:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:14:26):**  After time has gone by without further disturbance, what tends to take over next is perennial grasses and then shrubs and then deciduous trees.  To my mind, it's not honoring the way nature actually works for us to try to grow broadleaf annuals without a disturbance event.  I think that you can justify pushing our food system toward using more perennial crops, but the reality is right now that we like to eat broccoli, we like to eat soybeans, and those grow best when there has been soil disturbance.  
**[0:15:12-0:15:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:15:12):**  That's why I liked to use, to me it was a holistic system to use the animals to create that soil disturbance and then take advantage of that to grow a thriving crop of annuals and do that repeatedly.  There was a case study locally, but this happens repeatedly, that people trying to avoid the natural tendency of pigs to disturb the soil want to put nose rings on them and prevent them from rooting.  That just, to me, that violates the organic principle of allowing animals to exercise their natural instincts. Nose rings are very painful to pigs. They're trying to do what comes naturally to them.  
**[0:16:03-0:16:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:16:03):**  They're trying to root under the soil and they are met with a pain stimulus in response. To me, that's like putting a nail in somebody's shoe to keep them from walking.  Rather than trying to prevent the animals from doing what they want to do, we should be making sure that we are not overstocking our land, that we're being responsible about nutrient buildup in the soil, that we're paying attention to erosion potential and proximity to water bodies.  There's ways to mitigate the potential ill effects of hogs on grass without subverting what they naturally want to do.  
**[0:16:46-0:17:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:16:46):**  I wonder how much it sounds like you really used your pigs as part of a system and how much should people value the other ecosystem services that the pigs provide? How much did that come up in your farm?  When we first established our rotation system with the pigs and the horticultural crops, I was growing a really broad variety of vegetables.  In any given week, I had to remember to thin the onions and harvest the spinach and plant the pumpkins. It just became a logistical nightmare for me.  
**[0:17:23-0:17:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:17:23):**  Eventually, I ended up settling on just one crop, which was day neutral strawberries. They were very profitable for me. They did really well in that rotation.  It just simplified life a lot. Because it was a long rotation, I didn't really have to worry about growing just one animal and one vegetable. It was a four-year rotation. We would pasture the pigs.  Then the next year, you'd grow a cover crop on that land. That could be just about anything, really. Then the next year, you'd plant the day neutral strawberries. Those are just a single-year crop.  
**[0:18:08-0:18:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:18:08):**  Then the next year, you'd plant that ground back to pasture crops and just let them fallow and establish for the season so the pigs could go back on it next year.  There were basically two on-years where the land was growing something productive. Some years it was an animal, and some years it was a plant.  Then two years where it got to rest and resuscitate and just grow plant roots.  
**[0:18:33-0:18:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:18:33):**  If you were to give one piece of advice to a new farmer interested in raising pigs, where would you start?  Learn how to run a business. The marketing skills aren't necessary to running a farm business, depending on how you approach it. But there are a lot of ambitious, beginning farmers who are very excited about the agricultural principles.  But if they don't know how to run a profit and loss statement and they don't know how to calculate their expenses accurately, they're doomed from the start.  
**[0:19:23-0:19:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:19:23):**  People who are starting out tend not to value their time, which is easy to ignore when you're experimenting on a small scale.  Then it becomes just absolutely exhausting as you try to scale up. Once your farm becomes full-time, you realize it just becomes crystal clear that you're not making minimum wage.  You don't mind doing something for free when you do it two hours a week, but when you're doing it 12 hours a day, you can't do it for free anymore.  
**[0:19:56-0:20:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:19:56):**  That's my unromantic advice.  My other advice to people wishing to farm is to stay focused. There's another tendency, and I certainly fell into this trap, of wanting to do everything and be as diversified as possible. Diversity in agriculture is extremely important.  It's a real shame that so much of our farmland is taken up with this tiny handful of crops. We should be encouraging people to grow different types of plants, different types of animals.  
**[0:20:42-0:20:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:20:42):**  But that doesn't mean that it all has to happen on your farm. Farming is hard. It's difficult enough to raise pigs well without trying to raise wheat and broccoli well at the same time.  If your farm is struggling, you'd be better advised to learn how to do one thing better than to branch out in a million different directions and get stretched too thin.  The overall agricultural landscape can still be diverse if you're raising pigs and your neighbor is raising high bush blueberries. A young farmer should never feel like they have to do everything themselves.  
**[0:21:19-0:21:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:21:19):**  There's a middle ground between growing 4,000 acres of corn and growing 200 different types of crops and three different kinds of livestock.  We always like to ask many of our listeners or other smaller scale farmers, do you have a message you want to share with the smaller scale farming community?  Keep fighting the good fight. It's definitely a tough climate to be trying to make a living growing food in an alternative way.  
**[0:21:51-0:22:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:21:51):**  But I think that people who care about their food have our backs and those people are growing as a population.  So it's a conversation that we have to keep going.  Some people fear it's only been a trend and I think it's much more than that. But it's a conversation that we have to keep having to keep people aware and concerned and ready to vote the right way with their dollar.  
**[0:22:21-0:22:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:22:21):**  What is the most exciting and fun part of raising pigs?  New piglets are the best. I had a lot more fun with pigs after we started raising our own breed stock instead of buying piglets and just raising them out to slaughter.  New piglets weigh about two pounds and they feel like little footballs. They're just unbearably adorable and really exciting.  
**[0:22:54-0:23:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:22:54):**  They're always risky. Farrowing can go very wrong, especially in cold weather. You often lose a few in the first few days.  And so there's this tension around a new litter of like, is this one going to go well? How many are going to survive? If it's a new mother, is she going to be a good mother?  And when they get past that three day mark, you can be relatively assured that they're going to make it. And yeah, they're a lot of fun to watch and be around.  
**[0:23:27-0:23:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:23:27):**  It's brilliant to hear from Alice about rearing pigs outdoors, as the huge majority of pigs in the UK are reared indoors for their whole life.  As I travel around the UK countryside, I often pass shed after shed of indoor pig rearing units. They're concrete jungles that may seem efficient on a purely financial profit and loss, but they really don't add up in a more agroecological future for farming.  Thankfully, Alice offers a practical and soulful alternative.  
**[0:23:59-0:24:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:23:59):**  She recognises the importance of creativity and fullness in a pig's life, yet she doesn't deny the need for her farm to be a profitable business, and that ultimately she kills the animals she rears, and then eats them.  This Farm Armour podcast is brought to you by Chelsea Green Publishing, the leading publisher of books on sustainable food and farming, including Happy Pigs Taste Better by Alice Percy.  Contact your local bookshop or favourite online retailer, or go to chelseagreen.com for more details.  
**[0:24:37-0:24:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/alice-percy-happy-pigs-taste-better#t=0:24:37):**  This show was made by me, Joe Barrett, Abbey Rose and Hannah Sutherland. Community support is by Annie Landless, Olivia Oldham and Eliza Jenkins.  And thanks too to the pigs of Forest Culpit Farm in the Brecon Beacons.  