### Farmerama  (2022-08-11)
**[0:00:00-0:00:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-bonus-episode-mungoswells-malt-and-milling#t=0:00:00):**  There was no plan when we started and there still isn't really a plan. I hadn't dreamt  of making flour when we started.  Welcome to Cereal from Farmerama. This is a bonus episode featuring an extended interview  about Mungo's Wells Malt and Milling and their Swiss Army Flour Mill.  I'm Angus McDowell. I'm the farmer at Mungo's Wells where we also have a little flour mill  
**[0:00:43-0:00:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-bonus-episode-mungoswells-malt-and-milling#t=0:00:43):**  and a little maltings. I've been running the farm since 1984 and the mill has been  going now for about four and a half years.  My name is Alison Campbell. I'm 53 and I came into the Mungo's Wells Malt and Milling when  I was 48, 47. I knew nothing about it at all and I am now. I can malt and I can mill. I  do the sales. I just love it. There's everything and it has allowed me to find my passion.  
**[0:01:23-0:01:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-bonus-episode-mungoswells-malt-and-milling#t=0:01:23):**  I think Angus you should tell the story of the mill because you have a really good story.  You tell it very well.  We started malting. We got involved first in 2007 and then we found that we needed to  crush the malt for the little microbreweries because they don't all have their own mills.  I was looking, we have a farm bruiser, would have done the job but it is the dustiest,  
**[0:01:53-0:01:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-bonus-episode-mungoswells-malt-and-milling#t=0:01:53):**  dirtiest, most horrible piece of machinery and I didn't want it in here. I'm looking  round and a flour miller said to me, have you seen the mobile Swiss army flour mills?  I thought he was pulling my leg, I really did. However, we bought a mobile Swiss army  flour mill. The thought of the Swiss going off, stravaging round Europe, beating up  all their neighbours, yeah I suppose they wouldn't have been able to feed the troops  
**[0:02:28-0:02:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-bonus-episode-mungoswells-malt-and-milling#t=0:02:28):**  so they had to take their own flour mill with them perhaps but actually at the end of the  day I think in Switzerland you still do your national service for two years after you finish  at college or finish at school and I think you can do your milling apprenticeship while  you're in the army doing your national service and I think that's what these were built for.  But this one, when it came here, we opened it up and you can see how dusty it is in there.  
**[0:03:02-0:03:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-bonus-episode-mungoswells-malt-and-milling#t=0:03:02):**  It was clean, clean as a whistle. I don't believe it had ever had wheat in it. 30 years  old. So I was very lucky. Once eventually we had the maltings sort of under control,  it seemed a bit stupid to have a flour mill sitting and not make flour. So we started  trying to make flour and there's me proud as punch and I take my first bag of flour  into a small bakery in Edinburgh and the owner took one look at it and said well I suppose  
**[0:03:46-0:03:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-bonus-episode-mungoswells-malt-and-milling#t=0:03:46):**  I could use that as a dusting flour. Now it meant nothing to me but it was only fit to  dust the table so the dough didn't stick to the table. So we had to go away and rebuild  the flour mill. There were four of these Swiss army mills to start with. One went to Pakistan,  one went to one of the big flour mills down south and the other chap was a farmer's son  as well but his older brother was running the farm. He did a milling training, went  
**[0:04:26-0:04:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-bonus-episode-mungoswells-malt-and-milling#t=0:04:26):**  away to be a miller and he bought one of these mills to set up on the farm at home. He's  been a great help to me right the way through. He told me why the mill wouldn't work as  it was, he told me what to do. He actually found the machine that we bought to put in  except that it was completely rotten. We rebuilt it here on the farm because I still didn't  know if it would work once we put this machine in. We spent six or nine months, all the spare  
**[0:05:06-0:05:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-bonus-episode-mungoswells-malt-and-milling#t=0:05:06):**  moments building more bits and pieces and put this all together and then to everybody's  amazement I think suddenly we were making saleable flour. And since then he has tweaked  it and it's run on electricity, gravity and suction and a lot of make do and mend which  is even better because he's not spending fortunes. So he's reusing, he's regenerating  old bits of machinery, he's producing something that works and as it turns out it makes really  
**[0:05:44-0:05:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-bonus-episode-mungoswells-malt-and-milling#t=0:05:44):**  good bread as well. It was 30 years old before I bought it but we think that it was to all  intents and purposes new, hadn't really been used. Four or five years after we've started  it's now got 5000 hours on the clock. And that's building up as well, it does a bit  more every year from what it did the year before. Somewhere about six tonnes a week  at the moment which is quite a lot of loaves of bread. It goes way up into the roof, we'll  
**[0:06:18-0:06:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-bonus-episode-mungoswells-malt-and-milling#t=0:06:18):**  go upstairs and have a wee look at the separators. All this was actually inside the trailer.  All the green bits. All the green bits was inside the mobile trailer and Angus in his  genius has tweaked it shall we say, just a bit. Got to look after the mill and it becomes  like a pet in a certain way. You care for it and you look after it and you give it respect  that it's due which you must do because it's a dangerous machine if used incorrectly and  
**[0:07:05-0:07:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-bonus-episode-mungoswells-malt-and-milling#t=0:07:05):**  you just have to be aware of what it can do. But when used correctly it's so fulfilling.  It's a great story this grown on the farm, milled on the farm. To start with it was all  grain of our own production and I said oh we'll only use what we grow ourselves and  then we began to get too successful, too clever for our own good and now we are buying in,  we have a field rented from a neighbour. I'm talking to other organic farmers about getting  
**[0:07:40-0:07:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-bonus-episode-mungoswells-malt-and-milling#t=0:07:40):**  them to grow crop for us in Scotland. We can grow more on the conventional part of the  farm. We are changing the rotation to be able to grow enough wheat for the mill but on the  organic part it's a longer process. You've got to feed the ground in the previous year  to build the nitrogen in the ground to make the protein to get good enough quality wheat.  How common is it then to have a mill on a farm like this where you're milling your own  
**[0:08:15-0:08:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-bonus-episode-mungoswells-malt-and-milling#t=0:08:15):**  grain? I don't think anyone else does in Scotland. I don't know anyone else who's milling on  the farm. Do you think this could be a model for other farms? Oh no, no, it's dreadful,  it's terribly hard work. Well, no, seeing it slightly more seriously. If you were to  try to set that up from scratch, new stuff, it would cost best part of a million. Not  because the machinery, the actual mill unit separators, so on, cost as much but you pay  
**[0:08:55-0:09:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-bonus-episode-mungoswells-malt-and-milling#t=0:08:55):**  as much again to plumb it all together, to pipe it up, to fit it in so that before it'll  work, electrics and everything as well. It is simply not viable to start a mill on this  sort of scale. There's no economy of scale when you start working at this sort of rate.  What we have is what I would call a changeover flour, which is we can't, it's not one particular  whole flour, it's a little bit perhaps of strong bread and a little bit of plain flour  
**[0:09:38-0:09:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-bonus-episode-mungoswells-malt-and-milling#t=0:09:38):**  when I change on the mill, I have a flush through. The flour is of perfectly good quality,  however it can't be sold as a specific type. So what we've investigated is how can we  benefit the community, which group is going to be able to use this? And we give this flour  to community groups, to local churches, we take sacks into our local high school in North  Berwick, they use it, lots of different community welfare groups, you know, and the most valuable  
**[0:10:11-0:10:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-bonus-episode-mungoswells-malt-and-milling#t=0:10:11):**  commodity we have is our time and I think it's best served along with fabulous bread,  so it's wonderfully, it's really good.  Serial is possible thanks to generous support from the Roddick Foundation. Subscribe to  Farmerama to hear the rest of the series. You can find us on your favourite podcast  app on Soundcloud or at Farmerama.co. If you enjoy the series, please do spread the word.  
**[0:10:44-0:10:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-bonus-episode-mungoswells-malt-and-milling#t=0:10:44):**  And if you'd like to support Farmerama, visit patreon.com forward slash Farmerama.  Serial is produced and edited by me, Katie Revel, with Abbey Rose and Joe Barrett. Suzie  McCarthy and Hannah Sutherland also worked on the series. Our theme music is by Owen  Barrett. A huge personal thank you to everyone who's helped make and share Serial.  