### Farmerama  (2019-33-29)
**[0:00:00-0:00:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:00:00):**  Welcome to Cereal from Farmerama. This is episode 6, Grain Futures.  That's the Lost Travelers, playing at the Harvest Party we recently hosted at E5 Bakehouse  in London. And against that lovely backdrop, we've reached the end of our cereal journey.  An end which is in fact, just the beginning.  In this episode, we'll be revisiting some of the people we've met over the course of the series.  
**[0:00:46-0:00:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:00:46):**  They'll be sharing their visions for the future of grain. What needs to happen to build resilient  local grain economies? And what is already happening? First though, I want to pick out  some of the common threads I've noticed in the conversations I've had while making this series.  I think it's fair to say there's a general feeling that the industrial bread system is  underpinned by a flawed logic. A logic that's damaging to people and planet.  
**[0:01:15-0:01:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:01:15):**  As we've heard, it's a logic of alienation. It relies on creating barriers between people  in the system, and between people and food. It's a logic of uniformity. It can't cope with diversity,  let alone strive to promote it. It's a logic that implicitly assumes that automation is  synonymous with progress, and that bigger necessarily equals better. At every stage,  from soil to seed to flower to loaf, this logic is undermining the natural systems we depend on.  
**[0:01:47-0:01:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:01:47):**  Our health, both physical and mental, the fabric of our communities, and the value of people's work.  But just as these crises are interconnected, so are the solutions to them.  Here's Andrew Whitley from Scotland the Bread.  Now, when you factor in the other sort of elephant in the room, which is climate change,  climate crisis, and the impact, the carbon emitting impact of extended supply chains with  
**[0:02:15-0:02:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:02:15):**  big industrial processes, which are very energy intensive, then you begin to see that there is  another route. There is another way out of this, which in fact involves, in the language of the  Real Bread campaign, more jobs per loaf, rather than the other way around. And that's an inversion  of the conventional thinking of capitalist efficiency.  In this series, we've heard about a new grains movement that's based on this inversion of  
**[0:02:43-0:02:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:02:43):**  conventional thinking. A movement with a different logic and a different set of aspirations.  It aspires to diversity instead of uniformity, from the life in the soil to the life in our guts,  from the genetics of our seeds to the backgrounds of the people baking our bread.  Resilience as opposed to infinite expansion. Collaboration rather than competition.  Working on a human scale, not an industrial scale. And at every stage, getting people back into the  
**[0:03:14-0:03:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:03:14):**  system, into the mills, onto the farms, into the bakeries and around the tables, encouraging  bakers and farmers and millers and breeders and consumers to talk to each other.  It's a sharing exercise and it's accepting that you have a lot to gain from being part of that  feedback loop, from being part of that community, and that you also have a lot to offer.  Kimberly Bell from Small Food Bakery in Nottingham.  
**[0:03:42-0:03:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:03:42):**  A problem that they have could potentially be resolved by a solution that you hold,  and vice versa. And I think when marketplaces become depersonalised, when people become very  detached, those conversations don't happen. And so we end up with systems that are compensating  for problems that could have been very easily resolved. And the reason why this is important  is simply because I think to create a better food system we have to reconnect with nature  
**[0:04:13-0:04:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:04:13):**  and we have to reconnect with natural values. We can't continue to extract more resources  than are available. We are all needing to eat from the same field, in fact. So we might as  well work together to try and get the best out of that field.  Kim is not talking about regressing to some quaint, harmonious vision of the past.  This is about creating a more efficient bread system. A system that generates a lot less waste,  
**[0:04:42-0:04:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:04:42):**  and takes responsibility for any waste it does create. A system that operates as more of a closed  loop than a linear production line. A system that accounts for all of its impacts, including  everything from people's wages and their job satisfaction, to the carbon footprint of distribution  networks, to the health of our soils and the health of our bodies. And building this better,  more efficient system first requires a shift in mindset.  
**[0:05:08-0:05:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:05:08):**  We all talk about the food system and I think it's really hard actually. We have perhaps  an inadequate language to be able to describe it, but we talk about it as if it's other,  or as if it's something that's out there. And just by doing that we're actually taking  ourselves out of it. I think you can apply the same thing to the way that we're fumbling  around trying to understand our position in nature right now with climate change.  
**[0:05:34-0:05:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:05:34):**  I can't help but feel like these discussions are often flawed because we always remove  ourselves from the system before we start to imagine it or reimagine it. And I think we've  done that with food. We've completely removed ourselves from the system and then the system  starts to dictate how we interact with it rather than the other way around. I think  that's quite dangerous.  
**[0:05:58-0:06:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:05:58):**  We are the bread system. Even those of us who interact with it primarily as consumers.  If you eat bread, you're part of it. But the current system tells us otherwise. It encourages  us to be passive consumers and it encourages farmers and millers and bakers to be passive  producers. So creating a better system is about moving from passivity to agency. In  other words, it's about reclaiming food sovereignty.  
**[0:06:26-0:06:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:06:26):**  Again, it does just fundamentally come back to removing the barriers and our own belief  systems are one of the barriers that we need to break down. And so if we can just move  towards a belief we are part of the food system, then that immediately offers loads of exciting  possibilities because I think everyone's voice should be in the mix. If we can just  take a kind of evolutionary metaphor for how we need to survive the coming years of climate  
**[0:06:54-0:07:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:06:54):**  challenge and biodiversity loss, we need to behave like a kind of evolutionary species.  And I think removing as many barriers to that as possible can only be helpful. I think empowerment  of everybody to enjoy their food culture and to take part in it is probably one of the  most important steps or a first step before we even bother about all of the detail.  So how can we start to understand ourselves as part of the system?  
**[0:07:23-0:07:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:07:23):**  I don't think it's right to say that our food system is broken.  Stephen Jacobs from Organic Farmers and Growers.  I don't think ordinary people understand when you say that. Hang on, I've got food  on the shelf, I'm not starving. I think it's more useful to say the food system is dislocated  and what we need to do is to put the socket back in the joint. The idea is that in order  
**[0:07:52-0:07:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:07:52):**  to effect that positive change both culturally and agriculturally, you need to understand  the economics as well as the ecology. Grassroots is going to be the one that will influence  the policy makers. So in order to effect positive change we need to get a miller and a baker  talk to the farmer and they're doing that while still running their usual business.  We're not talking about some weird massive handbrake, we're talking about a slow but  
**[0:08:25-0:08:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:08:25):**  steady and transformative process. And that you must involve people. The people who come  to the bakeries, who go to the restaurants where the chefs are who are switched on to  this have to not just be served a plate of food, they have to be given the information  and they have to get excited about it.  We want to have a story with our food, it just makes it all the more interesting.  
**[0:08:52-0:08:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:08:52):**  Ben McKinnon, founder of E5 Bakehouse in London.  It's not a sort of romance, it has real impacts because we're creating more jobs, we're  training more people and we're creating more micro economies and micro supply chains that  I think will let us all feel more connected to the land and make us look after it better  ultimately.  
**[0:09:17-0:09:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:09:17):**  One of the most challenging and compelling things about making this series is that everything  is so interconnected.  Pick at any thread, soil health, food poverty, climate change, job satisfaction, wheat intolerance,  genetic diversity and you realise it's entangled conceptually and practically with every other  thread. That entanglement is the whole point and it's one of the things that makes this  
**[0:09:46-0:09:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:09:46):**  New Grains movement so exciting. It means that an apparently localised event, a conversation,  a connection, a purchase, a gathering, a shift in thinking, all of them can spark much wider  change. So let's hear about some of the organisations and individuals creating those sparks.  Anne Parry is the miller at Vellin Ganol Watermill in West Wales. Together with her husband Andy,  she produces a range of stone ground flowers. By collaborating with farmers and demonstrating  
**[0:10:21-0:10:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:10:21):**  that there is demand for locally grown milling wheat, Vellin Ganol is playing an important  role in reviving the area's grain economy. Anne's experience of setting up the mill led  her to establish the Welsh Grain Forum.  All these conversations we've been having, it was obvious to me that we weren't alone  and I was really quite inspired by the things that were going on in the States with main  
**[0:10:43-0:10:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:10:43):**  grains and the people who were working over in Washington state and reinvigorating their  grain economies really. And I thought, you know, we could do this in Wales. We've got  a lot of farmers who are keen to turn to regenerative agriculture and actually improve their income  streams by growing crops on a mixed farm and actually being able to do this kind of thing  again. We've got the universities with their research departments. There's a lot going  
**[0:11:08-0:11:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:11:08):**  on really. We could actually market a local grain. And people were doing it in little  patches here and there. There's ourselves, there are another couple of mills. There were  farmers who were sort of trying, looking at on-farm mills or setting up peasant bakeries.  And I felt we should all be talking together really, because otherwise we're all in danger  of reinventing the wheel. And all the infrastructure was gone. We were all very tiny and we needed  
**[0:11:31-0:11:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:11:31):**  to get together to work that out. What it basically is, is a networking group really,  so that people are actually talking to each other and hopefully, slowly but surely, we're  actually getting things off the ground.  Yes, so Welsh Grain Forum is a collaboration between millers, bakers, farmers, brewers,  molesters and anyone else involved in the grain economy in Wales.  
**[0:11:57-0:12:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:11:57):**  That's Rupert Dunn from Torthetir Peasant Bakery in South Wales.  And it's trying to put all those actors back in touch with each other to reinvigorate the  grain economy. So farmers know how to talk to millers, millers know how to talk to bakers  and molsters. And on a basic level, it's meetings of people coming together to share ideas and  discuss what's happening. And it's a great little forum when you come together and meet  
**[0:12:22-0:12:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:12:22):**  those people and gain support. Because if you're trying to do something different, I  think in Wales, sometimes you're on a farm down a lane, down a track somewhere, and you  want to grow some heritage wheat and well, hey, you want to talk to people about it.  You want to compare notes or gain inspiration. It's really important that we come together  to do those things. Yeah, so that's in a nutshell, I guess, what the Grain Forum does.  
**[0:12:48-0:12:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:12:48):**  Scotland the Bread is a social business working to grow better grain and bake better bread.  Their many initiatives include reviving heritage wheat varieties and testing them in different  Scottish microclimates, engaging communities with cereal production through their Soil  to Slice citizen science project, supporting the establishment of community bakeries, and  milling organic heritage flour at the Balkasky Estate in Fife. Here's Andrew Whitley to explain  
**[0:13:16-0:13:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:13:16):**  why Scotland the Bread are starting at the start with the soil and the seed. Sorry, by  the way, for the sawmill noise in the background of this clip. It's one of the many hazards  of recording on a farm. Scotland the Bread is an attempt to improve  grain and bread in Scotland, which has a particular problem in this regard because it's a country  which grows a million tons of very good wheat, which would be about five or six times as  
**[0:13:44-0:13:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:13:44):**  much as it would need to feed the entire country with bread and bread products. But it doesn't  use any of that grain for that purpose or derisory quantities. So where does it go?  What's it used for? Well, increasingly, unfortunately, the production of ethanol for biodiesel for  cars, feeding cars, not people, and even worse than that, arguably cheap alcohol, which not  only doesn't make a contribution to dealing with Scotland's serious problems of diet related  
**[0:14:11-0:14:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:14:11):**  ill health, but actually appears as a serious social problem in terms of replacing food  to some extent and causing severe problems of alcoholism in certain communities, or facilitating  it, shall we say. Now, some action is being taken on minimum alcohol pricing and sugar  taxes and that kind of thing. But nobody's really addressing this by joining up certain  obvious dots, which are if you could get better grains grown more locally, with a lower degree  
**[0:14:42-0:14:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:14:42):**  of intensity in terms of agricultural inputs and all their polluting and carbon emitting  consequences, then you might make a contribution simultaneously to biodiversity or landscape  health, to human health by making better bread and getting it closer to the end user, all  in one fell swoop. And that's what we're trying to do. So we've started on the ground saying,  which varieties of grain, not just sort of super hybrid modern varieties that somebody's  
**[0:15:14-0:15:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:15:14):**  bred which will break down in terms of their disease resistance in three or four years  or five years, whatever, but actually, are there grains which perhaps used to grow in  Scotland or in similar climates, which are inherently more diverse in terms of their  genetics and might therefore be more resilient to be grown without the use of chemical inputs  and plant protection products, pesticides, herbicides and fungicides and so on, and could  
**[0:15:43-0:15:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:15:43):**  be made into bread, which was more digestible and more nutritious. So the proposition is  less impact on the ground, the landscape on the farming system on soils, and a requirement  for fewer slices for satisfaction, which deals with the extra potential cost it will grow  if we get off the treadmill of this essential commodity market situation.  As well as networks like the Welsh Grain Forum and organizations like Scotland the Bread,  
**[0:16:15-0:16:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:16:15):**  companies also have an important role to play in getting us off that commodity treadmill  and helping farmers to become food producers. Hodma Dodds is one company working to do just  that. Hodma Dodds was founded off the back of the Great British Beans Trial, which aimed  to assess and stimulate demand for British grown pulses. The trial was a great success,  and Hodma Dodds now works with farmers to source British grown pulses, seeds and grains. They're  
**[0:16:43-0:16:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:16:43):**  challenging assumptions about what it's possible and economical to grow in the UK. So what's  the Hodma Dodds vision? Here's Josiah Meldrum, one of the co-founders.  So we are really keen to facilitate, enable, allow to happen a kind of broader transition  to agroecological food systems. So a move away from monocultural commodity production  towards more localized, diverse food economies that are dependent on a much wider range of  
**[0:17:13-0:17:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:17:13):**  crops that are in themselves making a positive contribution to the ecology of the farm systems  within which they're grown. That's kind of the bigger picture. And that that should be  equitable and fair and equal and healthy and all of those things that I think we'd all  strive for but that are not being delivered by the current food system.  So how can a company like Hodma Dodds help to make that vision a reality?  
**[0:17:35-0:17:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:17:35):**  For a farmer that's producing grain on a large scale and in East Anglia where we're based  that might be a thousand or a two thousand acre farm which has cereals in a probably  quite straightforward rotation often just wheat, wheat, wheat, rape, maybe wheat, wheat,  wheat. It's very, very difficult to break out of that. They are capitalized in terms  of their farm business and their machinery to produce wheat in a very particular way with  
**[0:18:00-0:18:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:18:00):**  a very particular set of costs that allow them to sell into the commodity market either  for milling or more likely probably into the feed wheat market. For them to break out of  that and to grow a more unusual cereal is a huge risk and a real challenge. For a start  they haven't got the machinery to handle those small quantities and then they also need to  find a market that will reflect the extra effort and risk that they've taken in growing  
**[0:18:24-0:18:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:18:24):**  those crops. We see our role as an enabler, as a facilitator. We can work with a farmer  and help them to find a way to grow the crops on a smaller scale and also to find them a  market for those crops. In terms of the help that we might be able to offer the farmer  in growing it we can offer some very basic agronomy based on our experience and skills  with those crops. We can offer them help with finding seed and looking for varieties that  
**[0:18:51-0:18:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:18:51):**  have the kind of traits that bakers and millers and home cooks are looking for whether that's  flavour or protein content or milling qualities. And so we can work in partnership with the  farmer to allow them to grow crops on a smaller scale that they know have an end market that  reflects the effort and the risk they've taken in growing them. And that sounds kind of fairly  obvious but it's actually extraordinarily difficult to make all those pieces come together  
**[0:19:14-0:19:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:19:14):**  and happen. And what does it look like when it does happen? Here's Shropshire based organic  farmer Mark Lee. He came across Hodmer Dodds about six years ago. We were growing peas  at the time for feed and anything you grow for feed is a sort of commodity because no  human being is specifically interested in it. It's about what its protein level is and  what it costs. And we were growing peas for animal feed. Peas are really really hard to  
**[0:19:40-0:19:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:19:40):**  grow and organically more so. And the value of those peas was in my view not fair and  it was set by imported prices because the feed industry works on a, certainly on a European  level if not a global level as far as pricing is concerned. So our peas were valued at the  cost of peas off a boat in Southampton. In desperation trawling through Sumer and other  whole food catalogues and outlets to see what we could grow. Could we grow chickpeas, could  
**[0:20:07-0:20:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:20:07):**  we grow lentils for human consumption, could we find something. And then I found the very  young and shiny Hodmer Dodds were just starting out. They came over and we got on really well  and we've grown peas for them ever since. So that took us to a position where our crops  were then in packets, on shelves, being bought by real life customers that we didn't know.  Social media of course getting going and those people were then tweeting about that saying  
**[0:20:35-0:20:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:20:35):**  that they'd bought these peas and they really liked them. So I was able to interact with  those people which is just wonderful as a grower of something to be thanked not only  by the person that you've just sold 10 tonnes of it to but the person who's just bought  300 grams of it was a really nice feeling. So it all builds this feeling of appreciation  which then gives you the motivation to keep going. So getting closer to our market through  
**[0:20:58-0:21:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:20:58):**  them has encouraged us again to look again at wheat and see whether we can do something  similar in the sense of style at least some of our wheat much more directly and shorten  the supply chain with the wheat and get the direct appreciation hopefully of customers  rather than indirect as we are at the moment.  One of the things all these initiatives are doing is building connections. As we've heard  
**[0:21:26-0:21:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:21:26):**  throughout the series bringing people together and especially people who usually work in  isolation from each other that can be a hugely powerful force for change. It was with that  in mind that Kimberly Bell, founder of Small Food Bakery in Nottingham, organised the first  Grain Lab, a gathering of farmers, millers, plant breeders, bakers, cooks, scientists  and academics. She was inspired to do so after attending Grain Gathering, an event organised  
**[0:21:54-0:21:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:21:54):**  by the Bread Lab at Washington State University. Bread Lab is a project that breeds publicly  available grain varieties with the goal of improving people's access to affordable,  nutritious food. And I realised when I went to that conference  for the first time how powerful it was when you bring people together who are passionate  and who all want to pull in the same direction. Just having this sort of combination of an  
**[0:22:17-0:22:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:22:17):**  intense learning experience with a very convivial social atmosphere and eating loads of great  food. I know there was something so deeply moving about the whole experience and it really  set my intentions going forward. One of the keynote speakers there was Dawn Woodward.  Dawn Woodward is the co-founder of Evelyn's Crackers, a Toronto-based food company working  to bring heritage grains to the public. And she spoke about sustainability, which  
**[0:22:47-0:22:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:22:47):**  was a really broad topic that really spoke to me because I was thinking about how I wanted  to develop my business and the direction I wanted to go and what I was really trying  to do, like what was it all for. And I just always remember her saying, I think towards  the end of her speech, that we have to be more than just bakers. And it just stayed  with me the whole time and I just thought, you know, what does that mean? Like, how can  
**[0:23:11-0:23:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:23:11):**  we be more than just bakers? One of the ways in which I wanted to contribute  was very much to bring that very emotional experience back to the UK. I thought we don't  have a gathering like that in the UK. And then also I'd met Martin and I'd learned  about the population wheat and people were starting to ring me and email me about what  we were doing and they'd come across the flour being grown somewhere else and they wanted  
**[0:23:37-0:23:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:23:37):**  to use it in their bakeries and could we share formulas.  Kim's talking about the YQ population, a genetically diverse population of wheat developed by Professor  Martin Wolf. Having met Martin and learned about the benefits of population wheat, Kim  was inspired to become a self-described ambassador for YQ.  So it's a combination of the aspiration of wanting to replicate a fabulous experience  
**[0:24:01-0:24:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:24:01):**  like grain gathering and also wanting to bring a group of people together around the population  wheat to understand and to learn a bit from Martin as I'd had the privilege to do. So  the first meeting was in 2017 and it was just 50 people who I invited and they were mainly  just people who had some kind of connection to Martin or connection to the population  wheat and they just wanted us to have a day workshopping out ideas and learning from each  
**[0:24:28-0:24:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:24:28):**  other and talking about localised grain economies because that's really what the population  was for. It was a way of empowering people to take back control over their bread, their  flour, their grain, their seed. It was about sovereignty. And then everybody had such a  nice time, everyone was like, oh we're going to do that again. So that gave me permission  really to make it into a much bigger event in 2018 and then we ticketed it, we invited  
**[0:24:54-0:24:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:24:54):**  people from around the world to come speak about their own experiences in forming alternative  grain economies. And I was very pleased to observe that most of the people who came had  a very similar experience as to what I'd had when I'd gone to America which was like deeply  inspiring and it really set my intentions. And now we are, I don't know, 10 months on  from the big event in 2018 and I'm already seeing all this kind of energy that was sparked  
**[0:25:22-0:25:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:25:22):**  by the event and the connections that were made and people coming together in small communities  in the regions and building their grain economies. It's really fabulous. I just think intention  is such a powerful thing, just getting people to emotionally invest in a profession or a  craft or just a particular direction that they want to go in and then getting them to  come together and do it together. It's just, I don't know, it's amazing how quickly we  
**[0:25:48-0:25:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:25:48):**  can make change and how much we can achieve in the timeframe. I've been amazed, actually.  Having itself been inspired by gatherings in the USA, GrainLab has already been the  catalyst for other events such as Common Grains which brought together Scotland-based bakers,  growers, millers and activists in Fife in autumn 2019. And back in May 2019, I was lucky  enough to be part of Bread as a Commons. It was a chance to think about the future of  
**[0:26:21-0:26:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:26:21):**  grain through the lens of the commons and the act of commoning. The event was instigated  by Tommaso Ferrando, a lawyer and academic and an expert in food as a commons-based as  opposed to a commodity-based system. And he really enjoyed being at GrainLab and he was  very moved by everyone's enthusiasm and energy levels and then pledged to put on a further  event that would serve a community specifically in the South West. And it just so happened  
**[0:26:49-0:26:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:26:49):**  that looking at the delegate list from the GrainLab, there was a lot of people from the  South West who were very engaged in these issues. We were able to convene at Fred Price's  farm in Somerset, a group of 30 people who came together for a weekend just to talk about  what a commons-based grain system might look like, might feel like, how we might create  it. Tommaso guided our discussions with another academic, José Luis Fivero-Pol. They advocate  
**[0:27:17-0:27:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:27:17):**  for an understanding of the commons that includes both material and immaterial resources as  well as practices. Material resources could be things like grain and immaterial resources  are things like recipes. Practices include the collective management of those resources  with the goal of ensuring that everyone has access to food. The practices are the doing  part, the commoning, and it's through commoning, through the practice of collective management  
**[0:27:43-0:27:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:27:43):**  for the collective good, that resources become part of the commons. Here's Tommaso to explain  more. So food as commons is the recognition of the essential nature of food for the human  beings but also the inherent and intrinsic connection with planet and the ecological  balance of the planet. And so it means thinking about a food system that is capable of providing  for people and the planet and actually not only providing but also giving more than what  
**[0:28:12-0:28:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:28:12):**  it is extracting. So it's a food that is socially and environmentally just and affordable and  is a system that recognises that sharing and cooperating are central and that competing  and extracting are detrimental. So it's a different way of looking at food not as an  item as an object of consumption but as a set of social and environmental relationship  and really like starting from that in order to think about what we have been doing wrong  
**[0:28:41-0:28:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:28:41):**  in the last, well, hundreds of years if you take into consideration the extractivism of  the international food system but in particular in the last 40-50 years with the industrialised  and highly processed food system. The idea of the commons is fascinating and  complicated and contested. I think it could be a hugely powerful challenge to the assumptions  that underpin our current commodity-based food system. As well as provoking a lot of  
**[0:29:08-0:29:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:29:08):**  thought and a lot of debate, the Bread as a Commons event had at least one very concrete  outcome. Somerset-based farmer Fred Price hosted the event.  I left with a very clear idea that there were people in the room that wanted to bake with  grain that had a provenance and had someone behind it and that I needed people to bake  with my grain to put a face to it rather than put it on a lorry. And so since all those  
**[0:29:37-0:29:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:29:37):**  people were in the room it seemed very sensible just to join up and get the ball rolling.  And I'm really excited to hear back from the people who have now formed essentially a south-west  grains group and they're working towards localising their grain economy around Fred Price's farm  and his crops and I feel like they're going to be an inspiration to all of us really because  they're working together so successfully. This collective of bakers and millers have  
**[0:30:03-0:30:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:30:03):**  come together with the farmer, Fred, as the South West Grain Network.  The network for me means I can put a face to grain. To me, grain was something you put  on the lorry, grain was a commodity. I have no control over the price of that commodity,  it's set on a global market. And that means that we have to work back from that point,  which inevitably means as a farmer you have to grow for yield because that's the only  
**[0:30:29-0:30:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:30:29):**  intervention you can make that affects profitability. So with the network, now we put a face to  the product and we can start by saying, how do I as a farmer want to grow this product?  How do you as a baker want to use it? And then you work backwards from there and you  find out what price you need to set that works for both of you. And that's quite a different  approach. And I think that it's best summed up in a phrase of saying like, I'm now a food  
**[0:30:57-0:31:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:30:57):**  producer, not a commodity producer. It's a great demonstration of the power of  gatherings, of coming together, of relationships to facilitate change.  I get the impression as well that because the bakers have now got stronger relationship  with Fred and they've been on the farm and spent time with these, having these discussions,  that actually their intentions are set quite clearly to support the economy for that localised  
**[0:31:21-0:31:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:31:21):**  grain. Maybe much more than they would have done if they hadn't spent that time together  in that kind of convivial atmosphere. And I think what it's about, GrainLab and the  Grain as a Commons meeting, is spending time understanding other people's perspectives.  And really for a baker to understand the farming perspective, for a farmer to understand the  baker's perspective, there's so much misunderstanding that can form barriers to actually moving  
**[0:31:44-0:31:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:31:44):**  forward. And I think that's been one of the most positive outcomes of these meetings.  I think as long as we keep them convivial, joyful, with great food and lots of wine and  fun, then people will always turn up and they will always have their intentions reset as  a result of it. And it pulls people together in the same direction.  So what does Fred, once a self-confessed yield chasing commodity farmer, what does he now  
**[0:32:12-0:32:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:32:12):**  hope the future holds? Well, lots of South West grain networks.  Immediately in the short term, I think we need more growers and more growers across  the UK to spread the risk. Because local grain is different from, I think, what I'm describing,  which is like human scale grain networks. Because we have to acknowledge that when you  localise things in terms of an immediate vicinity, you increase the risk. And grain is seasonal  
**[0:32:40-0:32:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:32:40):**  and weather dependent. So if we could increase the scope of these networks right through  the UK, each of them buffers the next one in terms of quality and consistency of flour.  When I look forward, the solution is not get bigger ever, and it's not competitive. So  my vision is to make sure that there's always a human scale to everything, and to make sure  that we're always collaborative. And it's to increase our impact in terms of the UK  
**[0:33:14-0:33:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:33:14):**  grain network by increasing the scope of our network. So to encourage people to set up  similar things all across the country, and to be as supportive and sharing and open as  possible.  In all of these examples, as well as the many we haven't mentioned, what they show is that  change is happening. And it's change based on the principles we heard about at the start  
**[0:33:45-0:33:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:33:45):**  of the episode. Diversity, resilience, collaboration, working on a human scale, and bringing people  back into the system. There's one more principle that I think unites all of these stories.  Joy. In a time of climate emergency, health crises, and increasing economic inequality,  it might seem frivolous and self-indulgent to invoke a word like that. But I don't think  it is. I think it's crucial. What I mean by joy could also be referred to as contentment,  
**[0:34:20-0:34:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:34:20):**  or purpose, or equality of life, or simply good mental health. In any case, in my experience,  and based on the conversations I've had, I think joy can spring from precisely the  things the New Grains movement is promoting. Things like direct relationships, food that  tastes good and is genuinely nourishing, feeling a sense of belonging and a sense of agency,  satisfying, meaningful work.  
**[0:34:47-0:34:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:34:47):**  I think in our current culture, although this is changing, luckily, there's very much a  narrative of you go to work and you pay your dues. You do your time, and then the rest  of your free time is when you get to be you, or you get to enjoy yourself. I suppose it's  one of the most amazing transformations for me, is that I don't see any distinction, really,  between my work and who I am. I get to do something that I enjoy in a very tangible  
**[0:35:18-0:35:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:35:18):**  way, but it also makes me feel like I'm part of something, or I'm just being me within  a system. I suppose it's convenient for industry to promote the other system because it creates  economic units out of us. We are going to spend a lot of money on those weekends to  try and compensate for the things that we feel we're owed, or the things we should  be enjoying. It keeps the wheels turning, the economic wheels turning, and the more  
**[0:35:49-0:35:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:35:49):**  you look into it, the more ridiculous the whole thing seems. It's all about creating  kind of marginal gains for someone else at the end of the day. I suppose that probably  sounds a bit high-falutin for a conversation about bread and bakeries, but it really is  political, I think, even if you don't want it to be.  An industrial bread system, an industrial food system, can't give us what we need.  
**[0:36:20-0:36:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:36:20):**  It can't have the capacity to respect baking as a craft and bakers as craft's people.  It can't allow dough the time it needs to ferment properly. It can't enable us to  buy our bread directly from the people who bake it. It can't help farmers to have meaningful  connections with the people who buy their grain or mill it, let alone with the people  who eventually eat it. All this talk of diversity, of meaningful connections, of working on a  
**[0:36:47-0:36:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:36:47):**  human scale and respecting people's work, I know it might all seem a bit naive, a bit  utopian, but I think there's a compelling argument in its favour. In short, there is  no alternative. In the face of climate change, the industrial  bread system cannot remain resilient. Any system that relies on alienation, on creating  physical and emotional distance between the actors within it, on a logic of ever greater  
**[0:37:14-0:37:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:37:14):**  uniformity, on the belief that infinite growth is both possible and desirable, in an age  of climate crisis, any system based on those principles is increasingly vulnerable.  And to come back to Joy for a moment, I also think it's crucial to counter the narrative  that mitigating and adapting to climate change can only mean hardship, sacrifice, grinning  and bearing it. It doesn't have to be like that, and it shouldn't be like that. In making  
**[0:37:44-0:37:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:37:44):**  this series, I've encountered so much joy. It's energising. So maybe the new grains  movement can lead the way for a wider change in our food system, and in other systems as  well. Not just in the UK, but around the world.  One of the biggest things that we need is sharing of information.  It's farmer, miller and mill designer Fintan Keenan.  
**[0:38:08-0:38:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:38:08):**  And that's going to have to come from the bottom up, it's not going to come from the  top down. So we're going to have to have these grassroots structures in order to be able  to re-establish local grain economies, which is really exciting. And especially, I believe,  with the new generation of farmers. You see people like Fred Price, you see Oscar here  at Duchess Farms, you see farmer George, and when you speak to them, that enthusiasm is  
**[0:38:30-0:38:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:38:30):**  just like boom! You know, it's incredible. And if we can get so many people like that  fired up, who are interested in it, that's going to be contagious. And that's what's  going to help grow these local economies. It's not just here, it's not just regional.  We have an amazing opportunity in terms of a global collaboration. I think the sharing  of information is something that is happening from Australia, to the States, to Argentina,  
**[0:38:51-0:38:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:38:51):**  to here in Europe, you know, and it's incredible. And I think with the drive and enthusiasm  of that, this will happen. You know, it's not a question of how can we make it happen,  it's already started. The wheels are in motion. But we need to gear up. It needs to happen  a little bit faster. Some people think, ah, you know, you just chill out a little bit.  I don't think we have the time to chill out. I think we need to get this rolling now as  
**[0:39:18-0:39:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:39:18):**  fast as possible.  This series does not claim to be a comprehensive record of everything that's happening in the  grain world at the moment. It can't be. And the point is, that's exciting. I've been  struck by just how much is going on and how much energy there is. There's a real sense  of possibility in the air of momentum and shared purpose. There are a lot of reasons  
**[0:39:46-0:39:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:39:46):**  to feel pessimistic at the moment. But in this new grains movement, I've found optimism,  clear-sightedness and generosity. So if anything you've heard in this series catches your interest,  I'd urge you to follow it up, to reach out, to get involved. It might be as simple as  asking a question about the next loaf of bread you buy, how it was made or where the ingredients  come from. It might mean learning to bake your own bread and discovering the joy of  
**[0:40:15-0:40:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:40:15):**  that process. It might mean asking your local school or your local care home to serve real  bread. It might mean emailing the producers of Bake Off, asking them to do a segment on  flour. It might mean getting together with other people to set up a community bakery.  All of these acts have knock-on effects. They have the potential to ripple outwards. Getting  involved could also start with spreading the word about good bread. And on that note, we're  
**[0:40:44-0:40:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:40:44):**  going to finish with a collective commitment recorded at our harvest party in Nottingham  in November 2019. It's called the Flower Ambassador Pledge and it was written by Amy  Halloran, a writer, teacher and cook based in upstate New York. We've put the words of  the pledge in the show notes, so if you like, join in at home.  We'll just go line by line. The Flower Ambassador Pledge.  
**[0:41:09-0:41:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:41:09):**  The Flower Ambassador Pledge.  I do solemnly, happily swear.  I do solemnly, happily swear.  That I am going to tell everyone I see.  That I am going to tell everyone I see.  
**[0:41:25-0:41:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:41:25):**  That it's okay to love flour.  That it's okay to love flour.  Bread is not poison.  Bread is not poison.  Invisibility is poison.  
**[0:41:38-0:41:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:41:38):**  Invisibility is poison.  I will try to make visible all the labour in bread.  I will try to make visible all the labour in bread.  From seed to mill, from mill to loaf.  From seed to mill, from mill to loaf.  
**[0:41:56-0:42:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:41:56):**  Mills are the levers farmers need to get more interesting grains in the ground.  Mills are the levers farmers need to get more interesting grains in the ground.  And on our tables.  And on our tables.  And under our butter.  
**[0:42:15-0:42:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:42:15):**  And under our butter.  Because butter is terrific and bread is our family tree.  Because butter is terrific and bread is our family tree.  It's time to put the Family Pictures back in the album.  It's time to put the Family Pictures back in the album.  
**[0:42:34-0:42:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:42:34):**  Put the album back on the mantle piece.  Put the album back on the mantle piece.  And get acquainted with grains and flour again.  And get acquainted with grains and flour again.  The end.  
**[0:42:50-0:43:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:42:50):**  Thank you all.  Thank you all.  Thank you so, so much to everyone who's contributed to Cereal.  Both those we've heard from and those who've helped in other ways.  In this episode, we heard from Andrew Whitley, Kimberly Bell, Steven Jacobs, Ben McKinnon,  
**[0:43:52-0:44:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-episode-6-grain-futures#t=0:43:52):**  Anne Parry, Rupert Dunn, Josiah Meldrum, Mark Lee, Tommaso Ferrando, Fred Price and Fintan  Keenan.  Thanks also to Richard Moore and Caitlin Roberts from The Lost Revellers for the music we heard  at the start of the episode.  And last but not least, thank you for joining us on this journey.  