### Farmerama  (2022-30-25)
**[0:00:00-0:00:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-bonus-episode-scotland-the-bread#t=0:00:00):**  Welcome to Cereal from Farmerama. This is a bonus episode featuring an extended interview  with Scotland the bread miller Connie Hunter. Okay, yeah, so my name is Connie and I work  as a miller manager for Scotland the bread here at Bauhaus. So it's my job to mill all  the flour and try and sell it to as many people as possible. I found out about the role through  the estate manager here and he thought it would be a good fit for me because I was running  
**[0:00:47-0:00:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-bonus-episode-scotland-the-bread#t=0:00:47):**  the market garden just 100 metres down the track. I thought, well, I don't know anything  about milling. I don't know anything about wheat. How can I do that job? But we had a  conversation and it seemed that it was more important that you cared about sustainable  food and that you could be an advocate for the flour and all the milling technical kind  of stuff you can learn if you're a practical person. So that's how I ended up doing it.  
**[0:01:09-0:01:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-bonus-episode-scotland-the-bread#t=0:01:09):**  Great. And can you just tell me a bit about the mill?  This is a Zentrafan mill, which is a German model. And I think it's the only one in the  country. Sorry if there's someone else who's got a Zentrafan mill. Basically, it's really  great technology because it's just one piece of volcanic rock with a hole in the middle.  And there's a motor underneath which pumps air up through the hole and the grain falls  
**[0:01:32-0:01:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-bonus-episode-scotland-the-bread#t=0:01:32):**  down into that hole and kind of gets spun around like a cyclone. So it kind of grinds  itself against the stone, which is good for a lot of reasons. One is there's no moving  parts. There's no stones grinding against each other. Then you've got a risk of sparks  and fires and that kind of stuff. So because of that, it's safer so I can leave it on overnight.  It's designed to be on 24 seven. So that's one of the really good things about it. The  
**[0:01:54-0:01:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-bonus-episode-scotland-the-bread#t=0:01:54):**  other thing is that then it doesn't create that same heat. So it preserves the nutritional  value of the flour much better. You know, we sort of nowadays think of flour as a product  that we have in the back of our cupboard. It's been there for months and months. But  actually, in terms of the nutritional qualities, it's better if you can use it as soon as it's  milled. People seem to understand that now about like coffee and grinding freshly ground  
**[0:02:14-0:02:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-bonus-episode-scotland-the-bread#t=0:02:14):**  coffee beans. We're really trying to get people to think about flour as a fresh product again.  So I only mill to order really. I don't ever have a stock sitting here. So try and get  it to the customers as fresh as possible. Our best before date is three months from  the date of milling to really try and push that message home to people. And so just because  the mill is smaller, we just do smaller batches. And because we're doing different varieties,  
**[0:02:38-0:02:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-bonus-episode-scotland-the-bread#t=0:02:38):**  it allows me to chop and change between them depending on what people have ordered. You  know, I don't do a ton of one kind and then have it sitting around for ages.  Cool. Okay. And can you tell me a bit about the varieties or the different the different  flours that you produce at the moment? So we have been just doing three different  kinds of wheat. They're all heritage Scottish varieties, hunters, rouge de coss and golden  
**[0:03:01-0:03:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-bonus-episode-scotland-the-bread#t=0:03:01):**  drop. And those first ones that we were milling were grown in East Lothian by Mungo's Wells.  And now because we moved here to the Balkaskie estate, we have been last year, we grew those  three same grains again, but also some spring ones and rye and some Swedish ones as well.  And so those grains I'm starting to mill now, I've moved over to the rouge de coss  and the hunters from last year's grain. And we're selling rye to some bakeries as  
**[0:03:32-0:03:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-bonus-episode-scotland-the-bread#t=0:03:32):**  well. So we're yet to decide, I think, what to do about some of the other ones. There  seems to be quite a market for the Oland's. People seem to be talking quite a lot about  that. Among bakers, it seems to be quite popular. But those are at the minute, my day to day  production is just those three varieties of wheat and the rye. But I think in terms of  how different they are, there's not loads of difference. The rouge and the golden drop,  
**[0:03:57-0:04:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-bonus-episode-scotland-the-bread#t=0:03:57):**  I think, have got the same genetic heritage. So they're quite similar to each other. And  the hunters is a little bit lighter. But in the end, what we might do is a blend, like  a heritage Scottish blend, just because obviously there's a lot of work that goes into keeping  all the batches separate to preserve the integrity of what you're selling as a separate variety.  So if they're not that different from each other, then maybe we might blend them. But  
**[0:04:21-0:04:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-bonus-episode-scotland-the-bread#t=0:04:21):**  we have worked with a lot of bakers who really love the rouge, for example. So if they want  to keep just doing that, then we'll do that.  On that note, actually, what's been the reception from, I guess, both customers here at the  Bow House and then also bakers around about?  So the reception has been fantastic. Basically, I'm now sort of struggling to keep up with  
**[0:04:45-0:04:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-bonus-episode-scotland-the-bread#t=0:04:45):**  the orders. People are really, really keen. We are working with quite a few different  bakeries in Scotland. We're working with E5 Bakery in London. We send a pallet down to  them once every three weeks. We also now supply Green City, the wholesaler in Glasgow, and  yet direct to various different bakeries who are closer. But the main problem for us is  that flour is a heavy product, so the shipping is kind of expensive. So we're always trying  
**[0:05:07-0:05:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-bonus-episode-scotland-the-bread#t=0:05:07):**  to find ways of piggybacking on other deliveries. We're working with a bakery in Comrie called  Wild Hearth, who are using some of our flour, and they are kindly, you know, on their delivery  routes, they might take some flour for us. So just trying to find creative ways to work  together because we've got the same kind of goals and to keep everyone's costs down.  We sell online on our online shop to individuals and at the Bow House market as well. So, you  
**[0:05:32-0:05:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-bonus-episode-scotland-the-bread#t=0:05:32):**  know, bakers who are committed to baking real bread and sourdough bread love it and, you  know, keep coming back for more. Members of the public who we meet on the market, even  if they don't know that much about baking, they can tell that the flavour is really different  and is definitely something that they haven't experienced with other flours before. So yeah,  the response has been really brilliant.  
**[0:05:54-0:06:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-bonus-episode-scotland-the-bread#t=0:05:54):**  What do you see as the kind of direction of travel or the trajectory? How do you see things  developing over the next few years?  So we've got really exciting things happening quite soon because the mill is going to be  upscaled in a way. So we're going to get a bigger hopper and a bigger bin so that I  can do more at once. With the current capacity that it's at, I don't have really the resources  
**[0:06:17-0:06:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-bonus-episode-scotland-the-bread#t=0:06:17):**  to expand our customers. You know, the deliveries that we're doing, I don't have that much capacity  to increase right now. But once we have a bigger hopper, we're going to go up to 125  kilos, then we'll be able to, you know, there's loads of people who are interested all around  the country. I'll be able to supply them with flour in a way that I haven't been able to  before. And I mean, we're so new that I think it's just going to keep building. People are  
**[0:06:43-0:06:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-bonus-episode-scotland-the-bread#t=0:06:43):**  going to talk to their friends about it. And so many people, so many individuals actually  who come back, it's because their friend got it for them as a present. And, you know, so  I can really see it that kind of ripple effect. And definitely people seem to be talking more  about grain and real bread now. So I think we're well placed to get our message out there  and make an impact now.  
**[0:07:04-0:07:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-bonus-episode-scotland-the-bread#t=0:07:04):**  I'm curious, actually, have you done any work with, say, local schools or kind of that sort  of outreach?  We have worked with Bow House on a couple of different events. They work with the Royal  Highland Education Trust to education days. And so we just, yeah, we did have different  groups of kids in showing them how to clean the grain and how the mill works and talking  
**[0:07:25-0:07:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-bonus-episode-scotland-the-bread#t=0:07:25):**  to them about different ways of milling and, you know, where their flour comes from. But  we also have another project, which is our soil to slice project, where community groups  and schools can grow grain as a sort of trial. And the idea is then they can actually bake  their own bread with it in the end. So, yeah, we're working with a couple of schools on  that project. But really, we'd like to have more funding to be able to do that in a more  
**[0:07:51-0:07:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-bonus-episode-scotland-the-bread#t=0:07:51):**  concrete way, because there's so many things you could do with that. It's just the time  and the resources to do it.  Cereal is possible thanks to generous support from the Roddick Foundation. Subscribe to  Farmerama to hear the rest of the series. You can find us on your favourite podcast  app on Soundcloud or at Farmerama.co. If you enjoy the series, please do spread the word.  
**[0:08:19-0:08:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cereal-bonus-episode-scotland-the-bread#t=0:08:19):**  And if you'd like to support Farmerama, visit patreon.com forward slash Farmerama.  Cereal is produced and edited by me, Katie Revel, with Abbey Rose and Joe Barrett. Suzie  McCarthy and Hannah Sutherland also worked on the series. Our theme music is by Owen  Barrett. A huge personal thank you to everyone who's helped make and share cereal.  