### Farmerama  (2022-59-24)
**[0:00:00-0:00:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:00:00):**  Testing, testing, one, two, three, testing, testing, testing.  Um...  MUSIC PLAYS  Cultivating justice. Cultivating justice. Cultivating justice.  Cultivating justice.  
**[0:00:13-0:00:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:00:13):**  Cultivating justice.  Episode five.  MUSIC PLAYS  Before we start, just a quick heads up that this episode includes  reference to racism, colonialism and enslavement.  
**[0:00:27-0:00:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:00:27):**  Please take care as you listen.  MUSIC PLAYS  All right, let's start.  Hello, everyone!  I am sat here with my friend and banjo teacher, Bianca Wilson.  
**[0:00:47-0:00:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:00:47):**  Hello. Hi. How you doing?  Good, how are you? Yeah, I'm good, I'm good.  Do you want to, like, introduce yourself?  I am Bianca, aka Island Girl, from South London, enjoying banjo fun.  THEY LAUGH  
**[0:01:02-0:01:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:01:02):**  My name's Marcus and I'm part of the Land and Art Names Collective  and I've been working on the Cultivating Justice project.  I made the first scene, Banjo, Gord and Kallalu.  It's a personal zine talking about my journey with growing  and growing culturally appropriate food  
**[0:01:20-0:01:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:01:20):**  and then getting into trying to grow banjos.  I wanted to talk to Bianca because she's one of the first  black banjo players I've met in the UK.  She's been teaching me since 2020.  I thought it was important to amplify her practice  
**[0:01:32-0:01:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:01:32):**  and give her a voice through this podcast.  How do you see the banjo as relevant to the Cultivating Justice project?  I think throughout my, like, growing journey as a person  that grows food and stuff like that,  I started to get more interested in, like, growing food from Jamaica  
**[0:01:49-0:01:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:01:49):**  or things from Jamaica or the African diaspora.  My dad and step-mum both grow a lot of, like, Kallalu  and, like, sweet potatoes and stuff like that.  So through my growing, I was getting more interested in growing  just, like, non-European stuff, things from Africa and the Caribbean.  
**[0:02:06-0:02:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:02:06):**  So not many people know that, like, the banjo originated in Africa  and that it's actually made from gourds,  it's made from a vegetable, a plant, you know what I mean?  And animal parts. And animal parts, you know what I mean?  Yeah, so for me, it's very relevant to Cultivating Justice  
**[0:02:22-0:02:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:02:22):**  because I think it's a pretty untold, unexplored story.  I think it's a story that we need to amplify  and there's so much more that we can explore and open up with that.  Let's talk a little bit about the banjo, I reckon.  Yeah. There's a deficit of black banjo players in the UK, unfortunately,  
**[0:02:47-0:02:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:02:47):**  and we're trying to change that. Yeah, exactly.  Slowly, slowly.  I've been into, like, country music and bluegrass  and old-timey music for a long time,  but never really delved deep into the history of the banjo.  
**[0:03:02-0:03:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:03:02):**  I think what sparked the interest, my friend, Tikea,  who's in a band called Divided and Dissolved,  introduced me to Hannah Mayrie when we were on tour in the States  and she has a project called the Black Banjo Reclamation Project,  which we'll talk a bit more about later on.  
**[0:03:17-0:03:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:03:17):**  And I think that's when I started getting interested and researching  and looking at the true history and origins of the banjo.  And then I started to find people like you on the internet  and then, like, our native daughters, Rihanna Giddens,  just starting to see more and more, like, black banjo players  
**[0:03:34-0:03:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:03:34):**  and it just sparked an interest.  Just to explain, Rihanna Giddens is a multi-instrumentalist musician  from the United States who founded the old-time string band  Carolina Chocolate Drops.  She's also a member of Our Native Daughters,  
**[0:03:46-0:03:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:03:46):**  a super band made up of four black female banjo players.  She's a really important artist and researcher  exploring the essential contributions of black people in folk music.  And then my housemate and my partner bought me a banjo for my birthday  because I kept going on about it and how I wanted to start  
**[0:04:03-0:04:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:04:03):**  and I really wanted to start lessons. What about you?  I kind of just decided that I wanted this banjo  and my mum got me it for my 21st birthday  and I think it just gathered dust.  So, yeah, I had the banjo for, like, two years.  
**[0:04:18-0:04:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:04:18):**  Didn't really know why I wanted it.  I just knew that I did want it and then when I had it,  didn't really know what to do with it.  And then I think I was at a festival a couple of years later  and saw someone there playing a banjo and playing claw hammer banjo.  
**[0:04:34-0:04:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:04:34):**  Claw hammer banjo is a method of playing where the strings are struck  using the back of your index or middle fingernail,  then alternately plucked with your thumb.  Claw hammer refers both to the shape of your hand as you play, claw-like,  and the way that you strike the strings by hammering them.  
**[0:04:48-0:04:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:04:48):**  It is a common component of American old-time music  and this is the style of playing that was brought to the Americas  by enslaved Africans along with the banjo itself.  And then I think as I sort of went down the rabbit hole of, like,  listening to people online and I guess finding Rhiannon Giddens in particular,  
**[0:05:05-0:05:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:05:05):**  I began to see for the first time the true history  and then maybe begin to understand why and how I'd come to this instrument.  Mm, okay.  Felt like a bit of a calling.  Alright.  
**[0:05:43-0:05:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:05:43):**  I've been all around this whole wide world, written down from sun to sea.  And there's any old place I can hide my head that feels like home,  sweet home to me.  Don't let your dear go down, little girl.  Your love's cold, your love's not at home.  
**[0:06:49-0:06:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:06:49):**  Who's gonna shoe your pretty little foot?  Who's gonna glove your hand?  And who with a kiss on will be ready to tell me who's gonna be your man?  Don't let your dear go down, little girl.  Your love's cold, your love's not at home.  
**[0:07:31-0:07:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:07:31):**  No one will shoe my pretty little foot.  No one will glove my hand.  No one will kiss my ruby red lips because I don't need no man.  You know that the banjo came from West Africa and left with,  or was taken with the folks that were taken from there.  
**[0:07:59-0:08:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:07:59):**  The first sort of historical documentation of banjos were in Jamaica in the 1600s.  It was something like a banjo, but we can't be certain that it was.  And also it was a four string instrument.  So maybe it's something sort of more along the lines of what a tenor banjo would be now.  It's in Jamaica.  
**[0:08:24-0:08:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:08:24):**  And then also in St Kitts in the 1600s there's documentation of banjo then.  And then I think the earliest documentation of banjo in the US was, yeah, 1700s.  And that's when we know that it definitely is a banjo.  And we see like a lot of white people start playing the banjo  because they're sort of taught it by their slaves or by their mother's or father's slaves.  
**[0:08:55-0:09:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:08:55):**  And so there does come this sort of like white interest in the banjo in the 18th century.  And then when we move into the 19th century and see the sort of like rise of like minstrelsy  as a form of entertainment, that's kind of when the banjo goes worldwide.  So through the minstrelsy and the sort of mockery of black people and racist depiction of black people,  the banjo became mainstreamed, became popular throughout like European cultures and stuff.  
**[0:09:28-0:09:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:09:28):**  Does anyone have any idea of what was happening in the diaspora, so in Africa or the Caribbean?  Or was it still being played?  Yeah, so it was still being used a lot in Caribbean music, but in a totally different context.  It was like in like memento music.  I think very often gets confused with calypso.  
**[0:09:51-0:09:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:09:51):**  But what people don't realise is that there is no calypso in Jamaica.  Calypso is from Trinidad.  Yes, Trinidad.  Memento is from Jamaica.  So there are like common crossover themes, but two very specifically different sounds.  
**[0:10:07-0:10:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:10:07):**  And yeah, memento is what you would hear the banjo in.  And that's still played now. There's still memento bands.  There's still memento bands now, but yeah, the banjo stopped really being played popularly in memento music in the 50s.  That's a shame, isn't it?  In Jamaica and all over the Caribbean, actually, they love country music.  
**[0:10:25-0:10:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:10:25):**  You know what I mean? There's always like country music radio stations in the Caribbean.  And so when you told me that the banjo was there before it was in the States, it all made sense, really.  I listened to a radio show the other day on NTS and it was this guy, I can't remember his name, he's got a country show, but he's black and he explores country music in the diaspora.  So it was really cool. So that particular day was all Nigerian country.  There's another thing to explore at some point is the full circle.  
**[0:10:55-0:10:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:10:55):**  Yeah, where it goes and comes back.  Yeah, so it's like, you know, it got appropriated in white culture and now it's come back.  And there's a huge country scene all over Africa and in the Caribbean.  It's about sort of cultural sharing and exchange as well, especially with like, claw hammer, like old time music and Appalachian music.  It's a real combination of like different cultures.  
**[0:11:17-0:11:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:11:17):**  That is kind of what folk music is, isn't it? Music of the people.  Music of the folks.  It's like you're passing down the knowledge. It's not classical music training.  It's, you know, call and response and circles and stuff like that.  Do you want to play? Should we play?  
**[0:11:34-0:11:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:11:34):**  Oh, God. OK. Warning, everyone. I haven't played in a very long time.  Do you want to try and play Old Joe Clark?  This is the one I kept practicing. So I'm going to try, but I will probably not be great.  Let's see. I can't remember that bit.  OK, why don't you just play this play over and yeah, just give the listeners a good something nice to listen to.  
**[0:12:18-0:12:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:12:18):**  Yes, something nice to listen to.  I can't. Keep going.  Probably frying you off.  That was great. You want to explain to me and to listeners how to play it like what you told me earlier?  I guess the thing about plantation music, skiffle music, jug band music is that people didn't have much.  
**[0:13:46-0:13:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:13:46):**  They didn't really have anything. And so everything had to be made, you know, by oneself.  It's sort of like the original punk DIY movement.  Definitely. Which is why I guess why it's so important and a part of Colbert and Justice, because that is such a like grassroots anarchist movement in its own way.  So like green anarchy. Yeah, definitely. This is another homemade instrument.  These are the bones. They would have originally been made with bones and played in sort of like early skiffle and like plantation music.  
**[0:14:21-0:14:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:14:21):**  And yeah, you kind of play them in triplets. You sort of hold them between your hands and you throw your hands from side to side and you can make a sort of like triplet sound like this.  That's so cool.  For this episode, I also spoke to Hannah Mary.  Hannah is a creative facilitator and a multi instrumentalist folk musician from California who founded the Black Banjo Reclamation Project.  Hannah creates music that reimagines folk traditions through an Afrofuturist lens, honors the lineage of black banjo and provide experience which reminds us how we can create a shared vision of freedom based on learning and growing together.  
**[0:15:21-0:15:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:15:21):**  The Black Banjo Reclamation Project is a vehicle to return instruments of African origin to the descendants of their original makers.  Their theory of change is tied directly to reappropriating their own culture by receiving banjos in the form of reparations and over time gaining skills that will advance individuals and communities for generations to come.  This includes ancestral survival and land based skills, including fostering the trade of instrument building and repair.  The Black Banjo Reclamation Project runs board banjo building workshops and banjo lessons for black people throughout the year all over the United States.  I was introduced to Hannah by my good friend Takir Reed, whilst we were on tour in California with Takir's band Divide and Dissolve.  
**[0:16:02-0:16:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:16:02):**  I wanted to speak to Hannah as part of the Cult of the Injustice Project because I found the work that they're doing with the Black Banjo Reclamation Project really inspiring and relevant to the aims of this project.  Hannah sparked an interest in me to start growing and building my own banjos and they sent me some banjo gourd seeds.  I've managed to successfully grow some gourds in London and the dream is to start banjo building workshops with Hannah over here.  I'm Hannah Maree. I am working on, amongst other things, the Black Banjo Reclamation Project.  In the pre-COVID times, I was mostly a performer. I was facilitating a lot of singing circles. I've always done a lot of herbalism.  
**[0:16:50-0:16:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:16:50):**  I've been farming, like mostly for the last 10 years, and I've been doing that as like a displaced person.  And so it has been a huge part of my life to just commune with the earth and with nature through music.  I'm like a diasporic person of the West Coast. Both my parents are from California and my dad's family is white Eastern European Ashkenazi Jews.  And my mom's side of the family is all people that I'm presuming are from West African descent.  They were living and growing and cultivating not by their own choice in Florida for several generations.  
**[0:17:39-0:17:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:17:39):**  And my grandmother was part of the Great Migration and ended up coming to Oakland back in the 50s.  So I think it's a different place almost to be like reclaiming a lot of these traditions because like even the traditions that are really connected with banjo.  Every time that there's like a migration that is kind of forced, it's like there's that disconnection.  You know, it's different if literally we're like, we're going to pick up, we're going to bring our culture with us, we're going to bring all this stuff with us and we're going to go to another land.  It's different when like there's a severance. My grandma was trying to get away from the lynchings, you know, so it was like that wasn't just like you decided to move to Oakland.  
**[0:18:23-0:18:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:18:23):**  You're escaping white terrorism.  How did you get into growing?  I grew up in Sacramento and I lived in a small house that had a really big backyard.  And that was my first like real experience, I think, just with nature.  Having a grandma that knew about canning and like growing stuff and like would use aloe vera and all of these different things.  
**[0:18:56-0:19:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:18:56):**  There's so much magic just in every part of the plant.  There was a lot of energy there just being able to go out and water the garden like just as a little kid.  I think just a blessing that I have had a healing experience with land from the time I was small.  It wasn't until I was like out of high school that I was able to start pursuing that myself.  I went to Sacramento City College for a few years. I did a biology class and through that class I was just like, oh, okay plants, I just, I want to know more about them because they're awesome.  
**[0:19:34-0:19:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:19:34):**  I was able to find a neighbor of mine who was an elder, whose name is Judy, and she had this garden like across the river that she had been growing for like 30, 40 years.  And it was a chance for me to see just for the first time like this is what the whole growing season looks like.  And I was able to see what sort of natural organic gardening was like.  That just sort of became my life, you know, path.  I chose to go to Florida in the winter of 2010. My ancestors were cultivating that land without their own consent, you know, they were forced to do labor on that land.  
**[0:20:11-0:20:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:20:11):**  And I just wanted to make sure, especially while my great aunt was still alive, that I really got to spend time with her and with my family and on the land that they have there.  I was able to be on this 20 acre permaculture homestead where I learned about a lot of plants. Permaculture is obviously like a concept that's been taken worldwide and we all know what permaculture is is our practices.  It's been a systematic thing of removing that from us so that we can be, you know, working for other people and stuff because when we're doing this work, we are not useful in capitalism.  So we have to also recognize that as a form of resistance.  I'm only other side, I'm only, other side.  
**[0:21:21-0:21:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:21:21):**  I'm on the other side  I'm on the other side of it  I'm on the other side  On the other side of it  I'm on the other side  
**[0:22:27-0:22:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:22:27):**  I want to talk about the banjo. Now that's what I want to get my teeth into that.  So how does it feel for you to practice something like this, you know?  Do you feel a connection to your ancestors through the instrument and the gourd?  Yeah, I would definitely say yes. You know, if you've had that experience then like  it is an experience where it's not a forced thing. I've had a lot of experiences with like listening  
**[0:22:52-0:22:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:22:52):**  to the music where definitely just like feel it in my body and in order for you to play it you have  to feel that in your body. It's something that's coming from inside of you and it's like coming  from the past. People have been creating instruments from what was around them for a very long time  and no matter where those people went they brought that with them. Whether they brought the seeds,  whether they brought the instruments, I mean there are accounts of people as far as colonizers  
**[0:23:21-0:23:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:23:21):**  coming. They were stealing people because they could play the banjo. They were stealing them  because of it. Can you tell us about the Banjo Reclamation Project and your journey of growing  gourds and building your banjo? Tell us all about it. The banjo is something that can be seen as very  distinctly American. Like what America has done to Black people is really like an expression of it.  You took something that was natural and you made it into something that was still natural  
**[0:23:53-0:23:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:23:53):**  but it had a lot of places where it was super duper compromised and it was made to be different.  The banjo is part of the original expression you know of being Indigenous people.  You know on the continent and being in relationship with goats, being in relationship  with the plants that produced the gourds. It was something that I came across and did not know  you know for my whole life that the banjo was coming from African roots. For me part of our work  
**[0:24:24-0:24:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:24:24):**  is just recognizing that it's going to be a host of emotions. What wrongs have happened through  white supremacy and the effect that white supremacy has on things like you know there's  a lot of emotions I think that for me what I hope to do with this project is just to create a space  where there can be healing in there and that we can just have acknowledgement and that like  wherever we are on that journey that that's like a legitimate place to be on that journey  
**[0:24:52-0:25:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:24:52):**  because it is ancestral, it is cultural, it is historical, it is racial, it's being human.  So I just want to recognize our humanity as Black people to venture into those  worlds and one of the biggest ways that I think we support that journey is by having banjos.  Of course like it's extremely you know valuable and important to look at those histories and know  those histories. What we also need is just to be able to have that experience on our own.  
**[0:25:26-0:25:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:25:26):**  We are humans, we know how to heal ourselves. One of the ways we do that is with music.  The banjo is for me really relevant like in that way you know to me and I think to a lot of people  and that was what I was realizing through my own journey with it and that was why I wanted to be  able to create a way to bring some of these ideas and actions and conversations and projects together.  That's amazing. How exactly does the Banjo Reclamation Project work?  
**[0:25:57-0:26:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:25:57):**  I don't want to as an organization like pretend like we have this all figured out.  We're like three years in and like we're still in the process of building a lot of the foundational ways of like  how do you plug in, how do you get a banjo, like what is sort of like logistical aspects of it.  The very first year that it happened was in 2019 and it was actually like a lot of programming  and workshops and just community events like it was a ton of them. It was great. We hosted a  
**[0:26:29-0:26:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:26:29):**  documentary viewing of this film that's the life and times of Joe Thompson who is a old-time fiddler  in North Carolina. We did a showing of that and we kind of just were like inviting people to come.  It was actually at a organic garden store in Oakland, Black owned and we kicked off a workshop  series that was one workshop per month for four months. Each time we had a guest teacher, we had  time to actually play the instruments and just do activities and just engage with each other.  
**[0:27:03-0:27:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:27:03):**  We would do that and we would do a potluck you know that was hosted by another really awesome  community space, the Eastside Arts Alliance and having culturally appropriate food like a lot of  soul food, a lot of just like nutritious food around together playing music and I think it's  just nice to have that experience of like being around in a circle and like everybody can just  grab an instrument and like you maybe never got to play a banjo before. Maybe you never got to  
**[0:27:29-0:27:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:27:29):**  try to play a fiddle. Maybe you want to and I think it's just nice to create spaces where like  that's welcome and we can explore that. The other piece has been acquiring banjos so that we can  actually have distribution. We were collecting the banjos mostly from white people and we had a lot  of amazing donors and that has been like a really great thing to speak on and to be able to say like  this is like not a donation, this is reparations. We've distributed a lot of banjos somewhere around  
**[0:28:01-0:28:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:28:01):**  the like 30 to 40 at this point and that's over like three years.  When I'm feeling misconstrued, these are the things that I feel I can't ignore.  First I think about moving around and the thought might occur to settle down  and I think about it for a little while and I stare at the ground.  Bleeding like somebody shot my face and people stare they start to erase their minds and mine  
**[0:29:21-0:29:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:29:21):**  is nowhere none of the time.  Reading and writing and wondering about a guy in the sky and a block of jeans  and whether or not I will ever again meet me.  But I'm wondering around thinking that I'm believing in something I don't know.  That's not the real, that's the lightly falling snow.  
**[0:30:25-0:30:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:30:25):**  We wanted to build banjos from the beginning. We had a banjo building workshop that happened  in February of 2020 and it was completely by the grace of spirit that we were able to have  that workshop because we brought so many moving parts together. I cannot believe that we did this.  Like we had a room full of bandsaws, we had drill presses, we had wood and two white teachers,  Paul and Joanne they even did some fundraising with their folk community to be able to contribute to this.  
**[0:31:02-0:31:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:31:02):**  It was just a very blessed thing to have happen to be able to have the opportunity to build something.  There's like a lot of other people doing like black banjo stuff and this is really like the  first of its kind that has been really looking at it in a way that is very holistic.  Why do you think it's important to grow and make our own banjos as black people?  Because of self-determination. So this isn't about asking for justice or trying to convince people to  
**[0:31:38-0:31:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:31:38):**  provide us with liberation because that has been a very white-centric kind of approach to things.  It's like if you just give me this then I'll be okay. It's like really kind of supports  the codependency on white people and like I've said this is a multicultural collaboration  and I really support the white folks who want to support this work and understand that our  liberation is tied together and also it has to happen through black self-determination.  
**[0:32:12-0:32:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:32:12):**  And just also acknowledging like the black radical tradition and the tradition of actual being a  liberation movement. All of that liberation movement for me like in this country it is tied to land.  This is about liberation when you know we're getting gentrified out of our neighborhoods and stuff  and we need a place to live. We need a place to literally exist to go and grow something and play  music and we don't even have that. So all of that is what this is tied to is that we have a place here.  
**[0:32:42-0:32:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:32:42):**  If you are a diasporic person there's a chance like you're in where you are not fully consensually.  But we belong to the earth and it's important that we recognize where we come from no matter where we are.  So connecting to land it connects us back to the motherland and like my goal is to be able to go there.  My goal is to be able to like have this experience where we can create more relationships with people on the continent.  And people in the Caribbean and in different diasporic communities so that we can continue supporting each other.  
**[0:33:17-0:33:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:33:17):**  Like in the ways that we're asking and what are being asked of us because everybody needs healing.  It looks really different and I don't know how to tell someone else what their healing looks like.  But definitely just being able to tap into that on my own it has definitely shown me that this is like a very good thing to be able to know where these things are coming from.  Like the banjo didn't come from the store. A lot of these banjos they'll say like manufactured in China.  Like it literally has made it accessible for us through globalization.  
**[0:33:51-0:33:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:33:51):**  But if you also look at the industrialization of the banjo you know that is what brought it farther away from our tradition.  And it brought it closer to white people because they were patenting this shit, making money off of this shit.  And like if you are a white person part of this part of this tradition you have to look at what your legacy in banjo has been.  If you think that Black Lives Matter then yeah this is a concept for you.  If you're actually interested in liberation if this is something that makes you uncomfortable  
**[0:34:21-0:34:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:34:21):**  then you're probably benefiting from whatever it is that was stolen.  There's a banjo that's in Amsterdam right now that was stolen.  Then you can go to some museum and see this and like there's like the account of the dude that wrote it.  What's a banjo?  It's the ancestor of banjo.  
**[0:34:40-0:34:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:34:40):**  I'm trying to think if that one was actually from Suriname.  It's one of the oldest banjos that like they have anywhere.  And to me it's just you know like this shit is offensive because like  you're literally pillaging people and potentially killing them and taking their instruments.  And then now it's in a museum.  
**[0:35:02-0:35:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:35:02):**  Like you didn't get that because someone gave it to you.  If we're not gonna have a conversation about this then like I'm not gonna give white people all these benefits of the doubt  that you're just doing this because you're interested in music or whatever.  Because that's white supremacy when you want to ignore it.  That's white supremacy when you want to ignore the how and why you have this in the first place.  
**[0:35:28-0:35:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:35:28):**  And why do you even have access to even researching it?  Why are you being given money from organizations to go around the world and study this?  When there's actually people that are a part of those cultures that could be doing that work.  That's part of what the Reclamation is.  Like how can we support scholarship in this realm of people who are actually like looking at this from a radical perspective to do that work?  
**[0:35:54-0:35:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:35:54):**  That can also support others getting access to this as well.  And being able to create those channels between different diasporic communities where this exists.  My home is the earth that I stand on Holy night going nowhere fast  Flailing through eternity This space will encase me  Absorbing time with my mind We travel endless, we wanted to go  
**[0:37:01-0:37:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:37:01):**  Where it all went I want to go  There's rock in the stone, not my feet or arms I find gravity  The air is a flow from the ancient ocean so The desert is a howl that crashes and cracks on my head  My home is a car, my home is a tank My home is lead on red  My home is heaven sent so comfortably made for me  
**[0:37:57-0:38:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:37:57):**  Our neighbors and friends with hands to lend My home is a street, my home is my feet  My home is a beat that sounds so sweet My home is myself, my home is myself  My home is wild and expands  My home is a bush, my home is a Walmart parking lot  My home is where I brush my teeth A hotel or a trailer, my home is your floor  
**[0:38:53-0:39:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:38:53):**  My home is a doctor's call, my home in my room My favorite tune, I'm coming home to you  I did actually attempt to grow some banjos and kind of succeeded. They didn't get as big as I wanted.  I've got one big one and then I've got one that's yeah so there could be a small one and then a big one.  Maybe some gaudy polies. Yeah we'll see what we can make out of them. I think we should try and use them for sure.  I think that there is a deep connection between growing a music because of I guess like our ancestors,  
**[0:40:29-0:40:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:40:29):**  people working in the fields. I mean even pre-slavery because it's not all about slavery,  our culture has been quite musical. There's different songs that you will sing when you're  planting or sowing seeds or harvesting. There's different ways to celebrate those, different  rituals and salutations and stuff like that. Obviously when people were enslaved and put  on the plantation there was obviously songs that people would sing as they were  
**[0:41:00-0:41:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:41:00):**  forced to work as well. So I feel like there's a deep long-standing partnership between music and  growing and like really beautiful history and a really horrific history. Music and labour is  something that pacifies the soul, definitely creates that sense of togetherness. And the thing that I  really like about growing, especially this experience of growing gourds and I'm definitely going to grow  again this year, is just feeling this connection to my ancestors. I just love growing things that  
**[0:41:34-0:41:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:41:34):**  I imagine ancestors would have been growing. It just feels quite deep in that way.  I guess it helps to create that closeness, so much of which is lost as well and not only because of  displacement but I feel like being able to trace your ancestors and understand them and see them  is really like heavily tied into wealth. Like if you didn't have a camera then how do you know  how certain people looked and having possessions that will pass down through generations  
**[0:42:07-0:42:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:42:07):**  is a very privileged thing that not a lot of people have. And so we really have to  kind of go the extra mile to create that psychic connection because we don't have the physical  sort of leftovers of those times to sort of look to.  The oral history, that's one thing that we do have, that we pass down and that's through music, call and response, songs.  Some of these things go back, some of these songs really, we don't know how far back some of these songs go.  
**[0:42:40-0:42:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:42:40):**  I think also similar to you, just really want to help cultivate a space where Black people  can get together and play music and it doesn't have to be what society tells us to be.  It can be alternative, it can be like traditional music or like folk music.  I am really interested just exploring that idea that Black people are not just limited to hip hop  and soul and R&B. Black people invented rock and roll and different kinds of folk and just punk music.  
**[0:43:17-0:43:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:43:17):**  It's really perpetuated within the music industry that is sort of run by white men in suits that  do want to see us in a certain way. In a box. And so we almost have to perpetuate those stereotypes in order to succeed.  Maybe that moving forward, that's what bringing folk music to the masses of Black people is about.  Yeah definitely, just creating space for inviting people into that and I feel like that's definitely  started to happen with like punk and alternative music. There's more and more like Black and POC alternative punk bands.  
**[0:43:55-0:43:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:43:55):**  It's come back around.  A lot of exciting opportunities.  It's been great talking to you and so thank you so much.  Thanks for listening, thanks Marcus.  Imagine if I wasn't recording that whole time.  
**[0:44:19-0:44:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:44:19):**  Don't let your deal go down, little girl.  Don't let your deal go down, little girl.  Don't let your deal go down, little girl.  Thank you, thank you very much.  For further info on Black Banjo Reclamation Project, you can find them on Instagram or their website blackbanjoreclamationproject.org.  
**[0:45:15-0:45:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:45:15):**  To find my zine, gourds, banjos and kalalu go to www.landinournames.community.  For anyone interested in a punk festival for and by people of colour, you can check out our insta or website decolonisefest.co.uk.  It will take place the 16th to the 18th of September.  The Cultivating Justice podcast series is made by Hester Russell, Sam Siever, Abby Rose, Dora Taylor, Katie Rebill and Nadia Mehdi.  The conversations you heard in this episode were recorded by me, Marcus Macdonald.  
**[0:45:56-0:46:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/cultivating-justice-episode-5#t=0:45:56):**  They featured Bianca Wilson, also known as Island Girl, and Hannah Mayroon.  We also heard music by Bianca and three tracks by Hannah called Other Side, Nosebleeds and Home.  Thank you to our funders, Farming the Future and the Roddick Foundation.  And a big thank you to everyone who's contributed in any way.  Visit lambworkersalliance.org.uk forward slash cultivating dash justice to find out more.  