### Farmerama  (2017-40-11)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-castello-di-potentino#t=0:00:00):**  From time to time we get in a story that deserves a bit more attention than we're able to give  on our regular monthly episode.  And here's one of those.  A field report from Farmerama reporter Camilla Williamson at Castello di Portentino, a small  scale sustainable vineyard in Italy.  
**[0:00:31-0:00:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-castello-di-potentino#t=0:00:31):**  I am in... this is like central Tuscany, right?  Central Tuscany.  I'm about to pick the grapes tomorrow to make some delicious wine.  My name is Charlotte Horton.  I am English, but I've been living initially for 26 years and discovered that I had an  
**[0:00:57-0:01:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-castello-di-potentino#t=0:00:57):**  extraordinary passion for wine making.  I learned wine making off the local people 25 years ago and that experience has been  informing the way that I make wine and I treat the vines ever since then.  My name is Andy Bullard.  Full name is Michael Andrew Bullard II.  
**[0:01:22-0:01:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-castello-di-potentino#t=0:01:22):**  Today we took samples from each row from the vineyards, the ones that we're going to harvest,  and just samples being one from the top, middle and bottom about every 10 feet.  And those were taken to some lab and were tested, I think, for sugar content and such  and the results that came back I heard were very good.  It's a technique that's based on observation and really using very, very natural treatment  
**[0:01:57-0:02:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-castello-di-potentino#t=0:01:57):**  of the vines and responding to the plants and the particular microclimate that we have.  We have found a whole series of Etruscan wine making stones down the valley which attest  to probably continuous tradition of wine making for about 3,000 years.  So I'm very proud to be continuing that extremely important tradition.  Next we get the grapes from the vines.  
**[0:02:31-0:02:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-castello-di-potentino#t=0:02:31):**  Tomorrow we're supposed to be out there ready to go at 7, sun up, sun down.  The Castello di Potentino has a very unique microclimate.  We are in a valley under one of the highest mountains in Tuscany that used to be a volcano.  So we have mixed volcanic soil.  We have a lot of aquifers under the soil and we have extreme changes in temperature, what  
**[0:02:59-0:03:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-castello-di-potentino#t=0:02:59):**  they call diurnal temperature, so from day to night.  So we have very hot dry air coming in from the coast during the day, very cold air coming  off the mountain at night.  These are perfect conditions for the growth of fruit and in fact this valley which is  known as the golden basin in the area, the Concadoro, is very fertile and full of fruit  
**[0:03:23-0:03:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-castello-di-potentino#t=0:03:23):**  trees, olive trees, cherry trees, apple, pear, all sorts of things and obviously vine.  We have three different varieties of grape in our vineyard.  All three varieties are extremely sensitive to their particular environments.  So they have a particular quality or a characteristic but they very much reflect or mirror the microclimate  or what they call in France the terroir of where they are.  
**[0:03:58-0:04:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-castello-di-potentino#t=0:03:58):**  So I think plants definitely have an intelligence.  Plants have a different type of intelligence and not able to recognize the intelligence  of plants sadly.  So plants often get quite badly treated and what I'm interested in is providing a very  good situation for the plants because they will thrive and they will produce something  
**[0:04:26-0:04:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-castello-di-potentino#t=0:04:26):**  that is natural.  It's sustainable and so that's also very important in how you consider what you're planting and  where is the sustainability not only in the sustainability of the plant's life but also  in the sustainability of the taste.  I believe that you can actually taste in wines or food when they are produced from plants  
**[0:04:54-0:04:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-castello-di-potentino#t=0:04:54):**  that are happy and sustainable in their own environment.  So we don't add a lot of chemicals to the wine, we don't add a lot of fertilizers to  the soil and we don't irrigate.  These are things that will become less sustainable.  The use of pesticides and fungicides and treatments for plants in order to produce food or wine  
**[0:05:20-0:05:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-castello-di-potentino#t=0:05:20):**  is becoming a really problematic issue.  I think that people and plants should be where they can survive without making too much of  an effort.  Obviously we have a lot of young volunteers who come and learn about how we make wine.  In the last month it's been a very busy time, we've been preparing the vines for harvest.  
**[0:05:53-0:05:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-castello-di-potentino#t=0:05:53):**  Obviously then we've been actually making wine, so that involves picking the grapes  and processing them in the winery.  My name is Canilla and I'm staying in Portantino for a few weeks volunteering.  Hi my name is Santiago, I come from Buenos Aires, Argentina.  Today was the first day of harvesting one of the grapes, the Pinot Noir.  
**[0:06:21-0:06:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-castello-di-potentino#t=0:06:21):**  We put the gloves on and cut the grapes without leaves, put them in crates and then we went  through the vines with the tractor, stacking them all up in the tractor to then take them  up to the back of the castle where they have all the wine making machines and stuff.  We were up pretty early, like 6am and had to be out on the fields, the moon was still  up which was lovely.  
**[0:06:47-0:06:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-castello-di-potentino#t=0:06:47):**  It was quite cool, it was fun, there was about 16 of us doing it.  They look pretty tasty, pretty ripe, it looks like it's going to be a good harvest.  And then we threw them all in a machine that de-steams the grapes.  So from one end comes all the leaves and steams and stuff, and on the other end of the machine  with a pressured hose comes out all the grapes, the skin and the juices and everything.  
**[0:07:18-0:07:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-castello-di-potentino#t=0:07:18):**  And it was quite relieving to get out of the sun by that point, it was about 12.30.  We did another hour in the vat passing down a chain of these massive buckets of squashed  grapes and the smell was really strong and on one side you've got all of the barrels  that just had wine in for like a year or so, then on the other side you've got all these  huge empty vats which echo quite a lot and obviously I think they've been scrubbed down  
**[0:07:41-0:07:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-castello-di-potentino#t=0:07:41):**  by people who have volunteered before us over the last few months.  Skins and juices go into big barrels of wood, I don't know which wood really, and apparently  they stay there for 2 or 3 weeks where they ferment.  It's a very sweet smell, as you start messing up and grapes explode in your fingers and  they get all over the place, your t-shirt and everything, and you can smell the sweetness  
**[0:08:11-0:08:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-castello-di-potentino#t=0:08:11):**  in the air, the sugar from the fruits.  So we're all pretty tired, our feet are pretty sore, we've got a few more hours to do today  and then I think we'll go out and finish the last few rows tomorrow morning.  There's a bit of a deadline because as the sun goes up the grapes get too warm and then  that's no good apparently.  
**[0:08:33-0:08:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-castello-di-potentino#t=0:08:33):**  So you start quite slowly, taking your time with each bunch of grapes and then you start  to sweat and you feel you have to hurry up, but it's good fun.  After the fermentation process is over, all the volunteers have been helping to take the  grape skins off the liquid, the liquid is then racked off and put into barrels to age.  We are stamping out the remaining juice left in the grape skins that have been fermenting  
**[0:09:07-0:09:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-castello-di-potentino#t=0:09:07):**  over the past 2 weeks I believe.  Sarah is lucky enough to be in the thing stamping out, but there's a massive tub on the floor  with a pump and she's squeezing out all the juice.  And then people are getting a bit drunk of the fumes in the vat from the fermenting grape  skins and then after this process the grape skins will be, the smell is overpowering.  
**[0:09:30-0:09:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-castello-di-potentino#t=0:09:30):**  I mean if you stick your head into the vat where all the remaining grape skins are, it's  just alcohol, alcohol, alcohol and that's why you get a bit light headed very fast.  Yeah, it's a very sweet smell.  So I think generally everyone who's been here has had quite a good understanding of how  much work it takes to run a small business and as a small producer, especially if you're  
**[0:10:01-0:10:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-castello-di-potentino#t=0:10:01):**  using no machinery.  So most of the work is done by hand in vineyards because it makes a difference to the plant.  If you see plants that are picked by machines, it's a very traumatic thing to see.  There's a technical reason why it's not good for the plants because it traumatises and  damages the plants, but it also damages the quality of the production because you can  
**[0:10:29-0:10:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-castello-di-potentino#t=0:10:29):**  get grapes that are maybe hit or damaged and the juice will come out in the back of the  truck and that can mean that you can have fermentations, uncontrolled fermentations  starting in places where you don't want that to happen.  So it's actually, not only is it traumatic for the plant, but it's actually bad for the  production as well.  
**[0:11:11-0:11:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-castello-di-potentino#t=0:11:11):**  Thanks to Charlotte, Andy, Santiago, Liam, Sarah and Caroline for their time.  And extra special thanks to Camilla for her field report.  The regular Farmerama will be back, as ever, on the third Sunday of the month.  