### Farmerama  (2017-43-11)
**[0:00:00-0:00:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:00:00):**  Hello and welcome to a special field report from Farmerama. From the 9th to the 25th of  September, Urban Food Fortnight Fund descends on London. Here's Clara Gilbert from London  Food Link to tell us what this special edition is all about.  So Urban Food Fortnight is our celebration of all the food that's being grown, made,  cooked and saved in London. There's loads going on behind closed doors, from community  
**[0:00:25-0:00:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:00:25):**  gardens to surplus food being saved from markets and shops. There's so much going on and here  at London Food Link we like to think we're the voice for good food in London. So this  is really our chance to shout about it and let people know what's happening. Big thanks  to Jasmine who went and got loads of stories for us for this edition.  So in this episode we're going to concentrate on the four themes of Urban Food Fortnight.  
**[0:00:48-0:00:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:00:48):**  Grow, Make, Cook, Save. Let the journey begin.  Firstly we head to Grow Up Farms. This farm is based in a very urban industrial estate  in East London. But inside the building is piled high with rows of leafy greens. Grow  Up Farms is London's first commercial aquaponics farm. Jasmine met with CEO Kate Hoffman to  give us a bit of an intro to how this works and why she thinks it's an important technology  
**[0:01:21-0:01:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:01:21):**  for growing in cities.  We are sat at Unit 84 which is the UK's first commercial aquaponics urban farm and it's  the first commercial farm that Grow Up Urban Farms has built. We've been running now for,  we've been in production for about six months. We moved into this farm about 14 months ago  and just then it was an empty warehouse and we fitted it out with our indoor vertical  
**[0:01:53-0:02:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:01:53):**  aquaponics system and now we are selling salads and herbs and microgreens and soon we'll be  selling the fish too to customers across London.  Aquaponics is a combination of two well established farming practices. Aquaculture, farming fish  and hydroponics, growing plants in a nutrient solution without any soil. We take the waste  water from the fish farm, use that as the nutrient source for the plants. The plants  
**[0:02:21-0:02:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:02:21):**  absorb those waste nutrients in the water, actually clean the water for the fish and  the whole system recirculates. So it's a very water efficient way of farming. We have a  natural fertiliser base from the fish waste and we don't use any pesticides or insecticides  in our growing room.  Some parts of that technology have been around for a really long time. So hundreds of years  
**[0:02:45-0:02:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:02:45):**  ago in China farmers would flood their rice paddy fields and put fish into them and the  fish would eat any bugs that were around and they would fertilise the plants and then when  you drained the fields you'd have your rice and your fish to eat. So that symbiosis between  the two systems or the two types of growing, that's been around for a long time. What's  more innovative and new, what we're doing is bringing that together in an urban environment  
**[0:03:13-0:03:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:03:13):**  and controlling that whole system indoors. In a way what we're doing here is very different  and feels very different from a traditional arable or an arable farm or a horticulture  business. But actually it's still, as a business it operates in a very similar way. You know,  you're focused on your yield and that's where you make your revenue from and that's what  covers your costs as a business. And although it might seem different and it might not be  
**[0:03:44-0:03:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:03:44):**  how you would expect food to be grown, actually I think the reality is most people have no  idea how their food is grown, especially if you live in a city and you don't really have  much contact with agriculture. People have no idea, you know, our food system, especially  for this country, it's already heavily industrialised. We import a lot of our food, especially fresh  produce and the majority of that is not grown by Fung and Bob in a field, you know, with  
**[0:04:16-0:04:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:04:16):**  his tractor. We're already using a lot of technology and innovation in the way that  we produce food because we have to in order to be able to produce it in the quantity that  people will need it. Yeah, as I said, it's about finding a combination of things to use.  So I guess there are certain places in the world where it makes sense to do certain types  of farming depending on what the land is and what the resources are available. But there  
**[0:04:37-0:04:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:04:37):**  are also certain places, namely cities, where you have a big concentration of people and  you need to be able to make the best use of the space that you've got in order to feed  them. And the reality is that that volume of food, you know, and the consistency throughout  the year that people require cannot just come from very traditional farming methods. People  are very receptive and I think in London especially, increasingly what we see is that people are  
**[0:05:10-0:05:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:05:10):**  really interested in where their food has come from and people are starting to understand  that actually the food you choose to buy and eat has a difference in terms of environmental  impact. They might also care about the health implications for themselves. They also might  just be, you know, cost conscious. Our main social purpose is not about education or outreach.  Our social impact is around our job creation and skills and development programme for our  
**[0:05:39-0:05:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:05:39):**  staff actually. But on the other hand, to be on top of that, to be able to have that  interaction with people can be a very positive thing to help them understand a bit more about  what it takes to produce the food they eat. Grow up, beholding to you meet the producer  events during the fortnight. Head to the Albion in Clarkingwell on the 13th of September or  Eat17 on the 21st and they'll tell you a bit more about their project and you'll get to  
**[0:06:03-0:06:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:06:03):**  sample their microgreens. They're also on the producers list so make sure you keep an  eye out for them in restaurants and shops across the capital. At Farmerama we're always  probing positive farming futures and we're interested to see how aquaponics fits with  this. At the moment there's so many different perspectives it's hard to know. From regenerative  growing to regenerative making, we ventured to a wonderful courtyard haven in Dalston  
**[0:06:32-0:06:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:06:32):**  where we chatted to Max Tobias of the Dusty Knuckle Bakery, surrounded by bee gardens  and plentiful plants, to hear about the process of making and baking in the city. Dusty Knuckles  is all about making beautiful bread and delicious things with great care and obsessive energy.  They're also a social enterprise, crafting their bread with youth offenders and early  school leavers. The bakery are implementing their youth engagement programme slowly but  
**[0:06:58-0:07:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:06:58):**  surely and Max has a few ideas of how to get started with a social enterprise. I'm Max  Tobias, I'm one of the co-founders of the Dusty Knuckle Bakery here and I've been obsessed  with making bread since I was quite young. I made my first loaf of bread when I was about  12. It just triggered a bit of an obsession really. About four or five years ago I started  to think seriously about trying to open a bakery. I was working with young people in  
**[0:07:31-0:07:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:07:31):**  a number of different roles for mainly charities and that work was really with young people  who were in a lot of trouble and involved with criminality and violence and so on. My  dream was to start a bakery that could engage young people in the workplace really and teach  them about what it is to earn their keep and enter the world of legitimate work and hopefully  see more of a future for themselves, a financially independent future. So yeah, this bakery kind  
**[0:08:08-0:08:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:08:08):**  of combines my two passions which was bread as a kind of hobby up to that point and youth  engagement as a profession. We started to apply for some kind of start-up funding and  thankfully were successful with one or two of those bids and then entered into a partnership  with Bootstrap, the charity here who are our landlords and who lease us this space. They  had this shipping container sitting here doing nothing and before we knew it we kind of had  
**[0:08:38-0:08:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:08:38):**  a small amount of money to buy an oven and we had somewhere to put it. So in the future  what we would like is to work with young people who haven't worked before and we see that  happening in a kind of phased program if you like. So it would begin with quite kind of  light touch trying to really just provide a kind of hook to get the feet through the  door as it were and to generate an interest and then moving forward into more kind of  
**[0:09:09-0:09:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:09:09):**  structured work experience programs and for those with whom the fit is right moving forward  again into kind of part-time and then full-time employment. In the future I would like to  partner with third sector organizations like Hackney Quest, Spark to Life, those trying  to engage young people perhaps with some additional needs. Hopefully going forward in the longer  term future we can engage statutory organizations as well like the youth offending services,  
**[0:09:36-0:09:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:09:36):**  the care system but at the same time I'm trying to be kind of pragmatic with what we can and  can't do whilst we're still quite a fledgling business ultimately. So it's kind of always  trying to be strategic with our resources so that we kind of tick long term aims as  well as short term aims. A piece of advice that I got very very early on which has really  stayed with me is that the number one single most important trait of any social entrepreneur  
**[0:10:11-0:10:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:10:11):**  is endurance. If you really want to make it happen you've got to really strap up your  boots and prepare yourself for a kind of long term slog. Darcy and Ackler are on the Urban  Food Fortnite producers list so make sure you keep an eye out for them and they've also  kindly donated a prize for our raffle at the 5x15 Future of Urban Food event taking place  at Farmopolis on the 22nd September. Make sure you head to that to be on the chance  
**[0:10:37-0:10:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:10:37):**  to win. Once the bread has been baked and the greens grown of course the chefs of the  city can't wait to get their hands on this local and seasonal produce. Oliver Rowe is  a London based chef and he has a few tips on what it takes to serve seasonal and local  produce in the city. I became a chef about 20 years ago because maybe 19 years ago because  I went initially on a working holiday to Tuscany. It's one of the reasons why I have a passion  
**[0:11:09-0:11:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:11:09):**  for local and seasonal food because all the produce that we were using there was amazing  and it came, was mostly grown locally so that was for me, that sort of set the tone for  what food should be about for me. That's how I became a chef and then I came back to London  and I got a job at Morro which is a Spanish and North African restaurant in Clarkinwell.  After Morro I sort of came to a bit of a, I wasn't quite sure, a bit of a crossroads,  
**[0:11:36-0:11:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:11:36):**  I wasn't quite sure what to do so I opened a café which was all about kind of provincial  European, not kind of high cuisine but still with lots of European influences and then  I opened a restaurant nearby called, the café was called Constam and the restaurant was  called Constam at the Prince Albert and that was a really interesting restaurant for the  reason that we sourced about 80% of the ingredients that we used were from in and around London  
**[0:12:10-0:12:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:12:10):**  or in and around Greater London. Not only did it make me connect with various urban  farming projects, various growing projects but I also connected to, reached out to the  farms in and around London so you can't really run a restaurant based on everything just  being grown inside the London city limits, it's not really feasible but nonetheless  quite a large amount was from really, really very, very close and the idea was to be seasonal  
**[0:12:40-0:12:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:12:40):**  really that was the thing. It followed on from the rationale of the more local you are  the more seasonal you are. Environmental concerns were very important, a few people, yeah it  was something that was becoming important but also I looked into the health benefits  and the taste benefits and I think also in terms of running a restaurant one of the most  important elements is that if you eat things seasonally, which when you eat things locally  
**[0:13:06-0:13:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:13:06):**  you do, then you are eating things when they're in a glut and when things are in a glut they're  cheaper. So it works on four levels, so seasonal eating uses less energy because you're harnessing  as many of the basic natural resources you have at your disposal. There are slightly  more nutrients in food that is grown seasonally but it tastes better as well so seasonal food  tastes better. I mean we just all know that the tomatoes and strawberries in the summer  
**[0:13:41-0:13:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:13:41):**  taste a million times better. Environment, health, taste and money, so there's four reasons  why I think eating things seasonally is important and beneficial. People expect a lot from restaurants  now but I think that people are much more familiar with the idea of food being local,  food being seasonal, so that's something I think it took a while to negotiate and I think  people are very savvy now so people go into a restaurant and they expect it a lot of the  
**[0:14:08-0:14:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:14:08):**  time. If you're not a chain, chains are very different as well and they're very hard to,  that's one of the big nuts that we still have to grab, but if you're not a chain, if you're  an independent restaurant, people expect a changing menu, they expect you to be featuring  local seasonal produce, they expect a range of vegetarian food and so on, so people are  very, quite demanding. Whilst I loved working with urban farming projects and it was great  
**[0:14:30-0:14:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:14:30):**  and some of the produce was amazing, it's really going to provide you with enough produce  to actually run a restaurant or a cafe but you do need to work with lots of different  individuals, it takes a bit of time, there's no one person you can go to and say, supply  me with UK produce because everyone's trying to, everyone's having to make compromises  here and there. You have to work with your suppliers and ask them what's locally sourced,  
**[0:14:59-0:15:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:14:59):**  what's locally reared and focus on that and be prepared to limit your menu. Your menu  has to reflect the availability of the produce that you are selling, that you can buy and  that forces you to be creative, that's the great thing is I think seasonal and local  produce, because it's an intermittent supply, as a chef that's great, it forces you to be  creative to think about what you've got, it gives you like a palette and it gives you  
**[0:15:29-0:15:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:15:29):**  like a larder which you have to select from and make dishes out of and that changes as  the year goes by and so you have to come up with new things, new flavours, new combinations  or research interesting recipes or think and create basically.  Listening to Oliver brought up a funny question, is food grown by aquaponics seasonal? And  what will seasonal mean as climates evolve and drought descends in previously lush landscapes?  
**[0:16:02-0:16:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:16:02):**  These are the kinds of questions the cooking sections team are asking through their Climavore  dinners at the Empire Remains shop in Baker Street. Check them out.  Oliver's collaborating this year with the London Cooking Project. They're a really great  social enterprise in Battersea and they work to provide opportunities for young people  in the area. He holds seasonal supper clubs throughout the year and this month he's holding  
**[0:16:26-0:16:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:16:26):**  a special local to London urban food fortnight feast. Join them on the 15th of September  for a four course meal which features producers including Cobble Lane Cured and locally grown  veg.  As Oliver mentioned with seasons there's often a glut of produce. All tomatoes are ripe at  the same time and sometimes we can't eat them all so it's important to have effective ways  
**[0:16:47-0:16:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:16:47):**  of dealing with leftovers or extra food. Luckily there are a few people helping us work on  this. Laura Hammond from Plan Zeroes tells us how both individuals and businesses can  start saving surplus food from being piled on the rubbish heap.  Plan Zeroes is a registered charity and we facilitate donations of surplus food from  businesses to charities that are working with people in need. So we get surplus food to  
**[0:17:13-0:17:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:17:13):**  charities such as homelessness charities, charities that are supporting the elderly,  people with mental health issues, substance misuse issues, low income families, things  like that. The way we do this is through two projects. One is a project at Borough Market  and that's been running for two years now. It's a very successful project. It was part  of the food save program of the GLA. The other project is an online platform for surplus  
**[0:17:39-0:17:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:17:39):**  food donations and that we launched last year. It's a free platform and it's a social network  where businesses can create profiles with the types of food they have to donate when  they might be donating it. There's over 180 volunteers registered on the platform. Not  all of them are active but they are registered and charities can contact them to ask if they  could help collect and deliver the food if the charities can't do it themselves. We get  
**[0:18:07-0:18:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:18:07):**  inquiries from all over the UK, all over the world in fact, so we definitely see our  platform growing in other areas of the UK. It started in London because the co-founders  were based here and Plan Zero basically started out of a movement at Citizens UK. So it was  a bunch of people that were really concerned about the amounts of food they saw going to  waste in London and the people around them who needed it. Definitely we've seen an increase  
**[0:18:39-0:18:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:18:39):**  in awareness in general around the issue of food waste and its impact on the environment.  I think that's evident by recent programs on TV such as Hughes War on Waste. Several  years ago the supermarkets weren't doing anything in terms of redistributing their surplus food  and now several of them have major programs to do that and it's part of their sustainability  program in general. So I think there's definitely growing awareness and I think consumers are  
**[0:19:11-0:19:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:19:11):**  also putting pressure on the supermarkets. There have been some online campaigns trying  to get the supermarkets to do more about their food waste and there's a lot more solutions  out there for food businesses to redistribute their surplus food or for food waste to dispose  of it in a more sustainable way through anaerobic digestion, converting it to energy and things  like that. There's lots more apps out there right now as well for people to use everything  
**[0:19:42-0:19:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:19:42):**  from businesses to consumers. So I think generally it's a good time and everything's moving in  the right direction but there's more we can do in terms of encouraging businesses, not  forcing them but encouraging them to redistribute their surplus through tax incentives, just  making the food safety issues a little bit more clear and the FSA is working on that  at the moment. But I think tax incentives would be a huge, they do that in the US, there's  
**[0:20:13-0:20:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:20:13):**  tax breaks for businesses that donate food. So anything we can do to encourage the businesses  to redistribute more would be great. I think right now for individuals there's an app called  Olio which is quite a nice solution. So if you have that celery at home and you know  you're not going to use it you can upload it on their app and your neighbour can come  around and collect it. So there are different solutions out there for individual consumers.  
**[0:20:43-0:20:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:20:43):**  That's not something that we're considering at the moment just because I said we're working  directly with charities and we want to ensure that that food is safe for them. Consumer  food waste is about 70% of the total food waste in the UK. It's huge and there's been,  I mean I think there's been a lot of progress through the Love Food Hate Waste campaign  of WRAP but there's still definitely more to be done and you know even I'm guilty of  
**[0:21:09-0:21:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:21:09):**  it sometimes. You know I'm just not careful about watching what's in my fridge and it's  gone past the use by date and it feels awful and everything. So there's definitely more  things like which can help you in terms of thinking of recipes or the ways that you can  use that surplus that you have at home. That's such a great example of how technology can  really help bring the right people together and allow connections of want and waste. So  
**[0:21:35-0:21:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:21:35):**  Plan Zero has teamed up with Global Generations Skip Garden to hold a disco soup on the 18th  of September where you can chop to the beat and save waste food. There'll be DJs, workshops  and even a cook-off so it looks like it's going to be an ace event. So there are over  70 events taking place during the fortnight so make sure you check out the map online  and get down to one of the events between the 9th and the 25th. From open gardens to  
**[0:22:02-0:22:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-field-report-urban-food-fortnight#t=0:22:02):**  pop-up dinners and cocktail evenings there seems to be something for everyone so get  involved. Even if you're not London based be sure and check it out because I found there  are lots of inspiring projects featured on there that everyone can learn from. You can  find out more on urbanfoodfortnight.org. That's all for now. Toodle-oo!  