### Farmerama  (2017-32-23)
**[0:00:00-0:00:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:00:00):**  On July 6th we headed to Fullerton Farms partnership near Andover with a couple of  hundred farmers for the 10th National Organic Combineable Crops event.  Famed for its delicious lunches and plentiful tea breaks, the day was alive with farmers,  traders, researchers, millers, processors and bakers exchanging ideas of how to work  together to support ecological farming methods and grow and make healthy food.  
**[0:00:32-0:00:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:00:32):**  This is a special episode commissioned by Organic Farmers and Growers who organised NOCC.  They're one of the UK's largest organic certification bodies.  Their commitment to be open, innovative and support a better farming future for all echoed  throughout every corner of the barn. Here's organiser Stephen Jacobs.  NOCC, what's it all about? National Organic Combineable Crops or NOCC is the event we  
**[0:00:58-0:01:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:00:58):**  hold each year to bring the community together to share knowledge. It's based around combinable  crops, that's cereals and pulses, looking at the challenges of growing them organically but also  the markets available. We have everybody come together for breakfast in the morning and straight  into the talks and panel discussions and the farm walk where we take people around different  parts of the site looking at crop varieties. We've got agroforestry represented this year.  
**[0:01:26-0:01:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:01:26):**  We also have a detailed look at soil analysis. Then we all get back together for an organic  lunch and then some more talks and panel discussions in the afternoon followed by tea  and cake. It's our annual get together, it's well attended and we're very pleased this year  to be hosted by the Liddell family in Hampshire. And just so you know it was so hot. The sweltering  heat kept everyone sweaty but undeterred to gather every grain of knowledge they could.  
**[0:02:00-0:02:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:02:00):**  Tim May was one attendee and he shares with us his impression of the event.  It's quite hot. I'm sort of in that stage at the moment as a newcomer into organic production,  organic cereals, is to try and understand what the market wants. I always actually like  coming to mix with the organic farmers. They always seem a bit more market orientated.  They're a bit more willing to take control of their own destiny than the conventional  
**[0:02:25-0:02:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:02:25):**  farmers. So there's normally a bit more of a buzz about their products and a bit more  pride in what they're doing. So it's a very sort of upbeat sort of deal.  We start with what to grow. In the morning panel discussion there was a call for more  farmers to trial new and different varieties on farm. The message was clear. Citizen science  and on farm research are vital in order for the organic arable sector to continue to develop  
**[0:02:56-0:03:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:02:56):**  and produce high quality nutritious grains. Researcher Ed Dickin tells us about some breeding  trials he's been doing on his parents farm. It's taken him 10 years to get this far, but  as one organic grower pointed out, it could happen much quicker if more farmers were involved  in the development of crop trials. I'm Ed Dickin. I'm a lecturer at Harper Adams,  but my research interest, which is a bit of a hobby, is breeding cereals, looking at nutrition  
**[0:03:27-0:03:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:03:27):**  and human health as well as for yield. So the main one I do is naked barley, which is  barley specifically for human food. It threshes freely, bit of a tongue twister, free threshing  from the husk. So you can use it, human food, without further processing. So you don't have  to pearl it. So pearling is what's done to normal covered barley, which is the abrasion  of the hull, but that also removes the germ or the embryo and not the bran, which is what  
**[0:03:57-0:04:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:03:57):**  a lot of the good stuff is. So naked barley can be used as whole grain without that need  for pearling. And then what you do with it, you can flake it, you can mill it for flour,  you can use it as a whole grain in things like risotto as a substitute for rice and  anything else you can think of. Stephen Jacob, the organic farmers and growers, he came to  one of the events we did with the Welsh Grain Forum, who got interested when I was working  
**[0:04:25-0:04:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:04:25):**  at Bangor University on naked barley. So the Parrys who've got a watermill at Bellinganon  near Aberystwyth, they were looking at milling some of the naked barley. So that sort of  got an introduction through them. Then growing hen gumrow, which is an old Welsh wheat variety.  So this is where other interests started coming in. That's when I got the contact with Andy  Forbes at Bothwell Bake and started also experimenting with some of the old wheats as well. So now  
**[0:04:56-0:05:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:04:56):**  expanded into wheats, rivet wheat as well, looking a bit at emmer and all sorts of other  grains as well as naked barley. At the moment the markets are small. We're dealing with  two companies at the moment, Hodmer Dodds, who many of the people would have heard of  with the pulses, but they're also interested in grains. Their first product is a naked  barley flake, which can be used in breakfast cereals, it can be added to bread and you  
**[0:05:24-0:05:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:05:24):**  can make really good porridge out of it, especially if you mix it with oats, because the oats  give a bit of a creaminess and then the barley flakes give a bit more flavour, a bit of bite.  And also Ed Me, who provides ingredients for bread making and they've been looking at  it for their whole soft process where they sort of hydrate and cook the grains and supply  them pasteurised in vacuum packed bags and then bakers can add those grains straight  
**[0:05:51-0:05:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:05:51):**  into their dough and because those grains are already hydrated they're not going to  suck moisture out of the dough so you don't have to adjust your water and flour volume.  So they're ready to use. So those are the two companies at the moment. We're also talking  to various other people and so there is interest at the moment on a fairly small scale. Today  has been really, it's great to talk to interested people and interesting people with sort of  
**[0:06:18-0:06:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:06:18):**  similar ideas. I'm not an organic farmer, I'm a conventional farmer, but finding have  a lot in common and this whole idea of trying to develop shorter supply chains and getting  good relationships with perhaps smaller processes, people like Bodma Dobson, I think that's the  way to go and bring these different crops forward because really growing commodity crops  at the moment, either conventional or maybe even organically, it is very difficult. We're  
**[0:06:46-0:06:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:06:46):**  competing with maize production in estates for example for animal feed and we just can't  do it.  In the morning panel, scientist and innovator Martin Wolf talked about the ORC Wakelands  population that he has been breeding for many years. He told us that the breeding of this  population is based on a simple principle at the core of Charles Darwin's theory of  
**[0:07:10-0:07:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:07:10):**  evolution that we must have diversity in our breeding populations to ensure a resilient  future for that crop. The population was bred by making 190 crosses among 20 different parent  varieties and mixing all the resulting seed. This goes against the current thinking where  breeding aims to produce a crop that is genetically identical.  Of course this radically different approach raised many questions but there was one wonderful  
**[0:07:39-0:07:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:07:39):**  moment on the day where the whole supply chain connected up and we saw a hint of what's possible.  Earlier this year, Josiah Meldrum of Hodgme Dobs brought some Wakelands population flower  to Kimberley Bell at the small food bakery in Nottingham. Here's what happened.  One of the most important things that I've learnt from trying to bake for this week is  that you actually have to adjust your perception as a maker and try and apply everything you  
**[0:08:04-0:08:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:08:04):**  know but to try and get the best product that you can out of the wheat. When I found out  about the Wakelands population it just seemed like an inherently good idea to me and I felt  like it's my role as a baker to try and make that work as a product. It's not for me to  turn around and say it's not high enough in protein.  I've only been baking with it for a little while. It's a sourdough made with 100% whole  
**[0:08:25-0:08:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:08:25):**  grain and the thing I've been concentrating on is the flavour. It occurred to me that  with such a biodiversity and natural crop doing some interesting things with fermentation  might yield a depth of flavour that you might not be able to get from a single variety.  So that's what I've been working on.  We need to understand the two different positions, you know, what the baker requires, what the  
**[0:08:45-0:08:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:08:45):**  farmer needs to get in terms of yield and reliability and if we can bring them together  and make a connection which Hovmador has done then we can make something that the farmer  might be very sceptical about, the baker might be very nervous about actually work and create  something delicious that people are clearly enjoying. So that's what we're all about.  It's so exciting. It feels like really exciting to be right here right now surrounded by grain  
**[0:09:09-0:09:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:09:09):**  and wheat and eating bread.  Absolutely and we're part of a global revolution. That's the exciting thing. This is happening  all over the world. It's happening in the States, it's happening across Europe. We're  in touch with organisations like Hovmador, like Kimberley and the Small Food Bakery,  like Martin at Wake and Zagro Forestry who are rethinking how we make bread, how we eat  
**[0:09:28-0:09:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:09:28):**  bread, where the cereal comes from, what we can do to create a more resilient, long term,  sustainable food system that produces nutritious, not just bread that fills you up but bread  that sustains you through the day. That's what it's all about.  The bread was incredibly delicious, a totally unique flavour. The panel I hosted after lunch  had a mixture of non-organic and organic farmers sharing what they are experimenting with on  
**[0:10:00-0:10:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:10:00):**  their farms. It became clear that all are aligned on principles of diversity, increasing  soil organic matter and building a resilient business.  One of the panellists, John Pawsey, is a farmer who has invested in a piece of machinery from  Sweden that's helping build resilience in his business and has allowed him to experiment  with relay cropping, directly planting a second crop into the current crop before harvest.  
**[0:10:31-0:10:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:10:31):**  My name's John Pawsey, I farm about 650 hectares in Suffolk. We also farm about 930 hectares  for other farmers, it's all farmed organically. I also have 670 breeding ewes, we're increasing  that year on year, really to sort of close the nutrient gap on the farm, to extend our  rotation to include more lays and to ultimately build fertility so we build a long term, sustainable  rotation.  
**[0:10:59-0:11:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:10:59):**  So we've done two years of relay cropping and they're both using the same crops which  is using spring oats with buckwheat. So the idea with relay cropping is you harvest the  crop of oats and then afterwards you harvest the crop of buckwheat. So how do you do that?  So first of all you drill your spring oats and they come up and then with our drill we  can drill a row of buckwheat in between the two rows of spring barley at a later date  
**[0:11:22-0:11:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:11:22):**  so it comes to harvest later. And the idea is to try and get two crops out of the field  which sounds a little bit greedy but actually the upshot really is that you could get a  crop of it but also if you don't get a crop of it it could also be something you could  crimp a roll or roll down to a surface of mulch to suppress weeds or you could just  incorporate it into your soil and it would be a green manure. So it's just trying to  
**[0:11:44-0:11:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:11:44):**  bring sort of more diversity into what we're trying to do to produce potentially different  results to either produce more output from the field or to increase soil organic matter  or suppress weeds.  I thought that relay cropping would be a good idea because actually it does have different  outcomes. I think what you're trying to do as a farmer is you're trying to spread the  
**[0:12:04-0:12:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:12:04):**  risk of anything failing and the way you spread the risk of anything failing is to bring as  much diversity into the field as possible. Now I know that you know just having oats  and buckwheat isn't a huge amount of diversity but when you start thinking along the lines  of you know other crops you could be growing in conjunction and there might be three crops  you could grow or you might be able to harvest crops together. I think you know it's about  
**[0:12:29-0:12:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:12:29):**  taking the risk out of anything going wrong and be it weeds overtaking your crop and the  way you suppress them is by putting in another crop in the bottom of the crop that you're  initially wanting to harvest, being the second crop then suppressing the weeds or you know  building fertility by incorporating the relay crop into the ground if you can't harvest  it.  
**[0:12:48-0:12:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:12:48):**  The first thing you have to know is what outcome do you want. First of all it's your desired  outcome because then that will enable you to make the right selection. So the desired  outcome for us with the buckwheat was to possibly take a crop off it but also the roots of the  buckwheat exude a chemical that makes locked up phosphate become available and the next  crop we were going to plant was going to be beans which needs phosphate at the early seedling  
**[0:13:14-0:13:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:13:14):**  stage. So that was what we really wanted out of it and the bonus would be that if we could  take a crop off each.  Another thing that was a first I think is we had a sort of agroforestry demonstration  and I've been going to Martin Woolf's farm in Wakelands in East Suffolk, it's very close  to my farm, for a long time looking at his agroforestry system and every time I see it  
**[0:13:35-0:13:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:13:35):**  I get incredibly excited about it. I haven't done it at home yet but I plan to do some  and it was really good to see it demonstrated here at NOC and it's also very exciting the  more people, not just organic but conventional farmers are beginning to talk about it. Watch  this space.  Next, farmer Sophie Alexander told us about her involvement in compost tea trials, her  
**[0:13:54-0:13:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:13:54):**  on-farm research that is part of an innovative farmers project.  My name's Sophie Alexander, I farm in Dorset at Hemsworth Farm, it's about 400 hectares,  it's now entirely organic and we have a lot of cattle which are brought to the farm by  a dairy farmer, an organic dairy farmer so we look after his replacements. Otherwise  we grow mostly wheat, barley and oats and quite often we grow beans.  
**[0:14:24-0:14:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:14:24):**  I've only been managing the farm, this is our sixth year and when I took it on I knew  it was quite a tired, well used farm, knackered farm. First of all doing the overwinter cover  crops, really long legume lays and getting the cattle on, that was the most instant way  of being able to rejuvenate the farm. But looking for other ways to supplement that,  I couldn't make enough farmyard manure and compost to apply and I read quite a lot about  
**[0:15:03-0:15:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:15:03):**  compost teas and then just happened to bump into a few people who were very encouraging  about compost teas. I thought well, you know, let's give it a go, it's got a wonderful  logic about it in that it's going to boost the microbiology of the soil which is what  makes plants grow, it releases nitrogen, it suppresses diseases.  So far the first year what has been demonstrated is that there is a significant increase in  
**[0:15:36-0:15:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:15:36):**  the fungal and microbiological activity in the soil that's been treated. This year it's  tailed off because the last couple of applications we did the moisture content of the soil was  really low and I think it was probably just applying microbes that couldn't survive sadly,  so the graphs show good activity when the moisture is high but then not much, so I don't  know whether it'll help us much this year. So last year the trials were on an oat crop.  
**[0:16:12-0:16:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:16:12):**  What we found with the oats, and it was a surprising result because you know, until  I came to want to buy more oat seed, firth oat seed in the spring, for spring planting,  I tested my own grain to see what the disease profile was and what we had in store, what  we had treated with compost tea had an appreciably lower disease rating than what I could buy  on the open market. So I kept back some tonnage and cleaned it and had it tested again and  
**[0:16:44-0:16:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:16:44):**  so that's a good result, you know, that saves money too. So difficulties I find driving  over the crop. I don't like doing that, I mean you know it's really good to have a very  wide sprayer, it's about 36 metres and really what happens is you know I've tried to make  the applications earlier and earlier because the first couple of times you go over it seems  to recover and then third time sort of beginning of June, end of May, it stays there, it doesn't  
**[0:17:18-0:17:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:17:18):**  look good and I worry about disease possibly getting into the stunted plants. So that's  a bit of an issue and then I'm also finding the amount of water we use is concerning me,  particularly in this very, very dry year. Because we use a contractors sprayer, so he's  using it for conventional chemical applications a lot of the time and he's incredibly diligent  and conscientious, he wants to wash out from the sprayer every single trace of chemical,  
**[0:17:53-0:17:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:17:53):**  but he does use thousands of gallons of water and we are using thousands of gallons of water  in making the compost tea, you know we're making 8000 gallons. The other difficulty  I have at the moment is I've had this wonderful, very accommodating contractor with his magnificent  Amazon 36 metre sprayer, but he is upgrading. He is going to buy state of the art, very  precision, sort of almost robotic sprayer and I can just tell from the expression on  
**[0:18:24-0:18:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:18:24):**  his face he does not want my compost tea in it, which I have to sympathise with. So do  I have enough faith in the efficacious qualities of compost tea to buy his sprayer? It means  I would use less water because I wouldn't have to clean it out as thoroughly. I don't  know, I'll have to make the decision probably by Christmas. If you could find other farmers  to go in on it with, I mean is that a possibility? It could be a possibility. If another organic  
**[0:18:56-0:19:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:18:56):**  farmer was prepared to do that they would have to be geographically very close. I think  it's great if farmers collaborate on machinery and things, I really do, but the reality is  most of us want it because we want it when we need it. Maybe a compost tea sprayer is  not as vital, you can move the application dates by a week or so. Maybe I'll brew for  other people and spray for other people, there's a thought. That's a third dimension I hadn't  
**[0:19:28-0:19:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:19:28):**  thought of, Abbie. I love that, we're being very entrepreneurial on the spot. Yeah, there  you go. Finally we hear from Andy Howard, a non-organic  farmer who spent his Nuffield Scholarship learning about intercropping around the world.  For him, low input is not only more ecological, it's also better economically. Using clever  strategies and well thought out practices can be at least if not more productive and  
**[0:19:54-0:19:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:19:54):**  results in a more viable farming business. I went to a meeting about five years ago where  a French farmer was talking about companion cropping with all seed rape and I thought,  well it just made sense. I tried it on the farm and it seemed to work fine and that's  what got me interested in the whole companion cropping, intercropping subject which led  onto my Nuffield. At the time I didn't see it as a solution to any particular problem  
**[0:20:19-0:20:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:20:19):**  we had on the farm at the time, but now I know more, I realise that intercropping has  the potential to mitigate a fair few modern agronomy problems. The first one we did was  winter all seed rape, companion cropped with vetch and buckwheat and that didn't seem to  harm the crop, we used no herbicide, less fertiliser and we didn't see a yield loss.  There's plenty of research now saying you can get yield benefits and better, less insecticide,  
**[0:20:48-0:20:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:20:48):**  less fungicide, as a conventional farmer. Now we're doing spring peas and spring all  seed rape together and the idea of that is the all seed rape stops the peas falling over  and come harvest we can harvest both and we're not scraping the peas off the floor. We're  also doing a little bit of beans and oats, the oats are helping weed control in the beans  and reducing disease and the last thing is chickpeas and linseed together and again the  
**[0:21:19-0:21:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:21:19):**  linseed is a, helps weed control plus disease control in the chickpeas.  I guess so far in our field scale P. Ola which is the peas and all seed rape and we haven't  needed fungicides, no fertiliser in that crop so I did a tissue test on the peas and the  rape in this field at the same time and rape being very nitrogen hungry you would expect  to be low in nitrogen but it showed to be high in nitrogen when it was mixed with the  
**[0:21:45-0:21:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:21:45):**  peas so you can see that the two are working together for mutual benefit. I can see it  being a part of the solution of weed control for organic no-till but it's definitely a  challenge organic no-till and it wouldn't be the one solution but it definitely would  play a part.  Just planting other crops with your main cash crop to help suppress weeds or out compete  
**[0:22:09-0:22:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:22:09):**  weeds the idea is really that you're filling the niche that the weed would take so if you're  planting wheat maybe you should be planting other crops like oats, spring oats that might  die over winter, radish, vetch which will help suppress other weeds. There's one guy  in Saskatchewan people say to me intercropping you can't do on a large scale. Well he was  doing 5,000 acres and 2,500 acres was in intercropped every year and he was separating it all at  
**[0:22:35-0:22:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:22:35):**  harvest so scale isn't really a barrier if you think about it and he'd been doing it  for 15 years and I guess someone like Gabe Brown in North Dakota he would never plant  a monoculture he had a livestock, he'd increased his soil organic matter to 8, 9%, never used  any fertiliser, he was conventional and just seeing someone like that go from a low base  to being almost without inputs that's really inspiring.  
**[0:23:06-0:23:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:23:06):**  There's lots of stuff going on, lots of farmers are interested, I've spoken at lots of meetings  and it seems to be in the press, farming press, there's two European projects starting looking  into intercropping, the Remix project and the Diversify project, there seems to be a  real interest in intercropping and for me the whole thing is exciting, growing two or  more plants in the field at the same time is much more interesting than a boring field  
**[0:23:32-0:23:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:23:32):**  of wheat, it just makes life more exciting. I've been speaking to Millers today, I've  actually been and had chats with the end user and the processors and they seem as keen as  us to have variety mixtures which is the simplest form of intercropping which gives disease  benefit, they seem very open minded to doing that so for me that's quite exciting for intercropping  to take off we need to get the end user, the customer to understand the environmental benefits  
**[0:24:01-0:24:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:24:01):**  and it does seem that they are looking for those stories and don't really see a problem  of having variety mixtures coming through their mills or their molesters.  Great that Andy reiterates the importance of the whole system being part of this ecological  farming revolution that's going on. We need to engage all parts of the supply chain with  ideas like companion cropping so that millers and bakers also discover ways that this added  
**[0:24:24-0:24:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:24:24):**  diversity might add to what they are producing. The story we heard of the small food bakery  is the perfect example of this. At the end of a fascinating and thought-provoking  day we hear again from Sophie and John as they look back over the event.  Yes lots to take away from it, I mean I like to do all those things, I like to mintill,  I like to do combi cropping, the jury is out on whether I want a chameleon drill I'll see.  
**[0:24:50-0:24:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:24:50):**  One of the big positives is I really like the conversations and the exchange of information  ideas between not just organic farmers but non-organic farmers as well. I think it's  a really artificial divide that's built up, you know organics taking the moral high ground  which is always a really dangerous thing to do and actually a lot of the innovation in  machinery and plant science is all due to the conventional guys. So thank you and they're  
**[0:25:25-0:25:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:25:25):**  the ones developing robotics and things which I'm really looking forward to and likewise  they're now thinking oh gosh maybe we need to do cover crops, maybe we need to you know  use leguminous lays and bring cattle back and if the organic sector hadn't kept all  that expertise and knowledge alive and well it you know might not be there to call on.  Let's do more together and be less judgemental about each other.  
**[0:25:55-0:25:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:25:55):**  I think what was really interesting about the discussion today and I would say something  that's never happened at Organic Cereals before is you had a panel of two conventional farmers  and two organic farmers and I don't think it's happened before, I might be wrong. What  was so exciting and I've sort of been feeling this before the event but it really compounded  it was that a lot of the language that farmers that are seeking a biological system rather  
**[0:26:20-0:26:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:26:20):**  than a chemical one we're beginning to talk the same language. I mean obviously in organic  farming we get a price premium, we don't want them messing around with our price premium  but at the end of the day actually we're all trying to achieve the same thing which is  a sustainable rotation which doesn't impact on environment too heavily and also builds  soil fertility so you know very exciting.  
**[0:26:42-0:26:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:26:42):**  Some great themes emerged from the day. The value of knowledge sharing amongst all farmers  organic and non-organic to build resilience into businesses. The need for more citizen  science and on-farm research to help the sector to develop. And finally how important it is  to engage the whole supply chain. We've heard how farmers are excited to be working with  ecological methods, diversity and maybe even planting populations but it will only be viable  
**[0:27:09-0:27:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:27:09):**  if the market takes this journey with them. That was the beauty of NOCC, everyone from  the whole system was there in one place, excited to work together to create delicious nutritious  products that are good for people and the earth.  Thank you for listening. We're excited that Organic Farmers and Growers commissioned this  episode. OFNG is the largest certifier of organic land in the UK, working with producers  
**[0:27:37-0:27:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/nocc-final#t=0:27:37):**  and processors to ensure their products meet the highest organic standards.  This episode was produced by me, Abby Rose, with Joe Barrett and Katie Reville. Thanks  for listening.  