### Farmerama  (2019-28-30)
**[0:00:00-0:00:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-cathy-dice#t=0:00:00):**  Late last year, I attended the perennial gathering put on by the Savannah Institute in Wisconsin.  The Savannah Institute are laying the groundwork for widespread agroforestry in the Midwest.  Over 100 farmers and researchers gathered to share learnings from different agroforestry  and silvopasture operations.  Kathy Dice and her partner own Red Fern Farm in Iowa.  
**[0:00:26-0:00:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-cathy-dice#t=0:00:26):**  They were some of the pioneers of the agroforestry movement in the Midwest, and their farm is  now a successful U-Pick perennial polyculture operation where customers pick their own produce.  I tasted some of their fresh chestnuts, and they were literally the most delicious nut  I've ever had.  Kathy tells us about a recent innovation in their U-Pick offering that really got people  
**[0:00:50-0:00:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-cathy-dice#t=0:00:50):**  picking.  We have quite a collection of nut and fruit producing trees that we sell through U-Pick.  We have chestnut trees, pop-pot trees, Asian pears, heart nuts, persimmons, and a whole  bunch of other things.  We first started planting trees thinking it could be a commercial business back around  
**[0:01:15-0:01:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-cathy-dice#t=0:01:15):**  1997, and we planted in our rugged, hilly ground where we had very rough time even getting  access to it.  We couldn't get mowers up across creeks that flooded and up steep hills.  We had heavy deer predation, and this was back before there were five foot tall ventilated  tree shelters available.  
**[0:01:36-0:01:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-cathy-dice#t=0:01:36):**  The deer were constantly attacking our trees.  We could barely keep the vegetation down because we couldn't get the mower back out there.  Those trees just struggled and struggled.  But then in the year 2000, our neighbors moved, and they had planted some chestnut trees on  our advice because they saw what we were doing.  
**[0:01:58-0:02:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-cathy-dice#t=0:01:58):**  They're like, yeah, this could be really profitable.  So they planted a whole bunch of chestnut trees, but they were moving now.  And they asked if we would be interested in taking over their ground and buying the chestnut  trees.  We were like, yes!  
**[0:02:13-0:02:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-cathy-dice#t=0:02:13):**  So we went and bought their orchard, and they hadn't actually, even though they had easy  access, they hadn't been mowing and mulching.  So these trees had not really grown in the 10 years or so since they had been planted.  They had planted back in 1990.  So we started mowing, mulching, and taking care of them.  
**[0:02:34-0:02:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-cathy-dice#t=0:02:34):**  But even that first year we got them, we were able to get a harvest of like a gallon or  maybe five, 10 pounds of chestnuts.  And we knew other people who had planted chestnut trees, and we decided to all get together  and make a co-op.  We would all start marketing our chestnuts together, and we all agreed it was going to  
**[0:02:51-0:02:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-cathy-dice#t=0:02:51):**  be really important to make sure we had good quality product, that it would be fresh, it  would be wholesome, and we would not undercut each other on the price.  So we were like, yeah, this is a smart thing to do.  So Tom, my husband, ended up being in charge of the co-op for about 10 years.  And he would buy the chestnuts from other growers, he would sort them by size, he would  
**[0:03:13-0:03:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-cathy-dice#t=0:03:13):**  bag them up, and then he would find the customers for that.  And in the year 2013, I think Tom bought and sold about 30,000 pounds of chestnuts.  And this was when our own trees were starting to get really big and dropping a lot of nuts.  And Tom didn't have time to go and harvest his own chestnuts because he was buying and  selling and sorting other people's chestnuts.  
**[0:03:36-0:03:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-cathy-dice#t=0:03:36):**  And so we had to hire help to do that.  So he told the co-op, I really can't keep doing this.  And so there was another person in the co-op who actually was a retired salesperson, and  he was like, I would be interested in doing that.  He took it over in 2014, and he has done a spectacular job with it.  
**[0:03:53-0:03:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-cathy-dice#t=0:03:53):**  So there's still a co-op, but now Tom was available to start harvesting his own chestnuts.  He had some customers who were there buying bagged chestnuts, saying, could I possibly  go out and harvest some chestnuts?  My father has got cancer, he's really doing poorly.  We really want him to have this experience.  
**[0:04:12-0:04:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-cathy-dice#t=0:04:12):**  So he told this customer, yes, we'll let you go and harvest some chestnuts, but don't  tell anyone.  And the next year, we had about three to 30 customers coming up, could I harvest chestnuts?  So we checked with our insurance, and it was okay.  So we started allowing customers to go out and harvest their own chestnuts.  
**[0:04:32-0:04:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-cathy-dice#t=0:04:32):**  And we were amazed at the response.  And at that time, our pawpaws and persimmons were also starting to produce, and I said,  let's try you pick on the pawpaws and persimmons too.  And so we are now, all of our fruit and nuts are harvested for you pick, which has led  to the new thing that we're trying out called the leaderboard.  
**[0:04:54-0:04:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-cathy-dice#t=0:04:54):**  We have a little chalkboard up in our way out room.  And I thought, well, people are curious, what would be the most chestnuts anyone's picked  up in one day?  Or what was the biggest harvest in one day?  So I recorded that up there on the chalkboard.  
**[0:05:07-0:05:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-cathy-dice#t=0:05:07):**  It was 265 pounds, and it was actually just one group who had done that.  So I wrote their name by that and the date.  And I was amazed how many people noticed that and commented on it, and then pointed out  a week later, well, we have harvested more chestnuts than those people.  Maybe you should put our name up there on that.  
**[0:05:28-0:05:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-cathy-dice#t=0:05:28):**  And that's when I started learning about what's called the leaderboard, where people who are  slightly competitive can have an online board where it will list their names and their place  like first, second, third place.  So I bought the biggest whiteboard I could find.  And I put it up and I started recording for chestnuts, Asian pears, pawpaws, persimmons,  
**[0:05:53-0:05:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-cathy-dice#t=0:05:53):**  who had the biggest harvest so far the year.  And it started out with 6.5 pounds of chestnuts with one family.  And then within a week, that was up to 80 pounds.  And I had to add in heartnuts down at the bottom.  And my whiteboard was starting to get really squished with writing in all this information.  
**[0:06:12-0:06:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-cathy-dice#t=0:06:12):**  But it was very fun.  And the customers really liked it.  And they would, when I was putting their name up on the board, I would often ask people,  is it okay if I put your name up on the leaderboard?  And then they would take their picture by the leaderboard, because they were proud.  
**[0:06:27-0:06:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-cathy-dice#t=0:06:27):**  They see we're on the leaderboard.  And I would post the leaderboard, a photo of it, up on our Facebook page every week  too.  And I really loved it if I had pictures of the people out there harvesting to go up with  their names too.  
**[0:06:41-0:06:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-cathy-dice#t=0:06:41):**  And it was amazing, the response and how proud people were about that leaderboard and their  placement on the leaderboard.  Next year, I'm getting an even bigger leaderboard.  For the business perspective, I found it convenient because I would have people who would harvest  like 10 pounds of pawpaws and say, oh, this is a pretty big harvest for you.  
**[0:07:00-0:07:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-cathy-dice#t=0:07:00):**  And I would say, look over at the leaderboard and say, well, actually, you know, and they  would look at the leaderboard and go, oh, 40 pounds?  And then they would notice, oh, somebody got 250 pounds of chestnuts?  Oh my gosh.  So it was more just a way of enriching the experience for the customers, making them  
**[0:07:18-0:07:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-cathy-dice#t=0:07:18):**  feel like it was a fun experience.  And maybe even tying them in to realizing how other people have been out here too and  what they had done.  So I think they liked that.  And the other thing I also did this year is I have a big map up on our bulletin board.  
**[0:07:34-0:07:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-cathy-dice#t=0:07:34):**  We have a map of the United States and also a map of the world.  And I'll ask customers, please put a thumbtack up from what you consider home or where you  were born.  And so they do that for the United States.  But I also have wonderful map snap pinpoints for all over the world for our customers.  
**[0:07:52-0:07:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-cathy-dice#t=0:07:52):**  In Laos, Albania, Bosnia, Rome, it's just really cool.  Our best customers are people who immigrated either five to 20 years ago, and they remember  picking up chestnuts in their home country with their family.  And they want to re-experience that again.  And they're delighted when they can come out to our farm and do it.  
**[0:08:15-0:08:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-cathy-dice#t=0:08:15):**  And that's one of the most delightful parts of the You Pick business is seeing the big  smiles on some of these grandmothers and elderly men who come out, and they're seeing the chestnuts  on the ground, and they're gathering them.  I remember an elderly gentleman from Vietnam had just this big smile as he was picking  up the chestnuts and cradling them in the crook of his arm.  
**[0:08:36-0:08:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-cathy-dice#t=0:08:36):**  And I was like, let me get you a bucket.  Let me get you a bucket.  And he just wouldn't stop.  He just kept going for more and more chestnuts.  All I would say is chestnuts are a wonderful way to meet a diversity of people living in  
**[0:08:49-0:08:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-cathy-dice#t=0:08:49):**  the United States.  And it's been a delightful experience.  Chestnuts are an excellent crop that is sustainable and very profitable, but you have to make  sure your soil and site is compatible for them because chestnuts will not grow for everyone  everywhere.  