### Farmerama  (2017-34-30)
**[0:00:00-0:00:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/blue-corn#t=0:00:00):**  The corn, yeah, we've had a lot of fun with that because we're not from a culture or an  ethnicity that typically uses a lot of corn, cooked corn.  So just developing recipes and finding different ways to use it has been rewarding.  And just learning about the grain itself.  It's not something that we grew up with.  
**[0:00:28-0:00:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/blue-corn#t=0:00:28):**  It's not something we'd ever seen.  It's not something that...  So just learning how to use it and how to work with it and how to promote it, it's been  a journey for sure.  You guys have decided to go down the route of creating tortilla chips, which I think  
**[0:00:41-0:00:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/blue-corn#t=0:00:41):**  is really cool because it's a staple and a lot of people love tortilla chips, but again,  there's a lot of stuff in them quite often.  So you guys went to a traditional Mexican place to have them made?  Well most of the commercial tortillas that are made or the chips or the nachos, some  people call them tortilla chips, some call them nacho chips, however, that are made or  
**[0:01:08-0:01:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/blue-corn#t=0:01:08):**  certainly that are available on a commercial level are all made with a masa flour.  There's absolutely no company in Canada that makes masa flour.  So again, it's all being imported from the US or from offshore.  So it comes back to why are we doing that?  We're producing...  
**[0:01:27-0:01:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/blue-corn#t=0:01:27):**  We have the ability to grow a flour or grow a grain that can produce that flour, but it's  the lack of manufacturing facility.  But more and more what I came to realize in the research and everything, the availability  of the nutrients from the corn is released in a different way when the corn is actually  cooked and they call that wet milling where you cook the corn in a lime, it breaks down  
**[0:01:51-0:01:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/blue-corn#t=0:01:51):**  the starches and then it's ground into a fine meal.  So the digestibility of it is that much more absorbable for the gut of the human.  What is really interesting to me is that was intuition from...  Or skills that the Mexicans and a lot of the natives knew for thousands of years, they  were already doing that.  
**[0:02:12-0:02:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/blue-corn#t=0:02:12):**  So I think that that's one of the biggest things that when people eat our corn chips,  they can't believe the difference of the taste, the flavor.  And it was a small manufacturer that's been doing it that way for 20 years.  And the fact that they're using a cold pressed sunflower oil that's grown on another farm  as opposed to a cheap byproduct or a cheap oil, again, it's the complete chip.  
**[0:02:35-0:02:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/blue-corn#t=0:02:35):**  And we have family members that do struggle with food issues and with digestive issues  and when they're able to eat that product again, you feel good because you know, okay,  this is something that isn't causing more problems.  