### Farmerama  (2017-08-26)
**[0:00:00-0:00:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-maria-partalidou-on-urban-farms-in-greece#t=0:00:00):**  Urban gardening is also a phenomenon in Greece that has, we've seen like gardens  pop up in almost every city in Greece since 2010. They begin to, urban gardens  in Greece is also a new phenomenon, a new phenomenon that has made its appearance  due to the crisis once more, but has different different trajectories. What I  mean is that we have seen some initiatives bottom-up, some grassroots  
**[0:00:51-0:00:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-maria-partalidou-on-urban-farms-in-greece#t=0:00:51):**  initiatives in terms of occupying a public space that is abandoned in the  city, or former military camps or a piece of land that it's not used for  construction. So we have these groups of people that occupy this piece of land  within the city limits and among other things they do, they grow their own food.  We also have some initiatives from top to down. We have seen many municipalities  
**[0:01:20-0:01:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-maria-partalidou-on-urban-farms-in-greece#t=0:01:20):**  establish an urban allotment garden, meaning that there are small plots of  lands that they are distributed to citizens to grow their own food. And the  narrative from the mayors and the municipality boards was that these  gardens can work as a tool to alleviate poverty. But what we've seen from our  research of the couple five years now, we have been researching several  
**[0:01:49-0:01:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-maria-partalidou-on-urban-farms-in-greece#t=0:01:49):**  gardens in urban gardens in Greece, we've seen that it's not only about growing  your own food. Okay, you can grow your own food, fresh fruit, that is seasonal, that  you know how it's grown. Okay, the actual benefits for the people from for urban  dwellers, what they actually get back from growing their own food is that they  get a sense of accomplishment. They get a sense of belonging, a sense of  
**[0:02:23-0:02:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-maria-partalidou-on-urban-farms-in-greece#t=0:02:23):**  achievement. I mean what they have been deprived of during this period of crisis  is not only money and food. They have been deprived by their values as  humans, by their dignity. They are in a stage of this loneliness, there's a  lot of people depressed, so within the gardens they can recreate their  connections, their social links with other people, but they can find again  
**[0:02:55-0:03:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-maria-partalidou-on-urban-farms-in-greece#t=0:02:55):**  themselves. And growing food seems, it is, helping them towards this problem.  So the myth created that urban allotment gardens, the gardens for the  poor, actually it's not supported anymore. We have seen that they have a  multi-functional role to play and this is what we have to focus on.  