### Farmerama  (2019-55-06)
**[0:00:00-0:00:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-xr-farmers#t=0:00:00):**  Hello and welcome to this short episode of Farmerama. We don't usually do breaking news,  but we thought we should share this story with you right away. If you're in the UK,  you may well see a bright pink tractor on the move over the next few days, and we wanted  you to be able to get involved if you're moved to.  Extinction Rebellion is a global movement born in the UK, calling us all to tell the  
**[0:00:28-0:00:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-xr-farmers#t=0:00:28):**  truth about the environmental crisis we're in, and to hold the government to account  on taking action in this climate emergency.  Extinction Rebellion is not everyone's cup of tea, and I personally have stayed away  generally because they lead with a fear-based narrative to get people into action, and in  my opinion, if you start with a fear, then you breed more fear, and I've learnt that  
**[0:00:53-0:00:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-xr-farmers#t=0:00:53):**  never really ends well.  I think it's also been a struggle for farmers because there's regularly communications  from Extinction Rebellion people that all animal farming is an environmental disaster,  and that we should all be vegan to save the planet. In my experience, this is not true,  as all listeners of Farmerama know. It's much more about how we farm than what we farm,  
**[0:01:19-0:01:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-xr-farmers#t=0:01:19):**  and so I feel like a lot of the Extinction Rebellion arguments appeared to have missed  some of the nuances of that. However, it can't be denied that Extinction Rebellion is having  a global impact, making people more aware of our negative impacts on the natural world  all around us, and so one farmer has taken it upon himself to bring positive farming  messages to the international Extinction Rebellion starting on Monday.  
**[0:01:45-0:01:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-xr-farmers#t=0:01:45):**  My name's Dagan, I manage Broughton Water Buffalo in Hampshire, where we have a regenerative  farming system producing water buffalo meat, which we sell locally, and we also do a lot  of work for biodiversity and habitat. The discourse at the moment and the media criticism  of farming is very destructive to, and stopping us finding ways to move forward and address  these huge problems we've got with the climate and ecological emergency. I think, of course,  
**[0:02:17-0:02:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-xr-farmers#t=0:02:17):**  farming has got lots of problems like all other industries and businesses have, but  I think we need to acknowledge that farmers, many farmers are doing really great work to  try and make progress with all this, and I think also we've got to move away from blaming  people and criticising people, and we've got to get changes to happen on a big scale where  there's incentivisation for farming to change, and ways forward to make progress where we  
**[0:02:42-0:02:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-xr-farmers#t=0:02:42):**  can look after our soils better and our biodiversity as we move forward and try and take proper  steps to address the huge problems that confront us all.  So what are you doing about it?  We've been farming regeneratively for 18 years at this farm with the buffalo, no inputs,  no chemicals, no antibiotics, planting loads of trees, creating lots of messy wild areas  
**[0:03:04-0:03:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-xr-farmers#t=0:03:04):**  to build wildlife habitat, and that's been very good, you know, and we feel like we've  made good progress with that over the years, but we feel now with the way things are getting  so bad around us and around the world that we've got to do more, and so we are working  with Extinction Rebellion, we've set up Exile Farmers, which is now in place and is going  out there to deliver a very positive farming message and to concentrate our minds on the  
**[0:03:38-0:03:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-xr-farmers#t=0:03:38):**  things that farming can do to solve some of the problems that we've got ahead of us in  terms of wildlife and biodiversity, but also growing clean and healthy food and protecting  our landscape going into the future.  So we set up Extinction Rebellion Farmers and we've bought a tractor which we've painted  pink and we've got a trailer which is going to take some people and some vegetables and  
**[0:04:01-0:04:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-xr-farmers#t=0:04:01):**  lots of positive messages up to London to join the rebellion next Monday.  We're setting off tomorrow on Friday, we're going to go through the villages and towns  of Hampshire with our tractor convoy and we're going to be spreading this message as we make  our way up to London with the ultimate aim of getting ourselves to Westminster on Monday  morning to be there to spread positive farming messages and talk about the role of livestock  
**[0:04:26-0:04:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-xr-farmers#t=0:04:26):**  and the vital role of livestock in nutrient cycling and creating biodiversity and building  soil and growing good quality grass fed meat.  And so we're going to be, if we get to London, we'll be able to talk about these things and  we'll also be able to go and pay a visit to Defra and we hope to be able to ask them to  put the issue of climate and ecological emergency at the absolute top of their agenda as they  
**[0:04:54-0:05:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-xr-farmers#t=0:04:54):**  devise a new farming subsidy system or whatever they're going to do in the years to come after  we have left Europe.  And so I think, you know, some of the Extinction Rebellion messages have actually been quite  anti-farming.  Could you just comment on that?  
**[0:05:11-0:05:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-xr-farmers#t=0:05:11):**  Yeah, that's true.  I mean, that's one of the reasons that we set up Exile Farmers because I think Extinction  Rebellion has been slightly hijacked by the vegan movement and animal rebellion.  The position of Extinction Rebellion is that they don't take sides on particular issues,  they're just trying to get their core demands met, which is to tell the truth on the emergency  
**[0:05:32-0:05:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-xr-farmers#t=0:05:32):**  and to get the government to act.  And they do not take, specifically take the side of the vegans.  They're trying to build this movement of movements where we get traction across society to get  pressure on government to act on all this stuff.  We've actually been in quite a lot of conversations with animal rebellion to try and find ways  
**[0:05:53-0:05:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-xr-farmers#t=0:05:53):**  forward.  Our ways forward obviously are very different from theirs, but in this state of extreme  crisis, we have to put our differences aside to get the government to act.  We've also been talking to the people at Extinction Rebellion who acknowledge the role of livestock  in regenerative farming systems.  
**[0:06:14-0:06:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-xr-farmers#t=0:06:14):**  And there are certain areas of livestock farming, obviously, dependence on soya, intensive systems,  huge waste problems and emissions problems.  But that's a very separate thing from animals being used in grazing systems to achieve many,  many, many ends on different levels.  Well, there was that question about scale.  
**[0:06:37-0:06:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-xr-farmers#t=0:06:37):**  And so could you maybe comment on the idea of what a good farm or a bad farm looks like  and how you relate to other farmers in this?  Yeah.  So, I mean, I don't think scale is really a factor.  A large farm or a small farm can be equally badly managed or well managed.  
**[0:06:58-0:07:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-xr-farmers#t=0:06:58):**  I think we can constantly get lost in these little side arguments and discussions which  detract from the main issues that are confronting us.  And so the issue of scale, it's not a problem.  The issue is that we've got this massive dependence on fossil fuels and artificial inputs within  our farming systems, which is a result of the need to grow foods and historically from  
**[0:07:25-0:07:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-xr-farmers#t=0:07:25):**  the Second World War and the First World War, which put us in a certain position.  But now with the knowledge and accumulated ways forward that now are being talked about  across the board in farming, these can be rolled out on any scale, on any type of farm.  It's just that that's got to be able to happen.  And that's got to happen with government leading on it and a government policy that takes all  
**[0:07:50-0:07:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-xr-farmers#t=0:07:50):**  this stuff properly, seriously, and enables farmers to transition to different farming  systems as we go forward.  Brilliant.  Okay.  Is there anything else you'd like to kind of communicate around the XR farmers stuff  
**[0:08:07-0:08:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-xr-farmers#t=0:08:07):**  or, you know, many of our listeners are like new entrant farmers or small scale farmers,  both in the UK and around the world.  Is there anything you want to share?  Well, I think sharing is the most important word in this.  You know, I mean, I think what's got to be enabled is that farmers have access to better  
**[0:08:27-0:08:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-xr-farmers#t=0:08:27):**  platforms of knowledge and skills that can be put out into the main farming community  and that we have an opportunity to see that there's different ways of moving forward with  farming.  Change has to happen in so many different ways and on so many different levels and it  taps into our food supply system.  
**[0:08:47-0:08:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-xr-farmers#t=0:08:47):**  And we've got to look at the amount of food that is being wasted and thrown away, both  in this country and globally.  We have to look at the fact that there isn't a single answer and a single agenda that is  going to solve all this.  But by communicating and sharing knowledge and not blaming each other, we can use our  
**[0:09:05-0:09:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-xr-farmers#t=0:09:05):**  amazing human intelligence to find our ways out of this rather large hole that we seem  to have fallen into.  