### Farmerama  (2017-49-24)
**[0:00:00-0:00:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-david-montgomery#t=0:00:00):**  Given that I'm a geologist and Anne's a kind of a biologist that studies the visible world  of nature, I thought I'd visit farmers who have already restored fertility to their land  and ask, how did you do it?  What did you do?  What were your methods?  
**[0:00:18-0:00:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-david-montgomery#t=0:00:18):**  How long did it take?  Did you make money or lose money doing it?  All those kind of things that are important to ask about.  So I visited farmers, subsistence farmers in Africa and Costa Rica, large scale commodity  crop operations across North America, cattle ranches in Canada and North America, or Canada  
**[0:00:37-0:00:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-david-montgomery#t=0:00:37):**  and the United States, and basically tried to look for commonalities and patterns.  What worked?  Why didn't it work?  And did some of the ideas that we looked at in previous projects and books play out in  practice?  
**[0:00:52-0:00:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-david-montgomery#t=0:00:52):**  And it really seemed to boil down to the principles of conservation agriculture, the ideas of  minimizing disturbance of the soil, of planting cover crops, including legumes, in diverse  rotations.  So those sort of three elements of ditching the plow, covering up and growing diversity  were really the common elements between these farmers that had been very successful at restoring  
**[0:01:14-0:01:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-david-montgomery#t=0:01:14):**  fertility to their land.  And that's the nutshell version of the story in Growing a Revolution, was those farmers'  stories, how those general principles really seem to work in a wide range of settings,  with or without livestock, there's ways to do it, small farms, large farms, organic farms,  conventional farms, highly capitalized farms with wild modern technology, and very basic  
**[0:01:40-0:01:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-david-montgomery#t=0:01:40):**  subsistence farms with very minimal technology.  Those principles seem to work really well, but the practices that you would use, say,  North or South Dakota relative to Ghana, are obviously really different to achieve those  objectives.  So I think one of the big challenges and one of the messages that comes out of the book  
**[0:01:57-0:02:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-david-montgomery#t=0:01:57):**  is that we, I think, have a pretty solid understanding now of directions we can go with to rebuild  fertility of soils, but we need to figure out how to adapt those general principles  to the specific settings and farms and technologies and economies and social systems around the  world.  And that really kind of boils down to that we've done two things really wrong, I think,  
**[0:02:20-0:02:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-david-montgomery#t=0:02:20):**  in agriculture for the last hundred years, and that's we've tried to make soils around  the world respond to the same practices that we export everywhere.  We've sort of reduced the diversity of our farming practices and tried to, and therefore,  underappreciated the diversity of soils.  And we've also underappreciated the ingenuity and creativity of farmers by trying to simplify  
**[0:02:44-0:02:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-david-montgomery#t=0:02:44):**  and standardize farming practices.  And we need to sort of undo both of those things in the service of those three general  principles of conservation agriculture.  And if we could do that around the world and convert conventional practices to things that  are much more organic-ish because they can greatly reduce the use of fossil fuels, diesel,  
**[0:03:06-0:03:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-david-montgomery#t=0:03:06):**  reduce fertilizer use, and reduce herbicide and insecticide use, if we can pull that off  and transform conventional practices to these newer regenerative practices, we actually  really could change the world.  