### Farmerama  (2018-40-09)
**[0:00:00-0:00:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-39#t=0:00:00):**  And now it's time for another of our regular visits to Jubilee Farm in Northern Ireland.  I reported a few months ago that our first choice site for our community farm had fallen through,  but also that we were in negotiations to purchase a small farm.  And this month in Farmarama I'm delighted to share that we are in the process of buying a small 13.5 acre farm  just outside the town of Larn in Northern Ireland where we're based.  
**[0:00:30-0:00:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-39#t=0:00:30):**  And we're doing this via community shares, making it the first community owned farm in Northern Ireland.  And supporting us in that process is Tiziana O'Hara from an organisation called Cooperative Alternatives.  And Cooperative Alternatives is the only organisation in Northern Ireland supporting and promoting the development of cooperatives and community enterprises.  So Tiziana, why use a community share offer to buy a farm?  Thank you very much for inviting us. We think that community shares are a perfect tool to build not only your capital,  
**[0:01:09-0:01:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-39#t=0:01:09):**  the capital that you need to purchase your farm, but actually to build the people that will be involved in your farms.  So community shares have this double edged sword. On one side it gives you the potential and the resources to purchase what you need,  but on the other side it gives you also the membership that you will need to build your business.  We tried to build a community owned energy project. We had football clubs community owned and they all used community shares to again raise that capital  for them to start or grow their own enterprise in idea. With Jubilee is the first time that we do something, we work with yourself, Johnny,  
**[0:02:05-0:02:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-39#t=0:02:05):**  to buy a farm. And that's fantastic because a farm requires capital for the purchase, but it requires people to work with the farm  and be a member in the same way as any other members will participate with that.  We're often told Tiziana in conventional economic terms that competition is the way to go and in food and farming we see farms getting bigger and bigger  and in the food industry we see mergers and acquisitions and food companies getting bigger and bigger, all based on the premise that competition is the only way to go.  But of course as cooperatives we believe that cooperation is the way to go. So what can the sustainable agriculture movement learn from the cooperative movement about cooperation?  
**[0:02:56-0:03:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-39#t=0:02:56):**  Oh, so much. Look at the cooperative movement even in a sector like the credit unions. Credit unions have become a network of small credit unions that work together  serving their own local population. And that's in the spirit of cooperation among cooperatives. And this is the spirit that we would like to adopt even in other sectors.  And cross-sectors. After all we are in Ireland. Ireland was the birth of the agricultural cooperatives thanks to Horace Plunkett or some of a very interesting initiative in Donegal by Paddy De Cope  another forefather of the cooperative movement in the northwest of Ireland. So we have a great history of cooperation on this island.  And what we want to promote and to grow is the cooperation among the cooperators in some sort of way.  
**[0:04:06-0:04:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-39#t=0:04:06):**  Competition belongs to a narrative that has proven a bit fallible. And in some sort of way we wanted to rediscover all the tools using cooperatives as what we know about cooperatives  all tools for modern purposes. And this is the way we wanted to use the initiative of Community Share and the cooperative for Jubilee.  And of course in a beautiful link between Horace Plunkett and the founding of the cooperative movement in Ireland we are being supported by the Plunkett Foundation to develop this community share offer as well as by Cooperatives UK.  So if you are interested in discovering more you can go to our website jubilee.coop forward slash share offer where you will have the details of our share offer launching on the 20th of October.  We are also streaming it live on our YouTube channel. We have got 300,000 to raise. We have already raised 165,000 in phase one.  
**[0:05:06-0:05:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-39#t=0:05:06):**  So if you are interested in cooperating with us to set up Northern Ireland's first community farm please do check it out.  