---
title: Shorts Harvest Barn Market Garden Update January
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### Farmerama  (2018-02-18)  
### Author(s): Farmerama  

**[0:00:00-0:00:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-update#t=0:00:00):**  Hello again, it's Joel here at the market garden at Harvest Barn Shop just outside Peterborough  in Cambridgeshire. This is day 21 of week 7 of my time here at Harvest Barn Shop market  garden. I'm only doing about three days a week, a little bit of time off. So it's looking good  
**[0:00:37-0:00:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-update#t=0:00:37):**  here on the market garden, still busy even though things are not growing that much. It was very cold  last week, the last couple of days have been quite windy and it rained a lot today and the  winds calmed down now. Some things are not growing very much at all, other things like  
**[0:01:00-0:01:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-update#t=0:01:00):**  the Chinese mustard and the Komatsuna, the spinach, they've grown quite a bit and I'd say  they would almost be ready to harvest. Harvesting is probably one of my weaknesses, something I  don't know a lot about in terms of when is the best time and how much to harvest at a certain  
**[0:01:21-0:01:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-update#t=0:01:21):**  time. It's generally been going really well, I guess the big worry for me still is not knowing  who I'm going to sell to. The shop here is due to open, the farm shop is due to open on January  the 4th so I could wait until then but if they have a slow start or if I've got more than they  
**[0:01:46-0:01:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-update#t=0:01:46):**  can sell it would be nice to know I could sell some leaves to other people and I haven't contacted  anybody yet. So I'm doing all this work not knowing if I'll be able to sell anything and  obviously if I don't sell stuff it will go to seed, be wasted and that will be quite disappointing.  
**[0:02:08-0:02:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-update#t=0:02:08):**  But things are looking healthy, they're growing well, I've just been over and re-weeded everything,  hoed and taken out and sort of couch grass that's still coming through so everything's looking very  good. There is some minor pest damage on some of the leaves which could be due to I don't know  
**[0:02:30-0:02:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-update#t=0:02:30):**  beetles or probably not bird damage. I guess now the next thing I need to be looking at is planning  my crops for next year which is quite hard to do given that I don't know what's going to sell well  here and how much to sow but I'll go for things like beetroot, radish, lots of salads, maybe some  
**[0:02:54-0:03:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-update#t=0:02:54):**  beans and peas. I've just been putting garlic and broad beans in but some of those things don't make  much money so I've got to get a balance between what's gonna be in demand, what's gonna make most  money for me, what's gonna do well in this situation and all of that will come with experience. I'd  
**[0:03:15-0:03:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-update#t=0:03:15):**  like to get a polytunnel but that's expensive just trying to work out where that might go but  probably pretty essential for getting seed started and growing certain crops which I want to grow.  So lots of things to think about. Generally I'd say I'm pretty pleased with the way things are  
**[0:03:38-0:03:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-update#t=0:03:38):**  going. I think I'm happy with the bed system that I've got 15 meter beds by 30 inches that seems to  work well in terms of sowing and marking out rows, stepping across beds. It's all quite practical and  easy. I have thought about bigger beds that some people seem to use meter-wide beds but I think I'll  
**[0:04:00-0:04:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-update#t=0:04:00):**  stick with this for the moment. I've just been at the Land Workers Alliance AGM which is great to  hear people talking about all their different projects, lots of ideas. I've got to try and focus  on a few things rather than get carried away. I was talking to some people about seed saving,  
**[0:04:20-0:04:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-update#t=0:04:20):**  that would be great to do but perhaps a bit too much to think about in the first year. Maybe try  one or two varieties. Some big news is that I have upgraded from my tent to a caravan. I was in a tent  when I was staying here until last week. That was pretty cold, I think it was minus one or minus two.  
**[0:04:44-0:04:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-update#t=0:04:44):**  The caravan is a bit more cozy and more spacious and it means I can sit somewhere out of the  wind in the evening even though there's no electricity. But that's fine, step by step,  things are getting a bit more practical and easier. Not much to report other than that in  
**[0:05:08-0:05:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-update#t=0:05:08):**  terms of exciting news. Farming life goes on and I spend most of my day on my own out in the field  and stop for a cup of tea and chat to the people who are getting the shop up and running. Go for a  swim in the evening, get some chips one evening a week. So it's a fairly unexciting life but  
**[0:05:41-0:05:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-update#t=0:05:41):**  hopefully when the shop opens and spring comes there'll be a bit more people around and life  on the farm which will be nice. Anyway thanks for listening, I hope this is interesting and  it will be great to hear people's comments and feedback about what I'm doing. Thanks, bye.  