### Farmerama  (2019-15-10)
**[0:00:00-0:00:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-january#t=0:00:00):**  Hello Farmerama, this is Joel in the market garden at Harvest Barn Farm Shop. This is  probably going to be one of my last, if not the last, podcasts from here. I'm going to  go inside to record the rest of this because you probably won't be able to hear me if I  stay outside.  Hello again, so I'm inside now, sheltered from the wind. So I'll be leaving the farm  
**[0:00:30-0:00:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-january#t=0:00:30):**  where I'm currently growing. It hasn't worked out for a variety of reasons. It's a bit sensitive  to talk about the reasons it hasn't worked out, but there's been personal reasons to  do with what I'm looking for, family commitments and differences of opinion with the landlords  about how to operate and expectations. I have until the end of February to pack up and leave,  so I'm trying to harvest as much as possible so I don't lose too much money on what I've  
**[0:00:59-0:01:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-january#t=0:00:59):**  already sown and planted. There's various medium-sized items of infrastructure that  I need to pack down, take away and store. The issue of the polytunnel is one of the  most complicated things to sort out. I'm not sure yet if the landlords will buy it from  me or if I'll have to take it down, which will be a shame after only a year's use because  that will mean that the plastic and a lot of the timber will be wasted. It's been an  
**[0:01:32-0:01:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-january#t=0:01:32):**  interesting experiment. I still have this dream of wanting to set up a market garden  that is profitable and successful. I feel like after a year that I probably know less  than I did at the beginning, but hopefully I'll go into any future land-based relationship  a lot wiser. It does feel like a lot of the success of projects like this, if you don't  own your own land, is based on luck. The incentive to invest time and money and infrastructure  
**[0:02:10-0:02:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-january#t=0:02:10):**  in a land project if you don't have long-term security is quite low. I'm certainly much  more wary now of getting into this kind of relationship because you can put so much of  all that time and money and energy into something and then it could be over after a year. There's  not many times you can do that in your life before you think it's not worth it and give  up. But I am looking for a new plot of land to start growing on. I will leave this farm  
**[0:02:41-0:02:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-january#t=0:02:41):**  with both a sense of relief because it hasn't been right for some time, but also sadness  because I put in a huge amount of energy and time and I was looking forward to building  on what I'd achieved this year. I have a number of regular and new customers and I was really  enjoying being able to supply them with fresh seasonal organic veg. But growing good quality  veg for local people is incredibly rewarding and I'm very disappointed to not be able to  
**[0:03:11-0:03:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-january#t=0:03:11):**  carry on doing that for the foreseeable future. But I'm hoping that at some point in the next  year or two there will be another opportunity that will come up. So thanks for listening  and I do hope to continue updating you with news of what happens next. Do get in touch  if you have any comments to make and see you next time. Thank you, bye.  