### Farmerama  (2018-40-24)
**[0:00:00-0:00:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-april#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, this is Joel at Harvest Barn Farm Shop Market Garden. It's April the 28th. That is  the sound of rain falling on the polytunnel. A couple of weeks ago we got the plastic on  and finished off all the ventilation on the sides and the doors. So the polytunnel is  now fully functioning which is amazing. And over the weekend I was building a couple of  benches and I'm now starting to sow seeds which is a massive step forward to be able  
**[0:00:43-0:00:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-april#t=0:00:43):**  to be in the dry in the polytunnel and finally sowing seeds on site in trays. I have brought  some from my flat in Norwich in the back of the car which was a bit of a nerve-wracking  experience because I had a fully laden car, had to load up the car with all my other stuff  and about 500 seedlings and drive down to London to see my dad. I almost had an accident  because a lorry cut up a car in front of me and I had to brake suddenly and half the seedlings  
**[0:01:19-0:01:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-april#t=0:01:19):**  did a somersault in the back of the car. But luckily they were all okay. I was most worried  about some lettuce seeds that I'm trialling with the Gaia Foundation but they were okay.  And then I had to unload them and load them up again and come up to Peterborough and they  have all made it safely here so I'm waiting for a bit of a dry gap to plant them out.  That may not happen so I may have to get muddy and wet again. But it's great to be inside  
**[0:01:47-0:01:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-april#t=0:01:47):**  the polytunnel and sowing seeds. I can finally sow my tomatoes and peppers and various other  things. It does feel very, very late to be doing that. I would have liked to be doing  it in January or February so I'm two or three months behind but let's see what happens.  The polytunnel is covered now with cardboard on the ground because I was going to make  beds out of compost bought in from a green waste compost supplier. I'm just testing that  
**[0:02:21-0:02:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-april#t=0:02:21):**  soil to make sure that there's no chemicals in there from grass clippings which might  affect the plants that I'm going to be sowing. So I'm just waiting to see how those plants  fare in that soil. If it's okay then I probably will bring in the compost. If it's not then  I will just plant into the ground. I have covered the ground with cardboard to make  sure the grass doesn't grow back but I have also rotovated all the ground in the polytunnel  
**[0:02:49-0:02:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-april#t=0:02:49):**  so the soil is looking okay for planting into but there is quite a lot of grass root in  there so I would prefer to plant into weed free compost. So I'm going to carry on with  some seed sowing. It's quite nice to be in here with the sound of the rain on the plastic  and to be staying dry and relatively warm. The temperature has gone down to about eight  degrees again so after that very hot period of a few days last week the temperature has  
**[0:03:19-0:03:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-april#t=0:03:19):**  dropped again so it's fluctuating quite a lot this spring. We'll see what the summer  brings.  