### Farmerama  (2018-08-28)
**[0:00:00-0:00:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory-peliti#t=0:00:00):**  The seed came as an idea to Panagiotis Aenatoudis, who is the founder and the coordinator of  the community about 20 or 25 years ago, when he realized that he wasn't able to find all  the varieties of, let's say, corn that he used to eat as a child.  Suddenly he's 20, 30 years old and he realizes that there's only one type of corn variety  left and he started wondering what happened, where are all the other varieties.  
**[0:00:44-0:00:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory-peliti#t=0:00:44):**  On his own he started traveling around Greece, meeting people in villages, searching and  gathering all seed varieties in order to save them somehow.  This has gradually led into the creation of a huge seed archive, which needs a lot of  resources to be maintained, although the purpose is not at all creating a seed archive or seed  bank because seeds are meant to be grown and cultivated and able to evolve.  
**[0:01:17-0:01:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory-peliti#t=0:01:17):**  And this is one aspect that maybe we should shed some light on, that seed banks, although  people use it as an argument or politicians use it as an argument against the necessity  of seed saving, are not a solution on their own because of what I said before.  Seeds are not meant to be kept in a refrigerator dug under the earth, but they should be able  to evolve, develop together with us and together with climate, together with the soil and the  
**[0:01:53-0:01:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory-peliti#t=0:01:53):**  earth.  Because they can do it, whereas the industrial varieties cannot do it.  So right now, PELIDI is consisted of 20 local groups all over Europe and also there is a  group in Sofia, Bulgaria.  We are all volunteers right now and we have, during the past years PELIDI is actively involved  
**[0:02:23-0:02:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory-peliti#t=0:02:23):**  and networked with other groups of seed savers around the world.  PELIDI is all about saving seeds and keeping seeds free.  Do you think that organizations like PELIDI also do some sort of politics as well?  Traditional varieties is the reason why, is what helped us, is what our food was based  on until very recently, solely, exclusively on traditional seed varieties until 60-70  
**[0:02:53-0:03:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory-peliti#t=0:02:53):**  years ago, when the big industry came and provided farmers with new improved varieties  that were high yield but are in dispense, linked to, well I'll go over it again, well  the big industry provided farmers with high yield varieties but that go hand in hand with  agrochemicals and soil exhaustion.  Because they have a limited genetic database and they cannot survive natural attacks.  
**[0:03:28-0:03:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory-peliti#t=0:03:28):**  So on the other hand, traditional varieties have a broad genetic base and they cannot  adjust to climate change, they cannot survive pests and diseases by evolving.  They might not be as productive as the industrial ones but it has been proven that if a farmer,  and this is what's important for local economy and it's also a huge political issue, if a  farmer is able to keep his own seed, which is not always easy, you know seed legislation  
**[0:04:03-0:04:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory-peliti#t=0:04:03):**  is not always very in favour of accessibility of seeds, well if a farmer is allowed to keep  its own seed, which means that he doesn't have to use fertilisers and pesticides, agrochemicals  in general, and can sell its products directly, he can have a totally viable farming business  and even earn ten times more than a farmer that buys seed, buys pesticides and herbs  and fertilisers and buys through intermediaries.  
**[0:04:47-0:04:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory-peliti#t=0:04:47):**  Wouldn't it be nice to have a way to combine the cultivation of traditional seed varieties  with soil health, to have a way to prove that growing traditional seeds compared to conventional  or industrial seeds correlates with soil health, correlates with human health.  There are a lot of claims and actually it is from a cultural perspective it's very interesting  to have a diversified rural landscape, to use our ancestors seeds and so on, but wouldn't  
**[0:05:24-0:05:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory-peliti#t=0:05:24):**  it be also interesting to connect that with some very urgent challenges like soil conservation,  public health and so on.  Is there something like that going on as a process in Peliti, this type of connection?  I know that apart from Peliti there has been recent scientific research going all over  the world about the connection of health, the condition of soil with microorganisms  
**[0:05:58-0:06:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory-peliti#t=0:05:58):**  that exist in the soil, how agrochemicals have decreased significantly, the populations  of microorganisms and how this affects the way that the plants absorb the nutrients from  the soil and how these nutrients are absorbed by our body and the damage that all the agrochemicals  have caused to our bodies, microorganisms and our bodies, microorganisms.  So Peliti right now, Peliti is a community that is trying to focus mainly on enlarging  
**[0:06:44-0:06:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory-peliti#t=0:06:44):**  the number of people, raise awareness and grow a network, a community of people that  support each other in seed saving, having in mind all these aspects and the ultimate  one is our own health apart from the political one or the economical one for farmers, the  health issue is something that connects everyone.  It would be very interesting if we could focus on this aspect and for the moment we are mainly  
**[0:07:15-0:07:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory-peliti#t=0:07:15):**  trying to focus on, let's say, encourage farmers and professional farmers to grow more of local  varieties, traditional varieties and be able to improve them the way our ancestors did  for many years so that more professional farmers prefer them for their benefits and gradually  this might lead into creating a network of committed professional farmers that face their  farms as an ecosystem of soil and plants and people that each one supports each other for  
**[0:07:56-0:08:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory-peliti#t=0:07:56):**  a better life.  So soil is an indispensable part of growing food so it's essential to have it in mind.  During class here Peliti with the support of forums is working towards a direction of  affecting seed policy so that traditional varieties can be accessible legally.  I don't know if you know what the situation is like with the legislation of the legal  
**[0:08:31-0:08:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory-peliti#t=0:08:31):**  framework right now.  The legal framework doesn't allow at this moment, it is said in a way that selling traditional  varieties is not allowed because it demands uniformity and stability in order to sell  seeds.  So that uniformity and stability is something that only industrial varieties can achieve.  
**[0:08:50-0:08:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory-peliti#t=0:08:50):**  Traditional varieties cannot do it because they evolve as we said.  So it's a very crucial issue and our main efforts right now are focused, a big part  of our efforts, of Peliti's efforts is focused on this.  And we also have an annual seed festival every year, a week after Easter where people from  all over Greece and now from all over the world come and exchange seeds.  
**[0:09:20-0:09:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory-peliti#t=0:09:20):**  It's an opportunity to meet people, we're doing workshops, people exchange experiences,  not only on seed issues but on land, access to land and new farming practices.  And we learn from one another, it's like a community that each one teaches the other.  So it's crucial.  Well, as with all collective efforts, when people, different people gather, we have differences  
**[0:09:56-0:10:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory-peliti#t=0:09:56):**  but having this common ground in mind, we try to find the connections that unite us  and step on it and evolve and continue.  You seem to give a lot of emphasis on the human to human relationships and interaction,  direct communication, knowledge exchange.  I think the motto of Peliti is from hand to hand and from soul to soul.  
**[0:10:21-0:10:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory-peliti#t=0:10:21):**  From hand to hand and from heart to heart.  Do you think there is space for new technologies in these type of connections?  New technologies offer some really interesting opportunities for connecting with one another  between places that no one could have imagined just a few years ago.  Do you think that there is space for new technologies to help catalyze this strive for seed freedom,  
**[0:10:50-0:10:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory-peliti#t=0:10:50):**  for food democracy, for solidarity based land use and so on?  I think that new technologies are necessary, especially now that the food industry is so  aggressively addressing farmers and almost dominating over the food production system.  So if we want to create something different, we have to use new technologies to facilitate  what we do and our purpose.  
**[0:11:32-0:11:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory-peliti#t=0:11:32):**  But we should educate ourselves, we should educate farmers.  There are applications that you can use to have information necessary even for farming,  but it's necessary to use technology that facilitates communication with each other  within the country because we are in different parts of Greece.  So it's necessary to use the simplest form of internet communication.  
**[0:12:05-0:12:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory-peliti#t=0:12:05):**  It's necessary.  For instance, we could use technologies to improve our seed archive, monitor and control  it somehow so that other people can easily have access to what we have, maybe create  a commons of our seed archive so that other people can share.  It depends on how you use it, whether you cause good or harm.  
**[0:12:29-0:12:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory-peliti#t=0:12:29):**  So it's a tool in our hands and I think it's necessary for us to use it effectively.  