### Farmerama  (2018-07-26)  
### Author(s): Farmerama  

**[0:00:00-0:00:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:00:00):**  My name is Charles Shembrey. I work for the Napa County Resource Conservation District.  My title here is Vineyard Conservation Coordinator. I'm basically a soil conservationist that  works primarily in vineyard agriculture, but I do work in some grazing lands as well throughout  
**[0:00:25-0:00:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:00:25):**  Napa County. We're here today to talk about carbon farm planning. We produced, and me being the person  on staff, produced the first four vineyard carbon farm plans in the country here in Napa County.  It's a typical conservation planning process going out, spending a lot of time with the landowner,  
**[0:00:44-0:00:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:00:44):**  the managers, whoever it may be, and just really opening up the full lens on this property of  looking at, number one, you want to start with resource concerns. So if there's riparian degradation  or any degradation on the land, how can we fix that? How can we alleviate that and improve the  
**[0:01:02-0:01:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:01:02):**  situation? There's always a carbon benefit. So we start with that and then we start looking a little  bit more creatively, looking at ways that we can get large woody plantings or putting in some  hedgerows. How do we want to improve the farm ecology through inviting more beneficial insects,  
**[0:01:23-0:01:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:01:23):**  creating more habitat for wildlife that would promote that ecology of the farm? How do we  integrate all that? Start looking at other opportunities that may be energy related.  So we can talk about the farming equipment or the approach of timing of things and how to  
**[0:01:46-0:01:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:01:46):**  even just reduce tractor passes. There's a lot of opportunity. We've looked at ways of integrating  solar to power 14 pumps at a property before and the idea of removing vineyard that wasn't doing  well and building a solar farm. So really sky's the limit and each site's going to be very different.  
**[0:02:07-0:02:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:02:07):**  So it takes somebody who has a background and the open mindset to really look at all these  opportunities. You can be confined by just doing what the farmer thinks is feasible because there's  this reality of financial commitment. But what we do, what I do and some of our other partners  
**[0:02:28-0:02:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:02:28):**  believe the same thing. We want to look at all the opportunity and provide that in the plan.  Whether it's a little bit out of financial reality, that's okay. We want to create a plan  that highlights all the potential. So and then from there we can figure out and chip away at a  
**[0:02:51-0:02:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:02:51):**  plan that is like economically feasible in the short term like five to ten year and then you  can look at that ten to twenty, thirty, forty year outlook. And then the other big thing that we try  to implement for the funding is soil analysis to look at soil organic carbon pools and organic  
**[0:03:13-0:03:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:03:13):**  matter and other soil health indicators like aggregate stability, looking at bulk density.  So we want to look at that soil resource and see if there's opportunity to improve that. So if there  is a lot of opportunity, you know, we can begin to discuss, you know, different soil practices  
**[0:03:33-0:03:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:03:33):**  and especially looking at, you know, herbicide usage, how much ground cover, what's the photos,  what's the like full, you know, current state of photosynthesis on that property and how can we  maximize that. There's already been a carbon sequestration or greenhouse gas reduction  
**[0:03:53-0:03:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:03:53):**  associated with most of these through the work that's been done at like Colorado State and they  produced another common common planner and common farm tool which are models that we can use and the  NRCS conservation practice standards are built in there. So the last thing I'm going to do is  
**[0:04:08-0:04:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:04:08):**  quantify the full carbon benefit and greenhouse gas reduction using multiple models and also local  research that's been peer-reviewed. I don't get bogged down in the numbers. In fact, I think that's  the most irrelevant part of the whole process. We people want to look at the numbers and they want  
**[0:04:27-0:04:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:04:27):**  to know like what's the numerical benefit of this, that that's impossible. Carbon, these systems are  so complex, models are hypothetical but it gives us, you know, some kind of ballpark. People also  often say, you know, they're trying to do more and more research, more to prove like carbon is  
**[0:04:46-0:04:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:04:46):**  going to improve soil or, you know, going no-till or getting more covers on the ground is going to  improve and enhance carbon sequestration. It's like we, the models are there with already numbers  because that research has been done for decades. So, you know, I'm at a point personally and  
**[0:05:05-0:05:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:05:05):**  professionally where I'm not interested in that conversation about the numbers behind it because  it's too complex. Like one farmer can plant cover crop A and the other farmer can plant cover crop  A and they both have the same cover crop but they have completely different ways of like managing  
**[0:05:20-0:05:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:05:20):**  their property. And so it's too dynamic but we have these models that can, you know, kind of put us  in this like box of understanding. So, yeah, don't get bogged down on the actual sequestration numbers  is my opinion. So we developed these plans, we just finished them up last year. So we're still looking  
**[0:05:44-0:05:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:05:44):**  for implementation. This is all new, you know, like you might see articles and magazines and things  were coming out, you know, and I'm like I pretty much know every single person. I can count my one  hand in the United States that's doing these right now. So it was kind of comical but so there are  
**[0:06:04-0:06:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:06:04):**  like rangeland is ahead of the game right now on the West counties, Sonoma County, Marin, where they've  been doing this for five years and they're implementing and then you have Fibershed in  California. So they're working directly with their producer already, you know, implementing plans and  
**[0:06:22-0:06:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:06:22):**  getting benefits not just on the land but also in the product. With vineyards, we have folks who are  beginning to convert to no-till. That's kind of one of the first, you know, easy things to do that  doesn't involve any financial commitment. Some are, you know, already implementing compost or putting  
**[0:06:44-0:06:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:06:44):**  on more compost at least than they were historically and those benefits are, you know, still to be seen  because we've only really had like one year or they just are going to be coming into a lot of  their transition like this next fall. We've been doing this for about three years and we've seen  
**[0:07:01-0:07:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:07:01):**  some pretty large increases from large compost applications and biochar and enhancing our no-tillage  out there. I mean we're looking at soil organic carbon, soil organic matter, we're looking at soil  organic carbon through the lab methodology of dry combustion. On dry combustion, that's the most  
**[0:07:24-0:07:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:07:24):**  accurate way of understanding carbon sequestration in the soil. We look at wet aggregate stability,  we're looking at biological factors like CO2 respiration, potentially mineralized nitrogen,  we're looking at the active carbon pools, that labile carbon. These are really soil health  
**[0:07:47-0:07:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:07:47):**  indicators. A lot of them have been identified by the Soil Health Institute as tier one indicators  but for and there's more that we're looking at, you know, the physical measurements as well but  for if you're looking at to monitor carbon you really only need to be taking bulk density and  
**[0:08:06-0:08:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:08:06):**  soil organic carbon. That's probably all you need. Oh and I would throw in wet aggregate stability  because it is a I think one of the strongest indicators for the structural part of soil being  improved and looking at that impact of you know water infiltration. You know we really value soil  
**[0:08:30-0:08:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:08:30):**  health improvements and looking at carbon increases in the soil for improving groundwater recharge,  for really getting stormwater to infiltrate into that soil and recharge subsoil moisture so that  we can reduce our water usage. I mean that's probably one of the biggest approaches in this  
**[0:08:53-0:08:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:08:53):**  whole planning so I think they're interconnected. You know want to improve that water holding  capacity so we can measure those things. You know we can it's all it's all related but I mean just  to say again simply soil organic carbon you might as well you're going to get organic matter for  
**[0:09:08-0:09:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:09:08):**  that if you're looking at that bulk density and wet aggregate stability would be my three simple  measurements. The Healthy Soils Initiative is one of a kind. I think right now top my head I can't  even explain how it came about but I you know I know that there was something passed in 2015 by  
**[0:09:34-0:09:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:09:34):**  the state of California. It was in 2016 we have the soil there's like some soil action plan of  California and this is where the soil through the soil health initiative was birthed the Healthy  Soils Program essentially and that's where the funding is through that program to fund growers,  
**[0:09:56-0:10:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:09:56):**  landowners around the state. So I think it's a great program and it's just evolving. You know  there's been some things about it that some of us have disagreed with in the actual language of the  grant and the requirements behind it but CDFA has been pretty responsive to these comments and  
**[0:10:16-0:10:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:10:16):**  they're starting to shift some of the requirements like the first round of funding they wanted the  compost application requirements were not consistent with or practical and you had to  apply compost at a certain rate for three years in a row every year and we we generally recommend  
**[0:10:37-0:10:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:10:37):**  compost applications on a much larger application and with a much larger interval so maybe like once  every five years maybe even once every 10 years depending on the size of the application and some  of the soil monitoring that they were requesting to prove that there was carbon sequestration was  
**[0:10:59-0:11:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:10:59):**  kind of unrealistic like they wanted it to happen every year so and again it's dynamic so it could  happen it might take three four or five years to see like a small response. You know it's just  interesting how the conversation shifts like we used to talk about like right before Trump was  
**[0:11:17-0:11:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:11:17):**  hired that you know we could sequester carbon and mitigate climate change through soil management  and now like the USDA isn't allowed to use that kind of terminology because climate change doesn't  exist or something like that you know so I mean it's just I know that's the interesting thing but  
**[0:11:35-0:11:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:11:35):**  it is it is kind of the first time that it's been like recognized at a state level that this is a  real tool for I guess mitigating climate change and that's pretty profound. Yeah we just get a  little bit we don't do justice to this kind of work when we try to look at it just through one  
**[0:12:02-0:12:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:12:02):**  lens you know because we all we've understood for decades sustainable regenerative soil management  practices and what it does to the whole ecological function of the land you know from storing water  to reducing erosion to enhancing crop productivity to providing habitat and clean water to animal  
**[0:12:24-0:12:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:12:24):**  and people so that's really the lens that I'm going to continue walking down like it doesn't  need to be a climate lens or a carbon lens but it's about the whole system you know and I think  the healthy soils initiative is looking through multiple lenses I don't think it's just about  
**[0:12:39-0:12:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:12:39):**  carbon but sometimes we get we seem to get caught up in talking about that but the healthy soils  initiative does state that climate solutions can occur through soil management like that that is  known so that is certainly a focus and maybe it's the driving focus that I'm not I'm maybe a little  
**[0:13:00-0:13:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:13:00):**  reluctant to to have that focus but so. What I believe is that we have we're in a paradigm that  we need to break out of and even some of us who feel like we're have broken out of that paradigm  we still have to step back and recognize that sometimes we're still looking through the a lens  
**[0:13:27-0:13:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:13:27):**  of like traditional farming since World War II you know what what what seems to be  the way it should look in particular we we tend to use our eyes to look at the land like in on  the farm and things being clean cookie-cutted we have to step back sometimes and think about what  
**[0:13:49-0:14:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:13:49):**  is the end result and what does that mean and how do we shift our you know conditioning away from  that and and with our farm that we have I still do that every day I walk out there you know I have  to like hit myself in the head sometimes and go you know you go out there and you're just trying  
**[0:14:11-0:14:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:14:11):**  to get things done it's like a day to day sometimes just got to stop and you think oh I got to mow  this and I got to do that and I got to do that and sometimes I stop and go but why why do I have to  mow that area over there and I start thinking about I'm like I don't need to mow that area I  
**[0:14:25-0:14:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:14:25):**  can let that just be you know it's just this estate we want to keep things mowed and keep  things clean so biologically and like you're looking through the carbon lens you want to be  able to sequester as much carbon as you can you need chlorophyll to do that so if you mow something  
**[0:14:41-0:14:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:14:41):**  down especially in California where by the way it doesn't rain for like five to six months out of  the year as soon as you mow something it is kind of pretty much dead so um you know and just another  quick example is that we've noticed that when you let grasses and other things grow quite tall the  
**[0:15:02-0:15:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:15:02):**  do is like trap it captured and this is just anecdotally everything everybody wants things  measured and researched but we see out on these properties where we let covers grow real tall  that atmospheric moisture is condensing and that we find that the topsoil stays more moist in these  
**[0:15:23-0:15:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:15:23):**  no-till environments and you have more biological activity as you get deeper into the season is  warming up and you still have a lot of moisture that's actually being grabbed from the air so  just like redwoods do that you know they they've found that redwoods have the fog drip and we can  
**[0:15:41-0:15:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/short-charles-schembre-on-carbon-farm-plans-monitoring-soils#t=0:15:41):**  get that off of different covers so that's what I mean of opening that lens if you want to capture  carbon you've got to like think like carbon and so um I guess that's my long message there  