### Farmerama  (2019-45-19)
**[0:00:00-0:00:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-jubliee-farm-brexit#t=0:00:00):**  So we're back at Jubilee Farm. We've just moved on site having raised £280,000 to buy  this wonderful farm. And it's an interesting time to be setting up a farm because there  are storm clouds on the horizon with Brexit and what it is going to mean for agriculture.  And particularly here in Northern Ireland, the only part of the UK that has a land border  with the EU. There are a lot of questions about what it's going to look like for agriculture  
**[0:00:29-0:00:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-jubliee-farm-brexit#t=0:00:29):**  in the future and questions that we're asking as a small community farm setting up for the  first time.  So to think about some of those questions and the challenges of Brexit for Northern  Irish agriculture and the small family farms that dominate our farming profession here.  And joined this month by Conor McCauley who is the BBC's correspondent in Northern Ireland  
**[0:00:54-0:00:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-jubliee-farm-brexit#t=0:00:54):**  for food and farming and the environment. So Conor thanks for joining us.  You're welcome.  What are the challenges that Brexit poses to farming here?  Well that's a pretty big question. The main farm union we have here, the Uster Farmers  Union has been pretty categoric about the challenges. Not so much of Brexit but of a  
**[0:01:13-0:01:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-jubliee-farm-brexit#t=0:01:13):**  no deal Brexit. They have said consistently all the way along they're not against Brexit  per se but it's the prospect of a no deal Brexit that really worries them. And they  have said in no uncertain terms in recent weeks in fact that the outworking of a no  deal Brexit for farms in Northern Ireland and as you say we have predominantly small  family farms, a lot of livestock based farming here would be catastrophic. And the reason  
**[0:01:42-0:01:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-jubliee-farm-brexit#t=0:01:42):**  for that is essentially that the trading relationships in a no deal scenario which is what we appear  to be facing into at the moment as best we know anyway would mean that it would be very  difficult for particularly sheep and dairy sectors here and beef of course as well, the  potential for restrictions on cross border movements because a lot of our supply chains  here in Northern Ireland are essentially all island based supply chains. So we send a lot  
**[0:02:14-0:02:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-jubliee-farm-brexit#t=0:02:14):**  of meat to the south, live animals to the south to be slaughtered. We send a lot of  milk to the south to be processed. We bring a lot of pigs into Northern Ireland from the  Republic of Ireland for processing here. So there's a great deal of integration of the  supply chains in Northern Ireland and anything that's going to disrupt those is potentially  going to have as the Ulster Farmers Union has said catastrophic implications and is  
**[0:02:39-0:02:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-jubliee-farm-brexit#t=0:02:39):**  really going to potentially hit farm incomes. And as we know farm incomes are not big incomes  by any manner of means and of course particularly here in Northern Ireland they are heavily  dependent on existing EU subsidies.  Yeah and that's one of the things moving forward we've projected some subsidy income for a  couple of years but in terms of capital expenditure when we need to build a new barn we haven't  
**[0:03:01-0:03:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-jubliee-farm-brexit#t=0:03:01):**  factored in any EU money and in the short term buying pig feed from the Republic, organic  pig feed, the currency fluctuations are playing havoc a bit in terms of budgeting and that  sort of thing. We were talking just beforehand about the problems Northern Ireland faces  at the moment not having a current executive in place. Why is that so important for post  Brexit agriculture in Northern Ireland in terms of having that functioning executive  
**[0:03:24-0:03:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-jubliee-farm-brexit#t=0:03:24):**  there?  Well it's critically important for farmers to have the executive back because essentially  agriculture is a devolved matter. Now we do have an agriculture bill going through Westminster  at the moment but that is essentially a bill for England essentially which we're kind of  tacking ourselves onto because we don't have a functioning executive here in Northern Ireland.  
**[0:03:45-0:03:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-jubliee-farm-brexit#t=0:03:45):**  So essentially what we're doing in terms of the agriculture bill that's going through  Westminster at the moment is that officials at the Department of Agriculture here in Northern  Ireland are ensuring that the law is set in such a way that essentially they can keep  the thing rolling forward without basically making any big changes to what happens in  the short term with a view to the restoration of the Northern Ireland executive, the appointment  
**[0:04:10-0:04:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-jubliee-farm-brexit#t=0:04:10):**  of a locally devolved agriculture minister essentially and someone who can then set the  direction for agriculture policy in Northern Ireland because agriculture is a devolved  matter. We need our own policy. We need our own minister to set our own policy. Civil  servants say we can't set the direction of policy. Only a minister can do that. So and  there is the bones of a policy there. We had a big consultation document not that long  
**[0:04:35-0:04:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-jubliee-farm-brexit#t=0:04:35):**  ago which set out the shape of a potential future policy for Northern Ireland but the  reality is that has been consulted upon. The consultation responses are in the department  but the department cannot really do anything more with that in terms of setting a policy  until we get an agriculture minister back and that person then decides what way we're  going to go locally because the reality is what would work for England will not necessarily  
**[0:05:00-0:05:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-jubliee-farm-brexit#t=0:05:00):**  work for us because the structures of farming are much different. The climate challenges  are much different. So to finish up from Jubilee Farm this month, Mark Twain famously said  buy land, they're not making it anymore and so we're hoping that whatever shade of Brexit  happens in the next few months we're betting the farmer here at Jubilee Farm in Northern  Ireland that for this farm and for all the others that we're going to have a productive  
**[0:05:26-0:05:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-jubliee-farm-brexit#t=0:05:26):**  and sustainable future in agriculture.  