### Farmerama  (2018-45-01)
**[0:00:00-0:00:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-update-march#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, it's Joel here at Harvest Barn Farm Shop in the Market Garden.  It's the 20th of March, day 50 of my time here and the last few days and weeks I've  been working on the polytunnel.  This is a 20 by 54 foot polytunnel.  It's taken quite a bit longer than I was expecting.  
**[0:00:32-0:00:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-update-march#t=0:00:32):**  I've had some help and I've also been working on it on my own.  It takes a lot longer when you're on your own.  The levelling up and the measuring is the thing that's taken the longest but I'm getting  there.  I've got the timber rails on the sides now.  
**[0:00:48-0:00:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-update-march#t=0:00:48):**  There's a little bit more to do and then I've got to find a time to get some more friends  hopefully and put the plastic cover on and then do the doors and then it will be finished.  So it's exciting to think that I will have that fairly soon but it has been a lot of  work.  I've had a bit of a delay with the seeds because I've run out of space in my flat to sow seeds  
**[0:01:12-0:01:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-update-march#t=0:01:12):**  and the soil has been too wet and cold to sow anything direct.  So I'm really waiting for some space in the polytunnel to be able to sow some seeds in  trays and I can't do that until the plastic covers on so that may be two or three weeks  away.  It's also taken me a long time to do my seed order which I still haven't done.  
**[0:01:35-0:01:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-update-march#t=0:01:35):**  Even if I had done it I wouldn't be able to sow them so I'm not too worried about that  but it is getting quite late in the season.  But then with all the cold weather I guess everything is going to be a bit delayed this  year but it's just taken a long time to work out how many beds of each vegetable and flower  to grow and what varieties and which company to order from.  
**[0:01:57-0:02:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-update-march#t=0:01:57):**  So a lot of research, a lot of internet, time online, asking people for advice.  I think I've finally got a list and it will be a lot of trial and error to see what works  and what sells and whether I've ordered too many seeds or not enough seeds.  I'm trying to look at green manures as well, hopefully have a few beds of those.  I'm going to try and have ten beds of sunflowers just to experiment with different sunflowers  
**[0:02:26-0:02:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-update-march#t=0:02:26):**  and see if we can sell them in the shop.  It's been bitterly cold recently so it's been impossible to do anything out in the market  garden itself.  Just now it did start to warm up and amazingly the soil is already starting to dry out on  top.  
**[0:02:44-0:02:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-update-march#t=0:02:44):**  This feneland soil is incredible despite the days of cold and rain and snow.  Within an hour or two of the sun coming out the surface is dried so things will start  growing again.  Excitingly the tulips and narcissus are coming up, they're a couple of inches high.  We were hoping we might have some bunches to sell in the shop for Easter weekend but  
**[0:03:07-0:03:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-update-march#t=0:03:07):**  they probably won't be ready by then.  But as with everything it's difficult to predict too far ahead.  So that's how things are going here on the market garden.  It will all start to get quite busy as the weather gets warmer and things are growing  faster so in a way I'm glad for the weather although it's been pretty hard work outside  
**[0:03:31-0:03:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-update-march#t=0:03:31):**  in these winds.  Yesterday I think it was minus one and felt like minus seven with the wind chill factor.  So looking forward to the spring and a new phase in the market garden.  