### Farmerama  (2019-50-03)
**[0:00:00-0:00:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-december#t=0:00:00):**  Hello everybody, this is Joel doing another recording for the Farmerama podcast. I'm running  a market garden at the Harvest Barn Farm Shop just outside Peterborough. It's been just  over a year since I started growing at the market garden at Harvest Barn Farm Shop. It's  been a very eventful year, very challenging, very rewarding, although I would say the challenges  have outweighed the rewards, but I'm still enthusiastic. The biggest challenges have  
**[0:00:38-0:00:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-december#t=0:00:38):**  been a combination of marketing and growing. I feel like I've learnt as much about growing  this year as I have in the last 20 years and I thought I knew quite a lot before, but it's  been a pretty intense learning curve. I didn't have any experience of marketing before now,  apart from trying to encourage Year 9 students to take geography as a GCSE and selling green  cornflake cake outside my parents' house as a nine-year-old. I guess the growing challenges  
**[0:01:08-0:01:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-december#t=0:01:08):**  are fairly obvious. We've had problems with irrigation this year because it was so hot  and I was only just starting to get my irrigation system set up. For the beginning of the season  I was using watering cans. I've had a big battle with caterpillars. A lot of my brassicas  were unsellable because of caterpillar damage. There were a few other pests. I didn't have  any deer, rabbit, bird damage really, but the watering and some issues with the soil,  
**[0:01:36-0:01:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-december#t=0:01:36):**  which I haven't really resolved, and the caterpillars proved quite difficult. That obviously had  a big impact on my sales because I didn't have the quantity and the quality that I would  have liked. A lot of produce went to waste because I just couldn't sell it and I didn't  have enough in a lot of cases to offer produce to places who needed consistent regular supply  of produce. But I was able to sell to the farm shop and to people in London and Norwich  
**[0:02:07-0:02:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-december#t=0:02:07):**  and have just started to sell to people locally. So there are signs of my own market streams  developing in a positive way. But the marketing was also a big challenge and in terms of marketing  the main issues for me were finding people that wanted to buy the produce given that  I didn't have good internet access on site and the time was limited. Establishing a relationship  with customers, so going to meet them, talking to them, finding out what they wanted. Working  
**[0:02:42-0:02:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-december#t=0:02:42):**  out prices has taken a long time. Having the right quantities so I don't have too much  that goes to waste and I'm wasting all the time growing produce which I can't sell but  not having such a small amount that I then can't go to customers and say I'm going to  have this amount of kale for the next few months. Decisions about delivery logistics  and when it's worth delivering small quantities is a dilemma that I really have had to do  
**[0:03:13-0:03:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-december#t=0:03:13):**  by trial and error really and work out what is cost effective and time efficient. But  I am saying yes to most people at the moment because I feel I need to establish myself  and get a customer base and get experience. My sort of emotional well-being and mental  health has been a big issue. I've been quite lonely a lot of this year because I don't  know people in the area. It's been difficult to get out and meet people and I'm spending  
**[0:03:38-0:03:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-december#t=0:03:38):**  most of the time on my own on the land. It's difficult to get the right balance between  time on the land and commitments to my personal and family commitments. So trying to work  out the right balance to make the farm successful but also keep myself sane has been quite a  challenge. So in terms of the future, what do I need to do? Find more customers, plan  better succession so I've got a wider range or a greater quantity of produce coming through,  
**[0:04:14-0:04:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-december#t=0:04:14):**  there aren't gaps in the produce. Probably grow more of each crop and maybe actually  less variety so that it's less complication and less time involved. It has been great  this year to be doing what I've dreamed of doing which is to be growing food to provide  local people with produce that is healthy and organically grown and learn about managing  the soil and managing crops. There's been some really great produce come out of the  
**[0:04:42-0:04:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-december#t=0:04:42):**  market garden, sunflowers and great salads, peppers, tomatoes, a lot of herbs and that's  been really rewarding to be able to see that and grow it and get money back for it. So  I am enthusiastic about the future, I'm very keen to keep learning about growing and finding  the right way to grow these crops efficiently and I'm really keen to prove, if possible,  that it is possible to make a decent living on a small area of land growing vegetables  
**[0:05:17-0:05:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-december#t=0:05:17):**  but that is yet to be proved. But for that to be sustainable, for it to work, I need  to have a regular cash flow and at the moment the money coming in from what I'm selling  is not enough to provide me with a livelihood. So I have had to top that up with supply teaching  and hopefully next year I will have less expenditure and more income and that will be great but  it's not certain yet that I can make enough money to give me a living before it becomes  
**[0:05:52-0:06:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-harvest-barn-market-garden-december#t=0:05:52):**  financially unviable. It's been great sharing this year's journey with you, I hope you've  enjoyed listening, look forward to sharing more about next year's season and seeing what  successes I can achieve building on this year's hard work and learning and look forward to  hearing from you if you've got any comments or questions. Thank you very much, bye.  