### Farmerama  (2017-42-26)
**[0:00:00-0:00:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:00:00):**  I'm Amy and I'm here with Kenny from Wefarm. Hi Kenny.  Hi.  Now can you just tell me what Wefarm is?  Sure. Wefarm is a social enterprise that enables small-scale farmers, mostly without access  to the internet, to obtain information on anything they want sourced from the crowd.  
**[0:00:26-0:00:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:00:26):**  So using SMS predominantly as a tool at this stage with machine learning and the knowledge  of thousands of other farmers to get information shared across the supply chain.  I've been nosing around your website and I saw some stories of people saving their chickens  and their chickens had got sick and they didn't know what was wrong and then they text in.  There were also other stories. Are there any stories that you can share of how it works?  
**[0:00:51-0:00:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:00:51):**  Sure, yeah definitely. So mostly interactions on Wefarm start with a question or a problem  that a farmer has. You know in the example that you mentioned, we have a case study on  a guy called Kefa that he's a chicken keeper, had about 60 chickens in his flock and had  a disease that was kind of ripping through them and killed a large number in the space  of a few days. So he sends an SMS for free to the local Wefarm number that starts to  
**[0:01:17-0:01:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:01:17):**  talk about his problem. You know, my chickens have these symptoms and these problems, what  can I do? So Wefarm receives the message and at that point we do some machine learning  on the content, trying to understand what Kefa is saying to us, where he is, what he  farms, increasingly what the weather might be like where he is, etc. And we use that  analysis to pick out a few people in the entire network that can answer that one particular  
**[0:01:43-0:01:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:01:43):**  question. It goes to them via SMS and we get one or two bespoke, tailored answers back  to the original farmer from people we know have dealt with a similar problem or are experts  in that particular area.  Fantastic. And so a text message is how many symbols?  Up to 160 characters.  
**[0:02:02-0:02:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:02:02):**  Okay. And also are you dealing with different languages?  Yeah, so obviously a text message or SMS restricts us to some extent in terms of the content,  but I guess that forces us on the farmers to be eloquent to a degree in how we deal  with things. I think the other side of that though is that we're pretty much the only  digital ecosystem for these farmers to use. So in context, being able to get help and  
**[0:02:30-0:02:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:02:30):**  information even if it is only one or two SMS long is much better than the alternative.  In terms of languages, we deal with English, Swahili, Rwanda Kwali and Lugandu. So both  the main languages in Uganda and Kenya as well as some of the regional languages. I  believe we're probably the only people in the world building natural language processing  libraries in some of these languages. So hopefully it will benefit people beyond just we farm.  
**[0:02:57-0:03:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:02:57):**  So how many SMSes would be exchanged? Is it a conversation of SMS messages that normally  goes on? What's an average conversation consist of?  Yeah, so I mean many times it is just as simple as a farmer asking a question, us sharing  that with a few people we think can help and one or two answers going back to the original  farmer. Sometimes the conversation goes beyond that and more and more as we develop the products  
**[0:03:20-0:03:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:03:20):**  trying to create a unique link between the questioner and the answerer so that follow  up questions or a conversation can begin. So that's the sort of stuff we're working  at the moment. At the moment we're sending and receiving something in the region of 3.5  to 4 million SMS a month. Our network has now grown to well half a million probably  by the time this goes out sometime in the next few days.  
**[0:03:45-0:03:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:03:45):**  And how does it grow? How does your network grow?  Some mixture of different things. We use radio quite a lot as a medium to spread the word.  We do a lot of content driven radio where farmers can call in and talk to us and we  find that really effective. We also have agents, ambassadors as we call them on the ground  that help us to build trust in the community and teach farmers how to use it and that's  
**[0:04:09-0:04:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:04:09):**  a really effective model for us. And increasingly we see word of mouth being really powerful  so farmers who have been using the service can tell a friend about it which is obviously  really important for us as we really to scale.  And so when did you kick off and what's been the growth rate of?  So we launched in February 2015. I remember our first 10 users by name. And since then  
**[0:04:34-0:04:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:04:34):**  we've been growing probably somewhere in an average of about 10% month on month. And if  you look at our growth curve it's really accelerated rapidly in the last few months. We're starting  to hit not quite exponential growth but in the communities that we're working with which  are often offline it is the equivalent of exponential growth. I think more important  for us though isn't just people signing up it's that they actually use it. So on the  
**[0:04:59-0:05:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:04:59):**  average month about 30 to 40% of the users are actively contributing content, questions  and answers which is astronomically high if you compare that to most of the social networks  that we see in the Western world. So we're very pleased with that and believe we're probably  the first people to ever create this kind of significant growth and then engagement  digitally with offline communities.  
**[0:05:22-0:05:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:05:22):**  And in the back end you must be collecting loads of clever stuff about farming like lots  of… what are you doing with that? What do you imagine will be the outcome of those things?  Yeah, I mean data is obviously hugely important for us. I mean personally I believe that's  where our game changing social impact comes from. The data obviously on top of the individual  help we can give to farmers but it's also where our commercial model comes in. Obviously  
**[0:05:50-0:05:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:05:50):**  these farmers that we're working with farm the vast majority of the world's supply  chain, the origin of many of the commodities markets so the data and forecasting that we  can do across tens of thousands of conversations is really exciting. On the social side we're  looking at things like tracking disease. Can we use machine learning and the symptoms of  a disease to pick out trends that might indicate a break of food and mouth disease or army  
**[0:06:12-0:06:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:06:12):**  worm and help local authorities to deal with that, NGOs, whoever it might be. We can probably  see that in an hour where otherwise it might take weeks to come to light. On the commercial  side looking at things like ripening periods, also disease patterns that might affect the  supply chains of some of the multinationals or the commodities markets. Not sacrificing  or giving away any individual data on any farmers but looking at the trends of what  
**[0:06:37-0:06:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:06:37):**  happens across massive numbers of conversations. And also then building that back into the  product so it helps the farmers. So if a farmer asks a question on planting carrots in a particular  region of Kenya we have a lot of historical data on other farmers who've done similar  things and can help to guide people based on data rather than just hearsay. And obviously  we've seen a lot of change in agriculture over even just a relatively short period like  
**[0:07:04-0:07:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:07:04):**  30 years. And actually the amount of data that we collected about farming has been relatively  recent and has always been from large scale farming. So I can see how exciting it is to  collect from these smaller, I mean do they tend to be smaller scale farms that you're  doing or quite a variety? I mean we don't stop anyone from using the system as long  as they're using it responsibly. But yeah the vast majority of our farmers are small  
**[0:07:27-0:07:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:07:27):**  scale farmers between half a hectare and four or five hectares is where the majority would  lie. So I know that there's a lot of excitement about being able to collect data from small  holder farmers and also make the accessible the knowledge that they haven't been able  to share before. One of the things that I spoke to one of your colleagues about was  how do you make sure that there's like a variety of information. So if someone comes in to  
**[0:08:01-0:08:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:08:01):**  market a product and they approach 100 of your farmers and they get on your, and so  the farmers are talking about this product which may or may not be a great product but  how do you prevent your system or is that something you won't get involved with? So  I mean yeah I mean there's I guess a wide range of examples where people could be sharing  you know potentially inappropriate content. I guess we look at dealing with that in a  
**[0:08:28-0:08:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:08:28):**  couple of different ways. First and foremost you know with technology. So obviously we  have spam filters and can very quickly pick out keywords that are you know obviously inappropriate  for sending. More and more we use more sophisticated machine learning to actually detect intent  rather than just keywords. You know once you start looking at cross languages you know  a word that might be you know rude in Swahili or English isn't in another language it's  
**[0:08:56-0:08:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:08:56):**  something that sounds very similar so more and more we have to look at the intent of  what the message is trying to say and the same mechanism that helps us understand whether  a farmer is talking about this breed of chicken or another breed of chicken can help us understand  if they're talking about something political or something that we wouldn't necessarily  want to share. The other side of it is then having the crowd be involved in this. I mean  
**[0:09:17-0:09:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:09:17):**  this goes back to the entire ethos of We Farm and what makes our data really special is  it's coming from people naturally. We're not extracting it, we're not asking people questions  or filling in surveys, we're just letting people talk naturally between themselves and  empowering the crowd to also be filters of information and you know what's inappropriate  and what's not is really important. I think people get pretty protective about the system  
**[0:09:38-0:09:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:09:38):**  you know when people share things that aren't agricultural related there's always somebody  very quickly saying you know this is not about farming.  So people have that already on your system so people because I was interested how many  people see the messages because they're coming I'm imagining everyone sat on a pretty much  text based phone and they're just seeing they send in a message and then they'll just receive  
**[0:10:03-0:10:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:10:03):**  a response but also how are they getting the questions directed to them?  So the average user will receive something in the region between one and two questions  a week depending on how engaged they are and you know obviously we look at the data of  you know if we sent somebody 400 questions over the previous two years and they haven't  answered any of them you know it's probably not worth sending them any more questions.  
**[0:10:24-0:10:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:10:24):**  On the other end of the scale we have users that are highly engaged. We have an ask me  function where users can request questions and we see some users that sit and answer  questions you know for half an hour or an hour and it's you know that's really exciting  so I mean how many messages people get really depends on their own activity levels and what  they want but the average question is probably being seen by somewhere between 10 and 20  
**[0:10:47-0:10:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:10:47):**  people at the moment. We expect that one or two will answer it statistically and obviously  within that there's people that will report bad content or flag inappropriate things as  well.  So internally you have a kind of user assessment of how well a user is performing as a question  answer and as someone who's actually asking questions and partaking but it's rather than  
**[0:11:12-0:11:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:11:12):**  in a social media everyone's almost rating each other much more publicly.  And so how has that been for you trying to work out what is seen as like a high rated  individual on your platform?  Yeah that's an interesting question I mean the mechanics of what we're doing behind the  scenes are often very similar to the social networks that we know but obviously our interface  
**[0:11:35-0:11:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:11:35):**  is very different in terms of SMS. So not entirely different we're looking at and experimenting  with many different ways of getting users to rate things whether that's just a simple  did this answer your question yes or no to you know can you rate this out of 10 and we're  doing experiments at the moment to see you know which of those users you know respond  to the best which of them work but I think that kind of crowd verification is really  
**[0:11:58-0:11:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:11:58):**  important to us.  You know we're already getting way beyond the volumes of content that we can have humans  analyze and that's obviously only going to increase so we need a mixture of smart technology  and engaged users to do that for us.  I guess the analogy I would probably use is eBay where you know eBay can't possibly verify  
**[0:12:15-0:12:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:12:15):**  the millions of products that are going through their system so they have the crowd verify  that you can safely buy a t-shirt from this person because other users have verified that  they you know describe it well they send it on time you know we're essentially building  the same for information that you know we can't necessarily tell you this is a perfect  rabbit answer but we can tell you that this person knows a lot about rabbits.  
**[0:12:37-0:12:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:12:37):**  And what countries are you operating in at the moment?  So currently we're only in Kenya and Uganda we now have I think about 7% of all the farms  in Kenya and Uganda using the system as we grow quickly we're adding Tanzania early next  year and then looking at various other sub-Saharan Africa and Asian countries over the next two  years.  
**[0:12:57-0:13:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:12:57):**  And how did you decide where to start?  Yeah I'd like to say that was a really smart analysis and such like but partly coincidence  we were already working on the ground with farmers in Kenya and Uganda we knew some of  the cooperatives there through Wefarm's origins as a project an NGO the Cafe Direct Producers  Foundation that I was working with so you know we already had the context to be able  
**[0:13:22-0:13:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:13:22):**  to do the first launch and I guess the East African ecosystem you know SMS is a huge product  there mobile money people are already comfortable with doing things through SMS so it was a  really great place for us to launch.  Do you think that we might end up seeing something like this for UK farmers?  We do get quite a lot of interest and requests to do things in the Western world I mean at  
**[0:13:46-0:13:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:13:46):**  the moment the reality is there are much more sophisticated farm management systems in place  for farmers in the Western world that have internet access and the capital to be able  to do that.  That being said I think what Wefarm does uniquely is have that sense of community and talking  to each other which is something that I think a lot of Western world farmers actually relate  
**[0:14:04-0:14:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:14:04):**  to so at the moment I think our focus is very much on the developing world but you know  it would be interesting to do something outside of that as well.  Is there anything in terms of have you got any feedback from a farmer of the impacts  on maybe meeting up physically with other farmers or do any farmers I'd really like  to hear a story of where it worked really well and maybe ones where you've really had  
**[0:14:36-0:14:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:14:36):**  to work to solve a problem maybe where people weren't sharing or they were trying to sort  of sabotage are there any stories of?  I don't know of any stories of sabotage maybe yet to come.  I mean definitely we have plenty of case studies of farmers who've used it and really benefited  from it you know from Kefa our chicken farmer to we were doing a case study recently with  
**[0:14:57-0:15:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:14:57):**  a tea farmer called Michael in Kenya that he'd been asking various questions on fertilization  techniques on pruning which is really important in tea plants and when to do that the spacing  between these new plants and over a year of using the system he got pretty close to doubling  not quite about a 90% increase in his average tea yield which is obviously a fantastic result  for us and shows what's possible and we have you know various stories of that.  
**[0:15:24-0:15:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:15:24):**  We actually recently introduced a feedback function on the system where a user can send  us feedback on anything that they want to just by starting their message with feedback  that comes directly into our slack channel in the office so we get to see every piece  of feedback that a user has left and it's I have to be honest the majority of it is  really positive people's you know freely sending us information about the things they've taken  
**[0:15:49-0:15:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:15:49):**  from the system obviously like anything the occasional pieces of constructive feedback  as well you know we're still an early stage company and there's a lot of progress for  us to make but we're getting there.  Can you imagine posting out experiments or challenges with the idea that you're now starting  to gather all this information can you imagine actually sending out experiments that many  
**[0:16:13-0:16:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:16:13):**  people try in different areas and see what comes back?  To farmers you mean?  Yeah.  I mean we get a lot of interest in us sending things out to farmers whether that's you know  from a quite crude angle of advertising to you know obviously looking at much more of  
**[0:16:29-0:16:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:16:29):**  the data side of things and social experiments.  I think what's quite important for us is as you know we grow and build the trust of the  farmer is to minimize the top down voice as much as possible so we try to send as little  content to farmers as possible and really make it a community thing.  You know trust is hugely important you know everywhere but especially in rural African  
**[0:16:51-0:16:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:16:51):**  communities.  We are the first digital system that the vast majority of these farmers will ever use so  I think it's really important and a big responsibility on us to make sure that we're being responsible  with that.  But I think the possibilities of getting interesting social data out of this that are helpful to  
**[0:17:07-0:17:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:17:07):**  NGOs and to local communities themselves are huge you know for example we can look at the  rates of which young people under the age of 30 are planting coffee versus tea and start  to look at trends in that or what are the problems that a 20 year old farmer is talking  about versus a 50 year old farmer, men and women and the gender differences in that and  you know that's all really powerful data for governments and local authorities.  
**[0:17:35-0:17:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:17:35):**  With the data sharing where do you draw the lines of where this anonymous but accumulated  big data who can get their hands on it?  I mean I think this is still early days and you know as I said the first and foremost  for us is the trust of the farmer.  The reality is that none of it works unless farmers trust us and do so for the long term.  
**[0:18:00-0:18:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:18:00):**  You know we also have shareholders in the business which is the NGO which you know we  first created WeFarm which is owned by the farmers themselves so we have a kind of direct  link in our very structure back to the farming communities.  In terms of data specifically I think that's really a case by case basis for us at the  moment.  
**[0:18:18-0:18:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:18:18):**  You know our commitment to users is we never give away anyone's personal information and  have no intention of doing so at any point and you know we would certainly look at any  aggregated data that the farmers is something we would want to get involved in but you know  the vast percent of what we do is very anonymized and a very big scale so it isn't really particularly  relevant in that sense to any individual farmer.  
**[0:18:43-0:18:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:18:43):**  And with the NGO does that mean that you have a board who sits on the board of your NGO?  So the NGO has a board of trustees which includes I think three small scale farmers these days.  They're a shareholder in WeFarm and have a board seat on WeFarm.  We also have venture capital investment now.  We are a social enterprise but a commercial company so we are hopefully building the best  
**[0:19:09-0:19:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:19:09):**  of both worlds.  And how long have you been involved in WeFarm and how did you end up here?  It's a relatively long story I'll try to keep it short.  Yeah I've only got a few minutes now.  Yeah I spent many years working in Latin America mostly in structure and engineering projects  
**[0:19:29-0:19:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:19:29):**  with rural communities.  I built fish farms and water systems mostly with indigenous communities in the high Andes  and Amazon basin and obviously spent a lot of time working with farming communities and  I guess seeing a lot of the top down attitude that was taken to information sharing.  You know a lot of people you know it's obviously widely recognized this issue of people not  
**[0:19:50-0:19:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:19:50):**  having access to information but being honest most people come at it as well we'll just  tell poor people what to do.  And I think really saw the opportunity to do something very different and working with  small scale farmers under the NGO a few years ago we kind of started to develop what would  become WeFarm and people were really excited about those ideas and being able to share  
**[0:20:09-0:20:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:20:09):**  their own knowledge and information.  And then in 2015 we took the decision to spin it out as a social enterprise and haven't  looked back since.  Amazing.  I feel like I've got everything I need but is there anything else that you think, how  
**[0:20:25-0:20:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:20:25):**  many people work for WeFarm at the moment?  At the moment we're 24 at the moment with a kind of core team based here in London that's  mostly senior management, data science, developers and then we have awesome teams on the ground  in Uganda and Kenya and they mostly look at the marketing side of things, the engagement  with our users and agricultural knowledge and working with the farmers themselves.  
**[0:20:52-0:20:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:20:52):**  We are in the midst of doing another funding round at the moment.  Hopefully on the back of that we'll probably be doubling in size over the next year.  We hope to reach about 3 million farmers with that.  So we're excited about the next 12 to 18 months.  Great.  
**[0:21:10-0:21:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:21:10):**  And one thing that came up when we were chatting at this conference was have you ever thought  about giving them all weather systems and collecting the weather data?  Yes very much so.  I think our core vision for WeFarm is to become a complete digital ecosystem.  So at the moment it's very much based around questions and answers and information but  
**[0:21:33-0:21:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:21:33):**  we're really working on products that take that core and build other services for farmers  around them.  So whether that's the farmer being able to trade things through WeFarm or have access  to loans or fertilisers or simple things such as weather, we're very open to all of that.  Ultimately we'd like farmers to see WeFarm as a trusted source of information for everything.  
**[0:21:58-0:22:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:21:58):**  So Farmerama has a global community of small scale farmers and also innovators and tech  designers.  Is there anything that you would like to, any challenges that you have at the moment  that you think they might be able to...  We have enough challenges to keep people going for the next decade I think.  
**[0:22:20-0:22:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/farmerama-shorts-wefarm#t=0:22:20):**  If anyone is willing to help us or wants to know more or get involved we have a contact  us page on our website at WeFarm.org.  I'm very happy to speak with anyone who wants to get involved.  Perfect thank you so much Kenny.  Thank you.  