### Farmerama  (2020-59-03)
**[0:00:00-0:00:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-norwich-farmshare-december-2019#t=0:00:00):**  Hello, I'm Joel, one of the two growers at Norwich Farmshare, along with Jack. It's the  very end of October. It's been an amazing summer though. We've grown over two and a  half tons of veg since June. Our membership is now over 100. We've had two very successful  open days and lots of media coverage. We haven't quite seen the last of the rabbits.  They're a very tenacious animal, so they are still causing a few problems. I have to say one  
**[0:00:43-0:00:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-norwich-farmshare-december-2019#t=0:00:43):**  of my biggest worries about working in a CSA when I started, as opposed to working on my own, which  I was last year, was how to manage volunteers and make sure that our food production, as we are  primarily a production farm, didn't suffer due to having to provide support to people with little  experience. But I'm very glad to say those fears were entirely unfounded. We are extremely fortunate  to have some incredible volunteers on the farm. So this episode is devoted to letting them talk  
**[0:01:18-0:01:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-norwich-farmshare-december-2019#t=0:01:18):**  about their experiences of being part of a CSA. I will reflect on some of the challenges that we've  faced over the summer and some of the goals that we've got for next year in future podcasts. But  for now, over to our volunteers and members, Zav, Richard, Burkhardt and Dulce. Thanks.  Hi Burkhardt, thanks for taking the time to talk to us.  Hi, my name is Christian King Zavanayu, or Zav. My wife's Hannah Kim.  
**[0:01:48-0:01:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-norwich-farmshare-december-2019#t=0:01:48):**  My name is Tanya.  And why did you join Norwich Farm Share?  It's a really good question. So we were looking for an opportunity to buy organic  fruit and vegetables locally. And we wanted to support local growers rather than  constantly going to the supermarket. Yeah, we are constantly surprised by the quality of the veg.  
**[0:02:13-0:02:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-norwich-farmshare-december-2019#t=0:02:13):**  And yeah, just week in, week out. It's incredible, absolutely incredible.  Well, I love everything about it really. I like coming out and being in the fresh air for a few  hours. I like learning about plants and because I didn't know anything at all about gardening or  plants before I came. So it's very fantastic learning. And it's giving me confidence so that  in my own garden, I can go home and plant stuff without being worried, what am I doing? And I love  
**[0:02:44-0:02:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-norwich-farmshare-december-2019#t=0:02:44):**  growing food. And I think the vegetables are fantastic.  So every week, it's something new and something different. And it's seasonal. We're pretty much  plant based now. And yeah, it's pushing our menu creativity. It's fresh, it's different.  I would challenge you to find anywhere near as good a quality fruit and veg from Farm Share,  from any supermarket. And I would also suggest that if financing is a concern, then you'll  
**[0:03:22-0:03:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-norwich-farmshare-december-2019#t=0:03:22):**  probably find that you would spend as much in a supermarket for lesser quality fruit and veg.  So what's it like being a member of Norwich Farm Share? And how does it benefit you?  Well, it's a whole new hobby for me. But also more than that, I think it's because I'm so  interested in food and cooking and healthy living and also to do with caring for the soil.  I feel like I'm doing something instead of sitting at home worrying about all the terrible things  
**[0:03:51-0:03:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-norwich-farmshare-december-2019#t=0:03:51):**  that are happening. I feel maybe doing some small tiny thing, like helping to grow some  vegetables which are not poisoning anybody or the earth, then that means a lot to me.  And we also like the idea that as a member, you could be actively involved yourself and  basically learn how to grow vegetables. From the first time we came, we came first on open day.  There was a very good atmosphere, there were very good vibes, everybody was very friendly.  
**[0:04:24-0:04:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-norwich-farmshare-december-2019#t=0:04:24):**  Well, everyone is really nice and helpful and also really always says thank you whenever I  do anything, which is really nice. I feel appreciated even though I don't know what I'm doing.  So it seems to help and I like feeling that I'm part of a team and I'm helping out.  Yeah.  You know, even though I'm a complete beginner, that's nice and everyone's really nice.  
**[0:04:47-0:04:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-norwich-farmshare-december-2019#t=0:04:47):**  There seem to be an increasing number of people volunteering and I hope we can develop that.  And the challenge I suppose is to expand in a way which is sustainable.  I think it's the future and I think we need to really be serious about growing our food in this  way as much as we can locally and eat local and eat in season because they're the tastiest and  the healthiest foods to eat and also to keep things local. It's really important.  
**[0:05:19-0:05:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-norwich-farmshare-december-2019#t=0:05:19):**  The local aspect is very, very important.  Yeah. Well, thanks for your time. Thanks for your help. Thank you. Bye.  