### Farmerama  (2018-23-02)
**[0:00:00-0:00:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory#t=0:00:00):**  Hello and welcome to this special feature for Farmerama.  The Grower Observatory is an EU-wide citizen science project helping people grow food and  care for their soils using regenerative practices. They do so through massive experiments using  low-cost soil moisture sensors and online courses.  In this special feature, Nikos Francis speaks to Greek organic olive grower Pavlos Giorgiadis.  
**[0:00:27-0:00:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory#t=0:00:27):**  He's one of the initiators of the Grower Observatory and he speaks to him from his olive farm in  Alexandropoli to learn a little more about the project.  We are on the north-eastern coast of Greece, on the coast of Thrace, in the village of  Makri. Makri is a prehistoric establishment, a very old locality, and it hosts one of the  last remaining traditional ancient olive groves in the Mediterranean.  
**[0:01:05-0:01:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory#t=0:01:05):**  Right behind me is the Cyclops Cave, as the legend says, from the Homeric epic. And right  in front of us, you can see the Thracian Sea extending from left to right. Right in front  of us is a small fisherman casting his nets right now.  It's the beginning of November, we are really in the middle of the olive harvest, so there  is a lot of activity going on in the village. The village lives off olives, cultivating  
**[0:01:33-0:01:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory#t=0:01:33):**  a traditional local variety, really ancient genotype, and fishing. These are the main  two economic activities here in the village.  I grow olives, I'm a fourth generation olive grower. We manage about 1500 olive trees,  really big, large olive trees, really centuries old. And we are doing exclusively organic  cultivation and 100% of this local native indigenous variety. And we have engaged in  
**[0:02:12-0:02:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory#t=0:02:12):**  a path towards quality in the last five years. We made the transition to organic and being  one of the youngest farmers, growers here in the village, we don't simply grow olives  and produce olive oil and table olives. We try to inspire a process of transition to  the local community as well, trying to educate other farmers about organic techniques, techniques  that preserve the soils, that allow growing without chemical fertilizers and pesticides.  
**[0:02:52-0:02:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory#t=0:02:52):**  And we are now into a point in the sixth year, since I have taken up the management of this  olive grove, that looks like that people are getting on board this new philosophy. There  are more and more trees and more and more land dedicated to organic cultivation, which  is obviously good for the village and the local ecosystem.  So you also are one of the initiators of the Grow Observatory. Can you tell me a bit about  
**[0:03:26-0:03:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory#t=0:03:26):**  Grow and what is the idea behind it?  So in Grow we try to build a movement all over Europe, a movement of people who are  passionate about the land and soil, who care about the future of life on Earth, who are  growing the land with care, with care to the soil, care to biodiversity, care to consumers,  care to the climate. Basically we try to inspire a massive community all around Europe where  
**[0:04:03-0:04:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory#t=0:04:03):**  citizens will start becoming citizen scientists. And through the use of low cost sensing technologies  they will contribute soil moisture data to the Grow Observatory. And this data will then  be processed and analysed as an extremely powerful knowledge resource for the scientific  community, not only the soil sciences but also satellite science. But the hope is that  this citizen driven data project will also be able to inspire change in policy when it  
**[0:04:43-0:04:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory#t=0:04:43):**  comes to land use management and natural resource management, especially in Greece this is very  important because there are a lot of major data gaps when it comes to environmental monitoring  and decision making is often, decisions are often taken without any evidence. So here  is a big opportunity for Growers, citizens to be able to generate their own data and  provide evidence for better informed policy when it comes to environmental monitoring  
**[0:05:19-0:05:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory#t=0:05:19):**  and management. Which is obviously very very important, not only for Greece but particularly  for Greece as the country is located really on the front line of climate change. We are  one of the first countries in Europe that we already experience the effects of climate  change mainly in the form of droughts, desertification advances very very quickly and in rates that  are quite unpredictable and they are affecting the most vulnerable parts of the farming community.  
**[0:05:51-0:06:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory#t=0:05:51):**  Greece is a country with 85% of its farmers being small scalers and this obviously generates  large costs, large transaction costs but also risk. So the hypothesis behind Grow is how  we can bring all those people together, allow them to use new smart technologies, mobile  technologies that exist in order to connect with each other, connect with the science  community but also connect with decision makers. So you mentioned that Grow is based on the  
**[0:06:22-0:06:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory#t=0:06:22):**  concept of citizen science, what is citizen science and what is different in this scientific  method? Citizen science is an approach that tries to put the citizen in the centre of  the scientific agenda not only as an object but also as a research partner. Land use management,  environmental management, climate change adaptation and mitigation are challenges that are too  large for any individual scientist or scientific institution to tackle on its own. What is  
**[0:06:56-0:07:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory#t=0:06:56):**  needed is really interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary and international collaboration. So the problem  is quite complex and it requires a very analytical response and obviously there is also a responsibility  for the citizens to jump on the but-wagon of this new understanding that we need to  have over our ecosystems. So the idea is that citizens generate scientific data, data that  is useful to science by following a given methodology that is provided by Grow but on  
**[0:07:34-0:07:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory#t=0:07:34):**  return they receive incentives to continue generating and sharing this data. These incentives  come in the form of personalised advice for their crops, in the form of community, networks  of networks of knowledge where people get together to exchange on farming techniques,  ideas, concerns that they have about the land and in this way we are really trying to create  a new movement into science as well. Nowadays there are ideas like open science that are  
**[0:08:13-0:08:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory#t=0:08:13):**  more and more advancing, solutions that are based on open data and these are the type  of solutions that the more people are engaged the more value they get and of course they  have a very strong engagement component because the challenge is how to make this process,  the scientific process be owned by citizens. How can we place the citizen in a position  who is really able to also shape the research agenda where the research questions are not  
**[0:08:44-0:08:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory#t=0:08:44):**  only shaped by sponsors but also from the communities and the final beneficiaries themselves.  And I think to a certain extent this can be really revolutionary when it comes to raising  awareness for environmental protection because when you own the solution then it becomes  part of your own personal interest to protect it and this is a really big challenge with  GROW because GROW deals with soils and soils although we step on it, we step on the soil  
**[0:09:15-0:09:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory#t=0:09:15):**  every day, we depend so much on it for our food, for our medicine, for our clothes, for  our well-being, for wider environmental services, at the same time we are very ignorant about  the soils. We are losing healthy soils much faster than we discover them and this is a  unique opportunity with projects like GROW to raise capacity and raise awareness in massive  scales and I think this is what is required and I think it can become really really powerful  
**[0:09:47-0:09:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory#t=0:09:47):**  if we succeed to engage tens of thousands of citizens to follow GROW. So now we are  in Alexandroupoli. Alexandroupoli is one of GROW's first pilot places across Europe. How  was Alexandroupoli chosen? Yeah, GROW starts this year with three pilot places all over  Europe. One of them is here in my hometown in Alexandroupoli which is right next to my  village. One is in Hungary and one is in Ireland. The idea is that there was a need to launch  
**[0:10:28-0:10:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory#t=0:10:28):**  the project with actual communities in real life conditions but when talking about environmental  monitoring we also need to grasp the diversity on climate and growing conditions across Europe.  So having chosen Greece, Ireland and Hungary we have responded to this need to grasp diversity.  On the other side myself I'm quite active here in the food movement. The last ten years  I have been championing the idea of agroecology and return to the land for more than ten years.  
**[0:10:59-0:11:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory#t=0:10:59):**  I'm also involved as a professional grower in the last five to six years so there is  a small community of other growers and citizens here in this region that are inspired by this  message of transition and that was let's say the first access point to these communities.  It turns out that this is becoming a really exciting and interesting encounter with people  that we know each other from but we get to know better as we interact more and more.  
**[0:11:37-0:11:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory#t=0:11:37):**  We get to visit their land and taste their products and really get to understand what  are the struggles but also what are the unique points of growing in a place that is really  in the corner of the European Union. We are sitting right in front like Turkey is just  a few kilometres and we can see it across the sea. So traditionally this region has  been a little bit lagging back in terms of innovation, in terms of opportunity and I'm  
**[0:12:09-0:12:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory#t=0:12:09):**  particularly happy that GROW has provided a message of optimism and hope for this community.  It's an opportunity to interact with very smart technology which are the sensing technology  we are offering but also the ability, the sense of belonging to a wider community that  is working for the good. This is the first sensing mission of GROW and in 2018 we are  planning to scale out in six other GROW places all over Europe so it will be a total of nine  
**[0:12:47-0:12:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory#t=0:12:47):**  where it will be a network of curated communities that will interact with each other, share  their data but also engage with GROW through online platforms and fora like the GROW forum  and the massive online courses on citizen science, on regenerative farming practices,  on sensing technologies. So it's kind of a non-formal school taking place in the great  outdoors and is made by people for people. So what are the benefits that GROW will offer  
**[0:13:23-0:13:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory#t=0:13:23):**  to growers and communities that will take part? I've already mentioned some of the benefits  that exist for the scientific community, the ability to have a more analytical approach  in land monitoring and earth observation and there are also certain benefits when decision  makers have more evidence in order to reach better and wiser decisions. The benefit for  a grower is that really for the first time he can have access, the grower can have access  
**[0:13:56-0:14:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory#t=0:13:56):**  on validated information and advice on growing. The grower has access to some really interesting  tools for understanding better the soils. For the majority of growers out there, particularly  those that come from older generations, sure there is a lot of traditional knowledge that  is gathered over years of encounter with the land. Unfortunately when it comes to the soil,  the soil is like a black box. It is something that we don't understand. Many farmers see  
**[0:14:29-0:14:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory#t=0:14:29):**  it as inertia, as a dead matter. But the truth is that soil is a living ecosystem. We are  talking about the living soil which is a movement that becomes stronger and stronger every day.  So really the benefit for participants in GROW is the sense of uniting in a common cause  for the good which I believe is extremely important for today's Europe. There are a  lot of things that separate us and the hypothesis we draw is whether the land and earth and  
**[0:15:06-0:15:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory#t=0:15:06):**  soil can be a unifying cause. But of course there are very large benefits when it comes  to food production, quality food production, healthy food, nutritious food. When all this  effort comes together and at some point becomes so big that has already shaped a new reality,  a reality that is based on agroecology, on permaculture, on urban gardening, on growing  rather than consuming. I think we are in a pivotal point right now in the history of  
**[0:15:39-0:15:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory#t=0:15:39):**  mankind that we really need to put an unprecedented effort in front of the unprecedented challenge  and really get together and work these things out. GROW is an amazing project that brings  together some of Europe's leading scientists, food communities and public institutions that  are willing to open up this process to the everyday citizen out there. And I think what  we are looking at here can potentially be very strong and something very hopeful for  
**[0:16:21-0:16:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory#t=0:16:21):**  the future. I think this is a very very big benefit for individual growers but also for  the society as a whole. So what's coming next? Yeah we have another two years ahead of us  at GROW. The big challenge is to get people informed and aware about the project, get  them understand what are the benefits but also what are the responsibilities in terms  of generating credible, measurable data and sharing it openly. We are going to have nine  
**[0:17:02-0:17:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory#t=0:17:02):**  GROW places during 2018 all over Europe. These will be communities that will be coordinated  by GROW but it will be self-organised in different localities. These are communities that are  located in rural areas, they are connected with innovation communities and ecosystems,  they are connected with local universities, they are aligned with local policies for environmental  stewardship. So we are trying to bring all this dynamic together in the next year. And  
**[0:17:36-0:17:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory#t=0:17:36):**  I have to say that it is a very very important learning process for us that we have conceived  and implemented GROW. GROW is a project that looks amazing in paper, the design is quite  thoroughly thought but the actual interaction with the real communities is what really brings  the real knowledge and the real experience. It is this attitude of learning that we as  researchers have which merges with the attitude of learning from the growers which I believe  
**[0:18:13-0:18:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory#t=0:18:13):**  provides a very interesting domain for the knowledge economy. So what I want to, what  I hope lies in the future is a little bit more awareness about the gravity of the challenge  of soil degradation, a spirit of collaboration and unity to respond to the challenge and  actually respond to it successfully and in a positive way. But also the opportunity to  interact with thousands of growers that are thinking the same way I do and they are growing  
**[0:18:59-0:19:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-grow-observatory#t=0:18:59):**  in a way that is respecting the land, is respecting the traditions of farming but also merges  it with really high technology. I think this is really really inspiring, to place high  technology sensors in an ancient olive grove, I think this is the key to a future that is  based on a healthy future.  