### Farmerama  (2018-44-21)
**[0:00:00-0:00:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-alice-bettany-from-sacred-seeds-herbal-project#t=0:00:00):**  Hi Summer, it's beautiful. With the herbs you get some really tall herbs and you get  sort of the low level ground herbs so it's actually really easy to make your garden look  amazing and have it head to toe in the medicinals. On the sort of tall level you've got the marshmallow  and the goldenrod. The goldenrod is this bright yellow tail waving in the air and the marshmallow  is just like, it has this super soft leaves that you just want to rub on your face and  
**[0:00:37-0:00:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-alice-bettany-from-sacred-seeds-herbal-project#t=0:00:37):**  you can nibble on the flowers as well. And you've got the meadow sweet which is giving  off its like queen of the meadow scent all over your garden. And then like mid level  you've got like the mints or the vervain or things like that and then on the low level  you might have ground ivy or some other creepers maybe. Maybe even things like, you know a  lot of the common weeds like, I mean nettles are fully welcome in my garden but white dead  
**[0:01:09-0:01:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-alice-bettany-from-sacred-seeds-herbal-project#t=0:01:09):**  nettles as well you know they provide amazing nectar for early nectar sources and yeah there's  so many medicinal weeds, there's so many medicinal flowers and I think also part of the education  could be to help people include more medicinals just in their everyday gardens and how to  use them because they really are beautiful and so colourful and you know massively useful  and quite safe you know herbal medicine is really safe for the masses as well generally speaking.  
**[0:01:47-0:01:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-alice-bettany-from-sacred-seeds-herbal-project#t=0:01:47):**  I'm Alice Bettany, I'm a herbalist and I run Sacred Seeds Herbal Project which mostly  encompasses the herbal box scheme which is loosely based or on a CSA but it's often  termed CSH, the community supported herbalism. It's a little bit of, yeah my inspiration  basically came from the States where there's loads of really successful projects out there  all across the States and in Canada and there hasn't been any successful projects in the  
**[0:02:17-0:02:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-alice-bettany-from-sacred-seeds-herbal-project#t=0:02:17):**  UK and at the moment I'm the only herbal box scheme that's running so it's, I guess I'm  just testing out that market for myself and really enjoying the creative process. Maybe  it would be good to talk a little bit about why and how you got into it, a little bit  about your background. So I probably came into it from really wanting to teach more  people about being self-sufficient with their medicine needs, with their health needs and  
**[0:02:46-0:02:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-alice-bettany-from-sacred-seeds-herbal-project#t=0:02:46):**  so I do lots of foraging workshops, teaching people how to forage for food and medicine.  We run a home herbal, home-ed herbal program with young children and I really appreciate  that. So the box scheme for me is all about education. So they get the ready-made products  but they also get all the information on how to recreate those products themselves again  at home, details about how to, details about all of the herbs that are involved, included  
**[0:03:16-0:03:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-alice-bettany-from-sacred-seeds-herbal-project#t=0:03:16):**  in those products, plant profiles, seeds for them to grow their own herbs at home as well.  So it's really about basically moving away from a dependent healthcare system to being  really independent, learning how to use the weeds that are growing underneath our feet  and learning how to be more self-sufficient which is bringing back the people's medicine,  herbal medicine to the people really is probably my passion and drive. And maybe you could  
**[0:03:44-0:03:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-alice-bettany-from-sacred-seeds-herbal-project#t=0:03:44):**  talk a little bit about like your situation, how you choose what to grow and what you found  to be most successful maybe.  I was probably going to say I'm really hit and miss actually. So I rely, I don't, I'm  not completely self-sufficient for my box, her box needs. I forage for quite a lot so  it also depends on the season and what's been done well in the hedgerows and so forth. I've  
**[0:04:09-0:04:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-alice-bettany-from-sacred-seeds-herbal-project#t=0:04:09):**  had a bit of a battle with mice eating lots of my roots that I've been growing. They love  chicory root and they also love the milk thistle seeds. And so there's been a few trial and  tribulations. Fortunately with herbal medicine, most of the herbs are perennial. So it's just  a case of getting them established, letting them grow and grow and grow and yeah, harvesting  them and coppicing them right. I mean the medicine cabinet goes, you know, there's not  
**[0:04:36-0:04:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-alice-bettany-from-sacred-seeds-herbal-project#t=0:04:36):**  so many annuals so it is a lot of perennials but it's also shrubs and trees. So it takes  quite a long time to establish my garden. So I'm still in the early stages really and  I supplement my needs from buying and from organic sources as well.  And in terms of like who to sell to, so you're doing the CSA scheme, but do you sell to other  people or how are you, yeah, how did you get started that way?  
**[0:04:59-0:05:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-alice-bettany-from-sacred-seeds-herbal-project#t=0:04:59):**  So I advertise, it's all been online advertisement and I have, I probably about 20, 30% of my  box subscribers are local and the rest are nationwide. So I ship all over the country,  which is brilliant and I'm able to do that because of technology and I have a Skype consultation  with them to make sure that all the medicines I send them are safe and not contraindicated  with any medicines or conditions that they might have. So yeah, the market, I guess no  
**[0:05:33-0:05:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-alice-bettany-from-sacred-seeds-herbal-project#t=0:05:33):**  one else is doing the box scheme so the market isn't as established as it is in the States  for instance. And to be honest, the general public is still catching up and still needs  to be better educated about what herbal medicine actually is. So there's the whole wider conversation  around how herbs can be implicated in your health.  So if someone wanted to start growing herbs tomorrow or say you have a farm with like  
**[0:06:00-0:06:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-alice-bettany-from-sacred-seeds-herbal-project#t=0:06:00):**  lots of different things going on, like what would your tips be to get started?  You need to know what soil you've got. Depending on herbs, we'll like different soils. Some  will like, some love clay, some love sandy, loamy. It kind of varies a lot. Wildflowers  really like the chalk, chalk down areas. You can recreate that of course as well if you  needed to. Generally my advice, I sometimes do a little bit of garden design of the garden  
**[0:06:28-0:06:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-alice-bettany-from-sacred-seeds-herbal-project#t=0:06:28):**  advice for people and I normally ask them what are their most common elements in the  household. And so quite often let's say respiratory issues come up really commonly. So I'll be  like, okay, is it coughs, is it colds, what is it? And then we'll plan their garden for  their household medical needs and then they can start using them straight away and they  can reap the benefits and they're not just going to be sort of planted and obscure herbs  
**[0:06:52-0:06:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-alice-bettany-from-sacred-seeds-herbal-project#t=0:06:52):**  they're not going to use very often. So yeah, it's more about individual needs.  And just getting out there and using the wild edges as well. You'll have all of the wild  weeds, the nettles, the dandelions, the ground ivy will all be available already no doubt  on your land as well. So it's, I guess a good starting point is really learning your plant  identification, learning about the wild weeds and starting to do some foraging of your own.  
**[0:07:21-0:07:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-alice-bettany-from-sacred-seeds-herbal-project#t=0:07:21):**  Obviously you're trialing a CSA model, which is great. And in terms of some of the UK market  organic herbs kind of issues that were brought up, are they issues for you? I mean, do you,  if you do expand, do you want to be selling to bigger market? Like what do you see going  forward are your issues?  Good question. The common denominator that most herb growers have is that big, it's the  
**[0:07:52-0:07:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-alice-bettany-from-sacred-seeds-herbal-project#t=0:07:52):**  big topic of the talk is the drying and the preservation of the herbs to do them in a  healthy pathogen way, pathogen free way. So yeah, you know, whether we need the steamer,  industrial steamer, whether we need like an industrial drying system, I have a lot of  problems with space and enough areas to dry my harvest. So it's a continual issue for  me really. I guess I need to maintain my market too. I need to be able to sell enough boxes  
**[0:08:27-0:08:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-alice-bettany-from-sacred-seeds-herbal-project#t=0:08:27):**  to make it worth my while. And the number's quite high. It's like above 35 boxes really  per quarter to make it worth my while financially. And that has to be sort of sustained. So people  can buy one off box or they can sign it for a year. So I need to continually be getting  new subscribers, which is a challenge. And I guess the general challenge around any grower  that's going to have an issue around pests and diseases and losses in that way. So I'm  
**[0:09:05-0:09:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-alice-bettany-from-sacred-seeds-herbal-project#t=0:09:05):**  still learning how to manage that organically and dealing with various insects. The market  value of medicinal herbs or herbs is really low in the UK. So that's, I guess, an issue  to address. I mean, with my business model for my herb box, essentially I don't get paid  for any of the work that I do in my garden. So I get paid for making the products, doing  all the written online information that they get and packaging it up and so forth. But  
**[0:09:41-0:09:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-alice-bettany-from-sacred-seeds-herbal-project#t=0:09:41):**  all the garden work is essentially my labor of love that I do. I would probably be doing  it anyway because it fulfills me on lots of levels. I am growing the herbs, not just for  my box scheme, but to make medicines for my dispensary. And it feeds into my business  in lots of other ways and the workshops that I do and so forth. So that's just how it is  for me. Hopefully within about five years time, my business model should tell me that  
**[0:10:09-0:10:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-alice-bettany-from-sacred-seeds-herbal-project#t=0:10:09):**  I should get paid for a bit more gardening time later on down the line. So it's just  that time of investment, labor of love and making it work. It's working for me at the  moment. So that's where I'm at.  Thank you.  