### Farmerama  (2018-27-19)
**[0:00:00-0:00:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-ex-fuedo-stallaini#t=0:00:00):**  So I can say without being shy that we are very lucky to live here.  And when I walk and I have this heaven of plants and my soul is, I can say, full of joy.  And I feel peaceful and full of love too, even if I'm alone.  When I came the first time, because it belonged to my husband, and at that time it was my fiancé, so I was very, very young.  I was about 18 the first time I came here.  
**[0:01:09-0:01:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-ex-fuedo-stallaini#t=0:01:09):**  And all these green, the new green, the plants, the herbal plants, some of them were always here.  Others we implanted from other areas all around and we took here.  Because where we are, it was an old limestone quarry and we started to plant even here all the plants which were scattered all around.  And all the guests appreciated it very much, all these kind smells.  And it's a discovery every day walking.  
**[0:01:56-0:02:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-ex-fuedo-stallaini#t=0:01:56):**  This is a lavender and my son just planted it, so I'm very linked to it.  And when I touch and I smell the perfume of lavender, it reminds of him.  And so it's something that feels me good.  I use it even inside and when I want to welcome my guests, even when I'm doing the cleaning up,  I just pass every cloth that I use on the furniture to keep the smell.  
**[0:02:34-0:02:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-ex-fuedo-stallaini#t=0:02:34):**  It's very intense and it gives me a healthy sensation.  My son just planted it when we started with the restoration of this place.  He's abroad now, but when he comes, the first thing he does is to cut the lavender to renew it.  And I'm a bit sorry when he cuts it because it's just as he cuts something of me.  You can find traces of the human being and of their presence.  
**[0:03:10-0:03:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-ex-fuedo-stallaini#t=0:03:10):**  If we pass now and we go to the Byzantine necropolis,  because people in that time, they escaped from the invasions,  so they found here a fertile area, rich of water, rich of plants, of course.  They discovered the use of these plants and surely they used them to take care of their body.  And now we have so many varieties thanks to these old ancestors that we have.  
**[0:03:50-0:03:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-ex-fuedo-stallaini#t=0:03:50):**  Now our blood flows the blood of all civilization, as you know from the history.  This is the trilobat sage because the domestic one has just one leaf.  This one is rich of essential oils and you can feel it.  Just when you pass near it and the wind just spreads the smell everywhere,  it remains longer than the domestic one.  
**[0:04:28-0:04:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-ex-fuedo-stallaini#t=0:04:28):**  And even after hours you have in your skin the essential oils remains.  It's very intense. We use it just for our meals,  so cooking lots of beautiful traditional dishes.  And you can use it even to whiten your teeth if you want or to make your breath better.  I love it because it spreads very easily.  
**[0:04:59-0:05:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-ex-fuedo-stallaini#t=0:04:59):**  It's just some seeds when it's windy, just a bit of some drops of rain.  And the birds of course help them to spread everywhere.  You are meant to do anything.  I call her she because I think that sage is a female entity, so like I am.  And she spreads everywhere.  
**[0:05:29-0:05:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-ex-fuedo-stallaini#t=0:05:29):**  Now if we walk we can find everywhere among all the other plants.  These are beautiful plants with flowers and they smell too.  That one for example is called baliko.  I don't know the translation in English.  It grows now in spring.  
**[0:05:53-0:06:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-ex-fuedo-stallaini#t=0:05:53):**  It started just with these flowers which can be white or red or violet.  It's very intense.  When it's full of flowers the smell is a perfume.  If you put inside, if it's too much, it's even too intense, it can give you just a headache.  So you feel dizzy because it's a very, very strong smell, perfume.  
**[0:06:29-0:06:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-ex-fuedo-stallaini#t=0:06:29):**  So, lavender again.  And rosemary.  Rosemary is another plant that you can find everywhere.  There are lots of varieties of rosemary.  So this is the period that has many, many flowers.  
**[0:06:48-0:06:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-ex-fuedo-stallaini#t=0:06:48):**  In spring you know it's every flower, how do you say, springs.  It's a beautiful season because there are all the colors of nature that you can imagine.  All the variations of violet, of blue, of gray.  Everything is so beautiful now.  Because it was raining a lot last month and the blossoms very, very quickly.  
**[0:07:24-0:07:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-ex-fuedo-stallaini#t=0:07:24):**  And earlier because usually we have the most of the flowers in May.  But they started very early this year.  So you're lucky to see all these colors as we are used to seeing in Sicily.  It's dry in some places but we live on a hill as you see.  And so Sicily is very big so you can find all the kind of climates.  
**[0:07:59-0:08:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-ex-fuedo-stallaini#t=0:07:59):**  If you pass from the eastern coast to the western coast it's completely different.  But everything, nature is different.  So colors are different, smells are different, people are different too.  Cooking is different of course.  And this area is rich of historical roots.  
**[0:08:48-0:08:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-ex-fuedo-stallaini#t=0:08:48):**  An ambientalist person, a man who knows all the varieties of plants,  he said that here we can find all the varieties of the Mediterranean coast  which can live in a wood for example.  Because of the different heights, different humidity.  Yes, the grade of humidity that you can find.  
**[0:09:17-0:09:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-ex-fuedo-stallaini#t=0:09:17):**  So we can pass from species which live in dry soil  and others which are used to stay in humid zones.  This one has a beautiful color and is a medical smell  because it's an antibiotic plant.  It's Artemisia.  
**[0:09:41-0:09:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-ex-fuedo-stallaini#t=0:09:41):**  For example it has lots of properties to take care of your body.  And it's used in Africa for example, they use it against malaria  because of its antibiotic properties as I said.  And the smell you can feel is like that one of medicine  or something that you can recognize easily it.  
**[0:10:11-0:10:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-ex-fuedo-stallaini#t=0:10:11):**  So now you are listening to our donkey that welcomes  when he feels or listens to some people who is talking even if we are far.  He recognizes a human voice and gives and he just says I'm here.  It's called Turi, that is a Sicilian nickname for Salvatore.  And very sweet and he likes caresses and so on.  
**[0:10:42-0:10:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-ex-fuedo-stallaini#t=0:10:42):**  He's a very special donkey because he belongs to a race which is an extinction  and he's a donkey from Monte Amiata.  Monte Amiata is a mountain place near Rome, between Toscana and Lazio.  When you plant it, at the beginning I planted it from another place nearby  but thanks to the wind and the condition of the soil that as I said is very fertile  
**[0:11:30-0:11:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-ex-fuedo-stallaini#t=0:11:30):**  now it's everywhere in this area and the color is gray and blue.  And when there is the distillation of the plant it becomes a beautiful cobalt color.  But it changes with the time but at the beginning it's really amazing.  My husband makes distillation of every herbal plants with the grapes too  and he has done a very good grappa with it, Artemisia grappa, among all the others that he has made.  
**[0:12:14-0:12:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-ex-fuedo-stallaini#t=0:12:14):**  If he finds a new herbal plant he tries to distill it too.  So at the moment we have a cart inside, an old cart which is full of bottles, full of grappas, different grappas  and at the end of each meal, diner, he offers to our friends, guests a variety of grappas  and they have to choose their favorite of course.  Maybe in the cart now, maybe there are 70.  
**[0:12:58-0:13:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-ex-fuedo-stallaini#t=0:12:58):**  My favorite is fennel grappa and there is even cinnamon.  The one that he has distilled is a cinnamon from Morocco that is more intense, much more intense  and the stick of cinnamon is very, very strong so he uses it to put even in the grappa a stick of it,  an old stick of it just to give much more intensity.  This is our dog, one of our dogs, his name is Sammy and the other they are, we found them just last year in March  
**[0:13:56-0:14:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-ex-fuedo-stallaini#t=0:13:56):**  and they are puppets, puppets and there were two brothers, Oscar and Sam, he heard us and he wants that we come nearer.  He likes plants too, wild plants, but he selects, so he always eats if he is in the field, but at the beginning  he thought he could eat everything and he loved every kind of glass, instead he just is very, very selective.  So I think that he selects because of the plants smell and so he is much better than us, he is much more precise in the selection.  You can go to Turi where you want to go, ok to Turi.  
**[0:14:50-0:14:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-ex-fuedo-stallaini#t=0:14:50):**  So now this is the beautiful ranch of Turi, yes, for him alone.  He has a beautiful house because where he lives is another, was another quarry which a bit, so they built, they started to work on it.  Oh this Turi, oh Turi, oh Turi, oh, oh, oh, he wants caresses, you see, when I caress him he stops.  I give him some plants, I don't know if he likes Nepetella, this is, so listen, this one is one of the other owners of this soil,  it's called Nepetella, you can find really in dry soils, smell.  
**[0:15:50-0:16:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-ex-fuedo-stallaini#t=0:15:50):**  So it's a wild mint, it's so intense and it has medical properties to lots of them and even Turi that is so, how can I say,  so he knows the good things, he appreciates it very much, now he is so happy and he starts to do just a run for you, just like a dancer,  yeah and the beautiful, so he likes you because he does so with children that he loves a lot and he starts running and doing circles  and you have seen he was smiling, he seems that he is smiling when we approached him, now he follows us, if we walk to that direction he comes back, try.  He is coming, so he has all this space just for him but we just take him just in the open air, he wants other caresses maybe,  
**[0:17:02-0:17:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-ex-fuedo-stallaini#t=0:17:02):**  he is saying you don't give me much attention please, he wants caresses and love, so sweet, look at his face,  he bends his neck because he wants to be caressed even on his neck, he is like a dog, he is not really a donkey, he is like a pet.  So the cows are coming on the narrow road and the dogs are barking at them, so because nearby there are farmers and they just have cows or goats  and they take them every morning on this road, so we share animals with the others we can say because sometimes they come inside.  So you see there are the farmers who follow like in the past, so they are going to use the same traditions and some of them come from other places  
**[0:18:26-0:18:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-ex-fuedo-stallaini#t=0:18:26):**  because they don't have so much grass, since here instead there is lots of food for cows, they took their cows all around the path.  Now we are going to the preservation field where we planted very very old plants who were here in this area even many centuries ago  and the University of Palermo and Catania studied these old plants who disappeared because the fruits that they gave were not so perfect  but now they want that everyone knows what the area could give as a present to humankind because it's not important the perfection of the shape  but the quality of the products and here we try to plant and take care of the plants in the traditional natural way  
**[0:19:47-0:20:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-ex-fuedo-stallaini#t=0:19:47):**  so to have biological fruit at the maximum, so without chemicals and such stuff of things which in a long time destroys the real properties of the plants  and makes humankind very... it's dangerous to use chemicals of course as all know but they've gone unfortunately to use that way  that is easier to have maybe beautiful fruit but not so healthy of course, so we are very proud of this project.  There is a religious atmosphere when they do this.  So here there are for each row you can have at each plant at the end we are going to have five varieties of the old species  
**[0:21:00-0:21:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-ex-fuedo-stallaini#t=0:21:00):**  so there are three pomegranates, cherries, plums, fags and the last ones are varieties of grapes  but nobody knows what's the taste of these plants because they, the university just saved the germoplasma of each plant that they found in the area  in a small field they found one, in another one they found another and just because they gave you the chance to have again these old plants  because they are sure that this was the area, the original area of them.  In each stone you can find fossils and so for example in the wood where there is the necropolis  
**[0:22:11-0:22:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-ex-fuedo-stallaini#t=0:22:11):**  there you really realize the geological heroes of this ancient place because you know when you live in a place you try to keep back  for example when I walk I'm a bit shy to say but I feel presence so I don't feel to be alone and I think to all the people who live here.  So usually I walk alone all around but you never feel alone here.  you  