### Farmerama  (2018-32-09)
**[0:00:00-0:00:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-jubilee-farm-political-economy#t=0:00:00):**  We're between episodes, but bringing you something a little extra this month. A short with our  friend Jonny Hanson from Jubilee Farm in Northern Ireland, with an introduction to political  economy in relation to food and farming.  In the sustainable food movement we often spend a lot of time thinking about what food  systems are based on. Are they based on soil or oil? Are they based on uniformity or diversity?  
**[0:00:33-0:00:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-jubilee-farm-political-economy#t=0:00:33):**  But the other axis on which food sustainability turns is how food systems are controlled.  Who wins? Who loses? Who benefits? Who has a seat at the table when decisions are made?  And in food sustainability we tend to call that concept food sovereignty. But food sovereignty  is part of a bigger body of knowledge and thinking and research called political economy.  And to delve into what political economy is I'm joined this month by Jon Barry who is  
**[0:01:02-0:01:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-jubilee-farm-political-economy#t=0:01:02):**  Professor of Green Political Economy at Queen's University Belfast.  So Jon, what is political economy and how does it relate to food and farming?  Political economy very simply is the issues of power of control over assets and resources.  And in particular it's bringing home to us that the economy is created politically, whether  it's a market-based economy or a centrally planned one, that we cannot separate out economics  
**[0:01:35-0:01:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-jubilee-farm-political-economy#t=0:01:35):**  from the political system. And therefore issues of how the government and its regulations  can favour or impinge corporations and so on are absolutely central to the understanding  of the conjoining of politics and economics. And that's what political economy is.  In relation to food and farming in particular?  Well obviously in relation to food and farming and our food system, political economy would  
**[0:02:02-0:02:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-jubilee-farm-political-economy#t=0:02:02):**  look at the structure of the global market in food, in particular commodities, the way  in which we have an increasing corporatisation at both ends of our food system in terms of  both production, in terms of large companies controlling fertilisers, our industrialised  model of farming is also a marketised and corporatised form of farming. But also then  at the retail end, how for example in the UK there are five major multiples in terms  
**[0:02:33-0:02:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-jubilee-farm-political-economy#t=0:02:33):**  of Tesco's and Sainsbury's who actually control our food system. And this has knock-on effects  in terms of the price these companies and corporations can pay to farmers, but also  the types of farming and the types of food we as consumers and citizens get is as a structure  of the way the political economy of food and agriculture is organised.  At Jubilee Farm our share offer which is raising just over £300,000 to set up Northern Ireland's  
**[0:03:01-0:03:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-jubilee-farm-political-economy#t=0:03:01):**  first community farm is an exercise in political economy because for the first time we're involving  people not only in the ownership of a farm here in Northern Ireland, but also through  our CSA scheme in the production and consumption of food, sharing the risks and the rewards  between people who eat food and people who produce food.  So John, based on your research and interests as an academic, can you give us any examples  
**[0:03:28-0:03:33](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-jubilee-farm-political-economy#t=0:03:28):**  of political economy and food and farming in action?  Well one I can give you, it's more of a movement which has had various impacts globally, is  La Via Campesina, a global movement of peasant based small farmers often in the global south  but also in the global north that is part of the food sovereignty movement and they  are certainly fighting against this corporatisation and privatisation of our food system.  
**[0:03:58-0:04:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-jubilee-farm-political-economy#t=0:03:58):**  And indeed you can look at many examples similar to what you're doing in Jubilee of going  outside simply the state and the market and seeing that the community is also a source  of power and obviously of interest in terms of ways in which we can reconfigure the ownership  of land, the use of land in terms of growing food, distributing food and so on.  And indeed to put it more romantically perhaps, the issue of a community based initiative  
**[0:04:28-0:04:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-jubilee-farm-political-economy#t=0:04:28):**  around food and agriculture is where the head, the hand and the heart actually come together  in a nice synergy.  And I think there are many such examples of community supported agriculture across Europe  and the world but for me one of the most inspiring ones is La Via Campesina.  Another less positive example of political economy in action recently in Northern Ireland  
**[0:04:52-0:04:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-jubilee-farm-political-economy#t=0:04:52):**  is a recent scandal over a renewable energy scheme and its abuse by various vested interests  including the factory chicken industry.  And the poultry company from Northern Ireland that had various awkward questions to answer  about that, its then Brazilian owner at the time was also facing awkward questions at  the same time about bribing the Brazilian presidents.  
**[0:05:16-0:05:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-jubilee-farm-political-economy#t=0:05:16):**  So in a globalised economy issues of political economy happen in Northern Ireland and right  across the world.  Which is why as the Good Book reminds us, the love of money is the root of all kinds  of evil.  Which is why at Jubilee our political economy is very simple and very profound and it's  
**[0:05:35-0:05:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/shorts-jubilee-farm-political-economy#t=0:05:35):**  this that markets and states should serve people and places and not the other way round.  