### Farmerama  (2020-37-08)
**[0:00:00-0:00:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:00:00):**  It was really, really early in the morning and it was still foggy. I sat there until  the fog lifted and then it was a really beautiful summer's morning. Just the simplicity. I felt  really humbled to be in that space. My head just felt like I come from maybe a long line  of women or that are around the world doing this. I felt a sense of connection. It made  me curious as to who else in my family or my lineage did this or how they feel about  
**[0:00:33-0:00:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:00:33):**  the land. I felt pretty small actually in comparison to a global farming community,  but it was quite instrumental in that keep going, just keep going because it will come.  Who Feeds Us from Farmerama Episode 5 Cultivating Abundance  In this episode, we visit one region, the West Midlands, to explore how the pandemic  has highlighted connections between the local and the global, the present and the past,  
**[0:01:14-0:01:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:01:14):**  and between food, health, community and identity. What can we learn from this time about the  experiences, the resources and the needs of individuals and communities in the UK, and  in particular communities of African descent? How can having access to land, to green space  and to growing space feed us in multiple ways, physical, emotional and spiritual?  Linda McFarlane is based in Handsworth in Birmingham. She's the founder of Vegan Vibes,  
**[0:01:53-0:01:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:01:53):**  a non-profit that runs plant-based pop-up restaurants and food workshops, as well as  local markets, known as Earth Markets. As Linda puts it, Vegan Vibes champions a cruelty-free  and creative way of living and communicating. I really do feel that Vegan Vibes is my little  contribution to justice. And when I say justice, I mean, I dream of a world where things like  poverty alongside extreme greed or waste is no longer a thing that is acceptable. I dream  
**[0:02:32-0:02:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:02:32):**  of a world where it's normal to be kind and to help people who need help the most. There's  no harm to living things. If I could contribute to that, maybe not in my lifetime, but set  a seed going forward, I would have done something to make my existence valuable or to leave  something behind. Vegan Vibes is really a plant-based approach to mental health and  to enterprise. It's something that I see as not just myself, but I would like to set footprints  
**[0:03:04-0:03:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:03:04):**  for others to follow in, as I am following in the footprints of others. It's all about  the vibration really, warmth, kindness, not being judgemental. These are conditions that  I think humans do well to grow in. Another element of the Vegan Vibes project is a community  allotment space called the Earth Garden. Linda's motivation for setting up the Earth Garden  was very personal. It was about much more than just the desire to grow food. I had in  
**[0:03:40-0:03:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:03:40):**  the past, due to circumstances, suffered with depression. For me, being in nature, being  in the garden, that's just where I vibrate. I started a sort of a gardening club with  some of my friends. We took on an allotment and unfortunately, due to work commitments  and so forth, it died off. But I kept going and I kept going with my children. But why  I did that is because I would have loved the opportunity to go to a space where I could  
**[0:04:14-0:04:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:04:14):**  putter around. I don't have to divulge any of my personal life, but I could actually  be there and I could either use it as a chance to reflect or to grow or to learn or to heal.  But I think in the spirit of kindness to myself, I love to share. And if I had wanted that,  there may be somebody who still would want it. If there's a go to space that's safe,  that we can work together and you can pop in and do as much or as little as you like,  
**[0:04:48-0:04:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:04:48):**  that would have been something that I think I would have enjoyed.  In early March, another West Midlands resident returned from a trip abroad and found himself  in a changed country.  My name's Andre Reed. I'm a designer, architectural designer based in Walsall, UK. When it came  to the lockdown, the initial lockdown, I was just coming back from Zimbabwe where there  
**[0:05:14-0:05:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:05:14):**  was no lockdown and where there was observing the UK from far. So when I came back, it was  a week before lockdown and what I found was just this really glum energy. You could feel  people retracting and trying to just arrange and organise food provision because we're  starting to see the food disappear from the supermarkets and even from the local corner  shops. It's around that time that I realised the situation was in many ways very serious.  
**[0:05:45-0:05:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:05:45):**  I was getting so much information, so much conflicting information that I didn't know  what to believe. At the same time, in my area, I was very angry when I saw the roads really,  really, really quiet, but there are just dozens and dozens of police vans almost patrolling  the streets. It had the fear factor and I've never, ever seen that before where even to  go for a walk, no, I don't know, am I going to get stopped? And then I decided, you know  
**[0:06:23-0:06:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:06:23):**  what, just stop, just stop and slow down. It was a wake up call for me actually because  I realised that I had so much. What happened for me in that period was I was grateful for  my life and I realised that a lot of things that I thought were important in the grand  scheme of things were not as important as I initially thought. I've got my life now.  How do I want to live? How do I choose to live with the life I've got?  
**[0:07:00-0:07:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:07:00):**  We went into lockdown and one of the first things that came to mind was like, how can  we grow fresh fruit and vegetables? And I'd done a bit of stuff on urban farming before  and got linked into a WhatsApp group and we all got talking about how we want to build  like a more sustainable space and a sustainable, I guess, local economy for us to access food.  So what we started to do was invite loads of different people into the group, people  
**[0:07:31-0:07:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:07:31):**  that had permaculture backgrounds, people that were just local people that really kind  of believed in this same mission of like, what can we do to become more sustainable,  to become more resilient as a wider kind of network slash community. And that's how the  urban farmers WhatsApp group was made, which is now, I think, approaching like 60 members  and is an array of just local people that really want to do good things with their neighbourhoods  
**[0:08:00-0:08:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:08:00):**  and see growing and food as central elements in that.  And Linda is one of those people. Andre first met Linda a few years ago when he attended  one of her pop up meals in Handsworth, featuring an affordable and locally sourced menu. One  of the reasons Linda serves and promotes plant based food is that it's inherently cheaper  and healthier.  
**[0:08:25-0:08:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:08:25):**  We loved it. We was amazed because it was really, really good and it was really, really  cheap and we couldn't understand how it was so good and how it was so cheap. We went and  asked for the chef and like asked, how did it start and what is this? And that's where  we met Linda. And Linda told us about all the great and amazing things she has planned  and the vision she has in terms of how important it is for the black community to have good  
**[0:08:54-0:09:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:08:54):**  food and have access to locally grown fresh food. Linda has this vision of how we can  take ownership and stewardship of green spaces and of growing spaces for the community and  to feed people in a really healthy way.  Vegan Vibes essentially will have 10 projects, but I'm just concentrating on three at the  moment. So when one part wasn't able to continue, we still were doing food for the elderly,  
**[0:09:24-0:09:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:09:24):**  food for the vulnerable and transporting it out there so people would have cooked vegan  meals. So the food element of it was still going ahead. The Earth Gardens project was  still going ahead. So that's been a blessing. It's still in progress, but it's a small  allotment space and it's a garden where we grow and it's not just growing vegetables.  It could be growing in self-confidence or growing in awareness or spirituality, whatever  
**[0:09:51-0:09:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:09:51):**  it is. But I want to make it really pretty. It's flowers, it's an opportunity to plant  something in memory of someone. And then the phase two element of it is growing more on  the produce side so we can feed some of the food back into our earth markets when we come  out of this social distancing situation. So we've got local food that is grown by local  people that we would like to keep as organic or as heritage in its seedage as possible  
**[0:10:27-0:10:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:10:27):**  so that people from all backgrounds can get access to. So it doesn't have to be so expensive,  they can't afford it. And hopefully if this model takes off, then we can really become  more self-sufficient, not just in the cultivation of food, but in the planting, in the distribution,  in the eating of it, so that we become more self-sufficient on a micro scale. And that's  to me the principle of the Earth Garden. So it's not just impacting mental health, but  
**[0:10:59-0:11:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:10:59):**  hopefully if I can provide employment in a small way, then I'm providing enterprise as  well.  Linda, Vegan Vibes and the Earth Garden are part of a long history of community growing  practices in the West Midlands. And it's particularly in times of crisis that these practices come  to the fore. Through a project called Digging Around, Birmingham-based sociologist Dr Lisa  
**[0:11:25-0:11:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:11:25):**  Palmer investigated and highlighted this history.  The idea was to look at sustainable practices in Birmingham from the past in a way that  it could inform the future. There was a lot of material there in the archives. It was  material that the city council had collected over a period of time, administrative documents  and local histories about green space. As the story unfolded, it turned out that Birmingham  
**[0:11:58-0:12:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:11:58):**  was like the allotment capital of the UK, which is not what you would have expected.  Allotments played a really pivotal role, both in the First World War, the interim war period,  the Second World War and the post-war period as well. And again, Birmingham is not a space  associated with necessarily green spaces, but it has a really strong history of caring  for its green spaces, of developing parks and allotments. Even if you go around the  
**[0:12:35-0:12:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:12:35):**  city, you'll see hanging baskets, containers that come alive during the spring, summer  months. It's got a history of competing for Britain in bloom and winning competitions  about that. So it's kind of this really strange sort of pride in its green heritage. And I  guess what I came across in terms of the growing practices is the way that the usage of land  will shift depending on the political context that we're in. But the archive project that  
**[0:13:08-0:13:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:13:08):**  I worked on called Digging Around highlighted was the way in which land becomes reused for  different things and how the government can reclaim a particular space, such as a park,  to do other things like to grow food in times of crisis. For example, the purpose of a park  was for leisure, but actually they repurposed that park during the time of crisis to grow  wheat because there was a shortage of wheat at particular points during the Second World  
**[0:13:38-0:13:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:13:38):**  War. And so the kind of contestation over land usage and what we can use the land and  who controls the land and who owns the land is always very, very political and actually  I think cuts to the core of some of our most urgent social problems. A lot of allotment  spaces were bequeathed to the city. They were given to the city by the land gentry of the  city. People who had access and ownership of land and saw it as part of their civic  
**[0:14:29-0:14:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:14:29):**  mission to perhaps share that land with local communities. And it's not just altruistic  or just for the greater good. I think there is perhaps an element of that, but it was  also linked much more broadly to developing an economically viable and healthy workforce  and allotments supported that. So you saw that with the way in which Cadbury's Bournville  Village was very much an example of a big global manufacturer of chocolate caring for  
**[0:15:03-0:15:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:15:03):**  its workforce in the UK. And I guess the question that I was constantly asking myself was what  were the limits of that social consciousness? And so for example, if we look at Cadbury's  in the growing of cocoa, what the archives demonstrated is that the same sort of care  for workers at Bournville was not demonstrated for the growers in West Africa. These disparities  in economics, disparities in workers rights, disparities of who deserves to be paid a particular  
**[0:15:41-0:15:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:15:41):**  wage and who doesn't. I think those questions of the past are still with us today. I think  they're very much part of the politics of this day. So I think there are ways in which  we can look at those sustainable practices and see that even if they're sustainable,  they still may have some problematic colonial inheritances, colonial kind of legacies, if  they think social media brings the kind of new forms of communication, but these conversations  
**[0:16:14-0:16:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:16:14):**  in a much more immediate, accessible domain. It gives me hope and it's also kind of a point  of despair is that in one sense, it gives you hope that these kind of conversations  that we're having hopefully shine a kind of focus on the importance of these kind of histories.  But also what they also do is point to the places where environmental injustices, unsustainable  practices have a huge impact on the lives of people of colour, black people in particular,  
**[0:16:50-0:16:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:16:50):**  and people who occupy vulnerable spaces in the world where land insecurity still remains  a huge issue. What this conversation does is allow other people to enter into that space  and to kind of bring their experts knowledge or their lived experience.  When I set this garden up, I felt that I wanted to open the space so that I could share. And  I was asked the question, so why don't you want it for yourself? Why don't you have it  
**[0:17:37-0:17:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:17:37):**  for yourself first, see how you feel and then open it up. But I never saw it like that.  I see my home garden as mine, but the space I saw where there's laughter, where there's  music, where there's different input. And I saw it as that and I still do see as that  and I'm going with that. When we talk about the community, I really wanted to focus on  women of African heritage. I see us as a group of people who are either unrepresented or underrepresented  
**[0:18:22-0:18:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:18:22):**  or misrepresented. And we have become almost a group of people that don't exist anymore.  So we don't advocate for much, we just put our heads down, get on with it. And lately  I've been hearing quite a lot of women that have passed and they've passed either tired,  angry, overworked, not have fulfilled their potential. And I really wanted to say, hey,  did you know that there's a space where you can come and rest, where you are seen, you  
**[0:19:00-0:19:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:19:00):**  are appreciated, you are heard. You can give something back or you can just be in this  really pretty space and I'll make you feel like a lady. I really want the African community  to get back to the land. I really want them to focus on eating well, to growing well,  or to understand principles of growing so that this can be translated abroad. So this  is basically a pilot so that we can really start seeing the benefits of this principle.  
**[0:19:39-0:19:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:19:39):**  And if I can share this principle with other people, then I'm hoping that it will really  take off. It's in our heritage that we grow, you know, get back to nature. Nature is healing,  it's wonderful, it's open to the elements, things that are actually indigenous to this  country that are actually healing for us. So yes, I do think that the African and Caribbean  or communities of African descent, being close to the land is very, very healing.  
**[0:20:13-0:20:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:20:13):**  Allotments are often used as spaces as a way for people to kind of help themselves to live  with mental health issues, whatever problems that those might be. And that is, again, that  is not new, that was apparent during the interwar years as well. Allotments were important for  people who were formerly part of the army and had returned back from war and who were  looking for work but were unemployed. And allotments were used as one way to kind of  
**[0:20:45-0:20:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:20:45):**  mitigate against mental health issues. So I think that idea of healing is really critical,  really important. And it has a lot of resonance for, I think, particularly for Caribbean communities  who have enjoyed an experience of growing back home, to have that experience of growing  in the UK.  So the ability to access allotments and other green spaces has a particular significance  
**[0:21:16-0:21:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:21:16):**  for the UK's black communities.  We're living through a global pandemic, but that pandemic is also related to, you know,  the pandemic of racism at the moment, the social injustice, the racialized forms of  injustice that have been brought to our attention. And I guess in that context, when we think  about black communities or black identities, particularly in urban spaces, they're associated  
**[0:21:44-0:21:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:21:44):**  with a struggle and they're also constructed in particular ways that depict black lives  and black people's lives as being one dimensional. What is beautiful about thinking about black  lives in a much more complicated space in terms of how they occupy green spaces in the  city, it gives a different insight into multiple layers of the black experience that are not  given any focus or attention.  
**[0:22:21-0:22:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:22:21):**  Lisa Palmer's work focusing on that historic piece of what happened with the African Caribbean  community coming from a place in the Isles in like Jamaica or Barbados or any of the  Caribbean Isles in which people came or people that have come directly from Africa and West  Africa or East Africa. These are spaces where people would step outside and throw seeds  on the ground and watch it grow. You know, we have a connection specifically with being  
**[0:22:51-0:22:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:22:51):**  able to have that freedom to grow food and to have that space to appreciate freshly grown  produce that you can constantly return to, not having to go to the shop, just growing  it on your doorstep, to an urban environment where everything is so systemised around retail  and purchasing goods rather than cultivating them that when we settled, we looked for these  opportunities in the allotments, that kind of rekindling of being at home and being able  
**[0:23:20-0:23:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:23:20):**  to have harvest and to share food and to share memories and to share experiences centred  around the cultivation of food and the sharing of it.  It gives you a kind of ownership over your plate. Obviously there's an aspect of eating  fresh food that's about nourishing your body and the immediacy of having something fresh  to eat that you don't have to go out and buy. I think there was also an element of enjoyment  
**[0:23:53-0:24:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:23:53):**  and pleasure. I do remember with relatives that used to visit friends on allotments or  relatives that had allotments, there was that sense of excitement and satisfaction that  they could pick their own callaloo, that they could pick their own country pepper, they  could watch their peas grow. Even my dad, you know, if I go around there, he'll show  me how well or not his callaloo is growing. Just satisfaction, satisfaction that you could  
**[0:24:25-0:24:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:24:25):**  grow something that you perhaps used to have in the Caribbean, but you can actually grow  it in either your back garden or your allotment plot in Hemsworth or Perryvale or wherever  your allotment might be. I actually don't have the space to grow anything anymore. I  recently moved. It did make me feel a little bit vulnerable about that in some ways, not  having access to the land and not being able to dig the land. That was quite strange to  
**[0:24:53-0:24:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:24:53):**  happen in a moment of crisis in this space and time that we're in at the moment during  COVID. I think for my dad, it may have had quite an important influence on what he wanted  to grow this year and the amount of what he wanted to grow. So I think most definitely  it does have an impact or is having an impact. For my dad, I think it's a space that he can  have some sense of control over in terms of where to go to, to kind of enjoy his growing  
**[0:25:26-0:25:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:25:26):**  practices, but also enjoy the foods that it produces as well. I kind of like the culture  that exists in the allotment spaces, the kind of ethics and practice of sharing, sharing  food and exchanging food. It's always exciting. It's always interesting, but it's also kind  of gives us an insight into a different way to live and to kind of be with each other.  It's not just about monetary exchange. It might be exchanging a pumpkin for a bunch  
**[0:26:12-0:26:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:26:12):**  of spinach or a chard or something. One of my very first experiences when I got to my  very first allotment plot was the generosity of some of the older gentlemen from all different  backgrounds coming over and sharing tips or even their tools with me. And not only sharing  that, but giving me seeds and helping me and instructing me. I'd love to be able to pass  down the love of growing to younger people. And certainly when I go to the plot, I've  
**[0:26:44-0:26:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:26:44):**  always tried to make it as safe and as accessible as possible so that all generations can be  there so that they can have that experience. And even if they don't take it up as readily  as I've done or other people have done, but they've had that experience that they may  draw on later on in their lives. So I want to make the love of growing a multi-generational  and intergenerational experience. There's just lots of space for new fresh energy coming  
**[0:27:14-0:27:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:27:14):**  in. It's really interesting that whenever someone  starts a community project now, we center it on food and growing. It's really interesting  that for a lot of us, our society is so focused around work and exchange, monetary exchange.  And when people think of community projects, they think of growing, cultivating, and sharing,  a sharing economy. And so there is something in how communities feel closer through access  
**[0:27:48-0:27:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:27:48):**  to land, through access to space, to cultivate and grow together, not just food, but to actually  grow as a community, those spaces to physically interact and to share and generate ideas about  what the world or what their neighborhoods could look like.  So how could we make these green spaces, spaces for growing, for resting, and for collectively  imagining, how could we make those spaces available to all communities, both here in  
**[0:28:19-0:28:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:28:19):**  the West Midlands and elsewhere? My belief is that we all have access to growing  space. It's not necessarily soil. It's wherever we are. I think it's a matter of being able  to easily access the tools to create, to transform any space into a growing space. So could there  be ways in which you could walk down the street and pick up all the tools you need? They could  be recycled. They could be repurposed. They could be shared, but from a neighbor, I don't  
**[0:28:49-0:28:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:28:49):**  know at this point in time. But some way of communities being able to access these sorts  of tools for free or for a very limited cost so that we can actually start to transform  our living spaces that aren't traditionally designed for growing into growing spaces and  also being able to go outside and look at all of the green spaces, the verges, all of  these green spaces that exist strictly for aesthetics or potentially sound breakers in  
**[0:29:22-0:29:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:29:22):**  the environment, can these also be seen as growing spaces? For me, it's a matter of perspective  and just acknowledging that there's an abundance of opportunities and things at our disposal  to make the world how we want it to be. Every other organism on the planet, bar humans,  except that food is everywhere. And it's just a matter of your perspective. If a street  has a green patch, it needs to be growing food. And if it doesn't, we need raised planters.  
**[0:29:53-0:29:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:29:53):**  And rather than have the councilmen come and waste a day's wage collecting them because  they're seen as unauthorized street furniture, pay someone to go around and actually cultivate  them and keep them healthy and keep them growing good quality food and saying, this is how  much food is here. When lockdown happened, it was just basically fulfilling the plot  brief, putting in the infrastructure, sowing seeds. Now we're at a time when there's great  
**[0:30:23-0:30:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:30:23):**  harvest, but initially there wasn't a lot going on at all, but now that there is. So  should we go through this again, then we've got the infrastructure already there to be  able to put things in. And what we will be doing in our phase two plot, as I did today,  is start preparing and start planting stuff for the winter. So should we be in the situation  again, we will have food, hopefully all year round, something at least, and being able  
**[0:30:56-0:31:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:30:56):**  to store things as well is quite important.  The change that I would like to see come out of this period going into the new year is  one where we're literally on the game. And when I say on the game, I mean, for a lot  of us, and I've had these conversations as well, we're going back to our parents and  our aunties and our uncles, and we're asking them the questions about how they cultivated  
**[0:31:23-0:31:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:31:23):**  and grew food. And we're starting to practice them and teach them to our kids. What I would  like to see in the future is that heritage and that legacy pulled into how we operate  and look at the future, but with an added twist of how we implement technology into  those rituals, those practices, how we implement architecture and create beautiful growing  spaces that are able to produce foods that we've not been able to see grown where we've  
**[0:31:53-0:32:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:31:53):**  settled for so long. And I'd like to see more of our youngest people appreciating that  process of cultivating food and growing spaces and just appreciating green spaces because  we're in the city all the time. I'd like to see more of those things happening in our  community. I feel like it's proven it's really good for our mental health and our wellbeing.  In my mind's eye, I would like women in different inner city areas to be able to come together  
**[0:32:25-0:32:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:32:25):**  in a space and have it not just as a place of cultivation, but have it as a space of  beauty. So put thought into it. And I am not in any way, shape or form a landscape gardener.  But what I would advocate is that alongside vegetation is beauty. So things that create  tranquility like water or roses or beautiful flowers, because we do work so hard and a  part of balance is as well as working hard, we also need to rest unapologetically. That  
**[0:33:04-0:33:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:33:04):**  is part of healing is to rest without feeling guilty. And if we can do it, I'd love to be  able to see other people that are doing it too.  As undeniably challenging as these past few months have been, what they've also revealed  is the resilience and the resources that already exist in communities in the West Midlands  and across the UK.  
**[0:33:31-0:33:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:33:31):**  I have seen people pull together. I think it's really encouraging that people have a  sense of community. I've been inspired by generosity. I've been inspired by people giving  selflessly. I've been blown away by the amount of ingenuity when people have thought of stuff  and just made it happen. Yeah, I've come away with a sense of slowing down and slowing down  and trusting the process for people who didn't know how they would cope, but they've coped  
**[0:34:10-0:34:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:34:10):**  seeing their surprise and their own strengths. This lockdown situation has been really challenging  for some people, but they've survived. They've survived despite them thinking that they couldn't  and it's taken them on a whole other trajectory. Although it's been hard, but I think a lot  of people have come away with being surprised at their own resilience. And I have really,  really loved that. And I've really appreciated that in seeing it and hopefully being a part  
**[0:34:45-0:34:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:34:45):**  of that.  What gives me hope is things like this, things that, my goodness, you've heard about. Wow,  it just started off as an idea and I made it happen and I'm doing it. So that gives  me hope. The future is emerging and the bigger picture is yet to come. That gets me out of  bed in the morning. So I do have a vision. It's beginning to unfold and yeah, I'm really  
**[0:35:22-0:35:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:35:22):**  optimistic. If you've heard about me, then that's really good. In going forward, what  really has been a central part of my life has been going back to the land as a therapist,  as a human being, as a woman. That was really me. And I think I've gone back to what I was  like when I was a young girl and even coming in today soaked. I'm like, this is so good.  I managed to have a hot drink and sit around a log fire. And to me, it doesn't get any  
**[0:36:04-0:36:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:36:04):**  better just being out in the elements. And for me, that's gone right to the top of how  I choose to live going forward. And I've come back absolutely buzzing. I did what I wanted  to do. I managed to plant, connect with people, touch the soil, open to the elements and yeah,  I'm actually really good. So this phase of existence has been instrumental for me because  now I'm choosing how I want to live the rest of my life.  
**[0:36:39-0:36:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:36:39):**  In the next and final episode of Who Feeds Us, we'll catch up with the people we've met  throughout the series and hear their visions for the future.  This episode of Who Feeds Us was produced by Damarque Williams, Joe Barrett, Abbey Rose  and me, Katie Revel. Thank you to Linda McFarlane, Dr Lisa Palmer and Andre Reed for sharing  their stories. Andre was also this episode's community collaborator, so thank you Andre  
**[0:37:15-0:37:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:37:15):**  for highlighting these voices and bringing them together. The project manager for Who  Feeds Us is Olivia Oldham. Our artwork is by Hannah Grace and original music for the  series is by Michael O'Neill. Our Patreon supporters help to make Farmerama possible.  We're really grateful to them and even the smallest contribution makes a big difference.  If you'd like to become a supporter, visit patreon.com forward slash Farmerama.  
**[0:37:43-0:37:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-5-cultivating-abundance#t=0:37:43):**  Who Feeds Us is possible thanks to the Farming the Future COVID Response Fund. We're very  grateful to the A-Team Foundation, the Roddick Foundation, 30 Percy and the Samworth Foundation  for providing the funds to make this project happen. Many thanks also to Farming the Future  advisor Dee Woods for her guidance in bringing the team together.  