### Farmerama  (2020-57-11)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:00:00):**  Of course, in January, nobody thought we were going to be where we are now.  Nobody thought we're going to be in sort of a national lockdown, or even international  lockdown come March.  We entered lockdown and realised that the restaurant was no longer going to support  the farm and we had to make some quick changes and work out a way to flip those roles on  
**[0:00:23-0:00:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:00:23):**  our head.  We literally shut down overnight.  I think for a while it was sort of stunned.  I still actually struggle to believe it tangibly or really what's just happened.  A lot of people were losing the breadwinner and were really struggling and coming to me  
**[0:00:45-0:00:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:00:45):**  and saying Ursula, I've got no food, I can't feed my kids.  There is a lot of grief that is on pause.  I've had people say to me, listen, Ursula, my husband left the house or my son left the  house in an ambulance.  So I could only speak to them on the phone through a nurse.  
**[0:01:04-0:01:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:01:04):**  And then the next thing I know, they're telling me that that coffin over there has my son  or has my husband in there.  I'm not accepting that because I didn't go through the rites or the rituals.  I didn't get to kiss him goodbye.  I didn't get to hold his hand.  
**[0:01:20-0:01:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:01:20):**  I didn't get to comb his hair.  Who Feeds Us? from Farmerama Episode 1 The Hungry Gap  This series is a chorus of voices from people across the British Isles, people on the land  and the seas, on allotments and city roofs.  The stories of farmers, growers, community leaders, healers, chefs, beekeepers, fishers  
**[0:01:57-0:01:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:01:57):**  and others.  This is Who Feeds Us?  As the COVID-19 lockdown hit the UK in early 2020, our nation suddenly looked very different.  Supermarket shelves were empty and for the first time in most people's lives, we started  to question how we were going to feed ourselves and our families.  
**[0:02:20-0:02:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:02:20):**  Almost overnight, localised food systems went from being niche fantasies to a vital source  of sustenance for many people around the country.  One thing this pandemic has made clear is that food doesn't come from supermarket shelves.  It never did.  Food comes from the soil, the sea and the hands of people.  
**[0:02:44-0:02:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:02:44):**  In this series, we hear from those people.  People who stepped up back in March to feed the nation, who are still feeding us today  and who we're all relying on to feed us in the future.  This is a celebration of these key workers, a thank you and a call to action so we don't  forget just how key they are.  
**[0:03:11-0:03:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:03:11):**  I'm Katie Ravel, one of the producers of Farmorama.  There's something else I'd like you to know about this series.  It's the result of contributions from a huge number of different people, 23 in total.  We worked with six audio producers as well as six community collaborators from across  the UK.  
**[0:03:32-0:03:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:03:32):**  These community collaborators highlighted stories from within their communities and  it's these stories that we'll be sharing with you throughout the series.  You'll also find a collection of additional stories on our blog.  We've taken this approach because we want you to hear stories from the ground, literally  and figuratively.  
**[0:03:50-0:03:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:03:50):**  Amidst the dramatic headlines and apocalyptic news footage, as we all stockpiled flour and  tinned tomatoes, what was really happening on our farms and market gardens, in our dairies  and bakeries, in our food banks and community kitchens?  Who are the people who baked that loaf of bread, delivered that milk and harvested those  vegetables?  
**[0:04:14-0:04:19](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:04:14):**  In the words of one of our community collaborators, Highlands-based farmer Carl Gordon,  Food is something that connects everyone more than just about anything else.  Everyone has to eat.  Getting to know someone you get your food from is really a massive part of hopefully  what's come out of this.  
**[0:04:33-0:04:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:04:33):**  And I think there's a lot of people who maybe have done that for possibly the first time.  They felt that the farmer has become something or the food producers sort of returned to  being something that is important within a community, as opposed to someone who just  does something that gets put in the back of a truck and off it goes somewhere else.  By getting to know our food producers, we can make a big difference in terms of what  
**[0:05:01-0:05:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:05:01):**  everywhere looks like because you're looking at somewhere as opposed to anywhere.  In this first episode, we'll hear four stories from four very different corners of the food  system.  From people supplying high-end restaurants to people on the front lines of emergency  food provision.  
**[0:05:20-0:05:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:05:20):**  They've all been profoundly affected by the crisis and they've all responded in creative  ways to sustain themselves and their communities.  In this episode, they share their experience of the crisis so far.  We'll be meeting each of them again in the final episode to hear their visions for the  future.  
**[0:05:43-0:05:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:05:43):**  We begin with a farmer and a chef who have an especially close partnership.  My name is Jane Scotta.  I am a biodynamic farmer at my farm called Fernborough, which is in Herefordshire, which  is on the Welsh-English border in the West of England.  I grow vegetables, fruit and flowers for Sky's Restaurant Spring in London and have been  
**[0:06:07-0:06:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:06:07):**  doing that for the past six years.  I'm Sky Gingell and I'm, I guess people call me a chef, but I feel much more comfortable  with the word cook and I have a restaurant in London called Spring and I also work, as  does Jane actually, with a hotel in Hampshire that also, Jane's in the process of converting  to a biodynamic farm, so we work on that project together as well.  
**[0:06:36-0:06:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:06:36):**  Well, I've been taking my produce to London for quite a long time before I met Sky.  I was selling at Borough Market and then at Morby Street and I think perhaps Sky had visited,  knew about the vegetables and just out of the blue she wrote to me one day, this was  probably in about June 2015, that she was opening a restaurant in October of that year  and she was looking for a farm to work with and would we be interested and it was exactly  
**[0:07:07-0:07:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:07:07):**  what we had in mind.  I sort of, yeah, it fell out of the sky really, it's lovely.  It was 2014, Jane.  Was it?  Yeah, yeah, it's our sixth year working together, we're coming to the end of our sixth year.  
**[0:07:21-0:07:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:07:21):**  I'd always sort of known about these kind of relationships that certain restaurants  had with farms, like a really intimate, very personal relationship.  It's kind of like a marriage and over the years we've had a few disagreements because  there was so much to iron out, especially in the beginning and you know, we had to learn  to trust each other, didn't we?  
**[0:07:40-0:07:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:07:40):**  I make money and I'm able to do it in the way that I want to do it, by working with  Sky.  I mean, I know I've said this before to you Jane and I genuinely mean this, I don't think  I could work without Jane any longer and I don't really know where her work finishes  and mine begins.  
**[0:07:58-0:08:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:07:58):**  There's absolutely as much, and sometimes a lot more actually, of Jane's work on that  plate than there is mine.  I'm very inspired by seeing the plates because they're doing exactly what I would like to  have done with the food that I grow.  Often I taste something and then it's like a memory and then I search for that for later  
**[0:08:22-0:08:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:08:22):**  and I think with just growing it I knew I'd find that.  I mean, certainly did with potatoes, you know, I remember tasting potatoes as a child and  I really liked them and then just my early adult life, never finding anything that would  ever taste like that again.  It was the will and the wanting to get it right and appreciating the variety and the  
**[0:08:44-0:08:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:08:44):**  richness that it brings.  It's always felt really right being in a kitchen and being around food.  I mean, I think I love it probably more now than I did in the beginning.  It's been something that I've never tired of and actually I think our relationship is  so lovely because it really has opened up a whole new kind of vista for me actually  
**[0:09:07-0:09:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:09:07):**  and way of cooking which has kind of completely re-inspired me in the last few years.  Spontaneity as well of the seasons, you know.  It's the pure beauty of the whole thing, it's just completely mesmerising.  For me I always know that Skye always has my interests at heart and when I'm growing  food or harvesting that then that's how I feel about picking it and making sure it's  
**[0:09:39-0:09:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:09:39):**  the best I can do for her so that her business thrives and we can always do this.  Yeah we've got each other's backs that's for sure.  Definitely.  And then coronavirus hit and virtually overnight the UK's restaurant industry shut down.  I think it was March the 14th that we closed.  
**[0:10:02-0:10:07](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:10:02):**  I think that was the day if I'm correct that you know Boris Johnson made that statement  where nobody go to clubs, pubs, restaurants anymore but he hadn't actually officially  closed them down and I think from the moment that that happened it was really obvious that  you could no longer continue you know to run and open the restaurant and so we literally  shut down within two days of that happening and then I think for a while it was sort of  
**[0:10:31-0:10:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:10:31):**  stunned like it wasn't it I mean it was just like you know I think the comprehension of  what was happening was just I still actually struggle to believe it tangibly or really  what's just happened I was incredibly aware of all the people that also it's not just  us and you know the kind of 58 people that worked at the spring it was also Jane and  the farm and so we kind of reinvented ourselves very quickly didn't we Jane and we opened  
**[0:11:00-0:11:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:11:00):**  a shop.  Yeah within a week made a website.  Yeah made a Shopify account, sold Jane's veg boxes, learnt to pack boxes, learnt to do  deliveries and then and at the same time we added you know stuff that spring does all  our breads the butters we make, liqueurs, jams, cordials and we're actually still doing  
**[0:11:22-0:11:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:11:22):**  that so we've been doing that for six months now.  But lockdown came into effect just as the UK was entering its least plentiful growing  season.  I was doing a little box scheme sort of with the overflow of produce myself anyway before  but then suddenly it went absolutely mad and you know it was a bad time really it was a  
**[0:11:42-0:11:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:11:42):**  time that we had very little so we were really scratching around and we sold out of everything  within five weeks I suppose.  Then of course you know that season had ended and everything was going into the ground but  wasn't big enough yet so we had about a five-week slot where there was very very little to sell  you know if it had happened in July we'd have you know been laughing but so that that sort  
**[0:12:08-0:12:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:12:08):**  of you know stopped us in our tracks a bit.  When the coronavirus came and people really wanted fruit and veg it was also in what's  known as the hunger gap it was a time that there is little and then and also getting  people to try and understand they go I really like your box of fruit and vegetables but  actually I really would like to see a potato or this or that and you go okay well if you  
**[0:12:31-0:12:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:12:31):**  want to eat seasonally and you want to buy locally they aren't here.  People think of spring and they think oh my gosh the winter's over and the winter's actually  a very deep and rich kind of tapestry of I it's one of my favorite seasons actually I  have to say I in fact I think it is my favorite growing season because I love what comes and  the flavors that come from the winter are so kind of nutty and sweet and crinkly and  
**[0:13:00-0:13:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:13:00):**  irony and like delicious but um but I think people see spring and they go oh god there  must be loads of stuff and actually spring is probably the most fallow time of the whole  year isn't it's when you clear the land and replant.  Nothing will come until the middle of June it has to grow.  I feel like people wanted to make a connection make some sense of something real they probably  
**[0:13:26-0:13:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:13:26):**  thought that they really had time to cook because life had stopped in a different way.  And they're treating themselves a bit too weren't they at the beginning I think people  are buying lots of nice things to cheer themselves up yeah.  We really noticed that people were buying so many cakes and we saw this cookie dough  like we couldn't make enough cookie dough and jams and ice buns and biscuits and cordials  
**[0:13:52-0:13:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:13:52):**  and ice creams we just couldn't make enough ice cream really.  Can I can I be really dreadful I've got a pan on and I think it might be burning.  We'll hear more about how Skye and Jane have adapted as well as their thoughts on the future  of our food system later in the series.  Angus Buchanan-Smith grew up in Scotland on his family's dairy farm.  
**[0:14:23-0:14:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:14:23):**  He trained as a graphic designer before returning to the farm five years ago.  We're a little farm based just outside Edinburgh in Scotland.  We're set at the foot of the Pentland Hills so I'm in the office right now but looking  across the farm we've got about it's actually 400 acres of grassland here and we're only  actively farming about 10 acres roughly.  
**[0:14:50-0:14:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:14:50):**  For the last about 100 years my family has been based on this on this ground and it's  always traditionally been dairying because of the weather here and because the altitude  we grow really good grass but unfortunately the turn of the century there was a bit of  a bit of a dairy crisis and my parents just weren't able to make it stack up and it was  unfortunately shortly before they had invested largely in a new milking parlour.  
**[0:15:17-0:15:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:15:17):**  For many years they're really unsure about what else should happen here and they ummed  and arred and they had a lot of debt to look after and they were just kind of concerned  about what was going to happen and that's that's kind of when me and my brother and  actually some really good friends stepped in and we were like wait a minute surely there's  something else we can do here to preserve the farm and give it a new lease of life.  
**[0:15:40-0:15:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:15:40):**  Once we started talking about the possibility of actually taking over and having a bit more  responsibility it all started to line up and make sense and yeah just really thrilled to  still be here today and to see the farm you know it's running in a very different way  but to still to still be here and you know and there's a legacy there that I feel very  proud to be part of.  
**[0:16:06-0:16:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:16:06):**  Back in 2015 myself my brother and a few friends identified there was basically another dairy  crisis and we thought what can we do to basically help some of these farmers that were struggling.  So long story short we travelled in the UK hosting dinners on farms and the idea was  to generate more awareness about the importance of supporting local small-scale farmers primarily  dairy farmers but whilst doing this we realised that it wasn't just the dairy farmers that  
**[0:16:34-0:16:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:16:34):**  were struggling that they were basically all farmers small-scale across the board were  struggling in different ways.  So we came back to the farm and set up a way to host dinners from the farm and spread the  same message.  Angus and his friends set up The Free Company, a project that's grown from a seasonal farm  
**[0:16:52-0:16:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:16:52):**  to table restaurant to include a community supported agriculture scheme or a veg club  and soon a centre for rural learning.  So that's basically what we did we did a very minimal renovation on one of the old barns  here created this beautiful dining room with these guys and started started cooking these  meals and it was we knew that we could grow a certain amount of food ourselves so we've  
**[0:17:14-0:17:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:17:14):**  always had the garden that supported the restaurant.  It basically allowed us to pop up for a short period of time generate a whole lot of buzz  about what we were doing about the seasonality of produce at that time get people in and  then tell the story about the produce where it's come from how it's grown and also highlight  other other suppliers and local farmers that we're working with.  
**[0:17:36-0:17:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:17:36):**  So much of the food that we grow it all goes straight into the restaurant and the way it  works is our guests can arrive and they can walk around the garden and we'll serve them  some little snacks or canapes and they can see exactly where everything's coming from  and then when they sit down in the dining room we basically walk through each individual  course and talk about why we're so excited to be supporting a cheese supplier from the  
**[0:17:58-0:18:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:17:58):**  west coast and getting our butter from somewhere else or whatever it may be and it's basically  creating a narrative and sharing the stories and sharing the important knowledge that's  kind of rooted in where our food comes from.  Back in March we had received just under 3,000 reservations for the restaurant and although  we are a restaurant based on a farm for the last four years it has been the restaurant  
**[0:18:33-0:18:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:18:33):**  that has supported the farm and the creation of the restaurant that has kept everything  afloat here so when we entered lockdown and realized that the restaurant was no longer  gonna support the farm in that way we had to make some quick changes and work out a  way to flip those roles on their head and work out a way for the farm to support the  restaurant.  
**[0:18:54-0:18:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:18:54):**  With the restaurant forced to close Angus and the Free Company team shifted their focus  to growing for wholesale and their veg club.  And so luckily being back in March and going into the spring and the warm weather we were  able to pivot and basically upscale the garden.  We basically upscaled our production as much as we possibly could with the team that we  
**[0:19:14-0:19:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:19:14):**  had on board at that time in an effort to basically create a lifeline for us to get  through the summer and we're now looking at you know making sure this lifeline continues  right through the winter until next year.  We'll hear more about how the Free Company's been impacted by the crisis and Angus' response  to it in the final episode of Who Feeds Us.  
**[0:19:34-0:19:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:19:34):**  Like many of the people featured in this series Angus doesn't believe the pandemic has caused  our food system to become dysfunctional but it has heightened amplified and focused attention  on existing problems.  I would argue that our conventional supply chains are failing us.  The fact that there are so few organic farmers out there is very problematic.  
**[0:19:56-0:20:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:19:56):**  The fact that we have okay yeah we have we have choice we can buy vegetables from all  over the world at any one point whenever we like but actually we don't have choice for  what's actually grown at our own doorstep.  It's very hard to go into a conventional supermarket and say I want to buy stuff that's actually  grown within a 10 mile radius.  
**[0:20:13-0:20:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:20:13):**  It's impossible.  Convenience has driven the food chain to be where it is today.  Price and convenience.  So that's something that's a very tall order to compete against in the way that supermarkets  are currently supplying food is extremely convenient at a very affordable price.  
**[0:20:31-0:20:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:20:31):**  The current global supply system is great at delivering food in a way that appears to  be convenient and cheap at least if all you're looking at is the till receipt.  But what the pandemic has made clear is that it's a system that doesn't offer resilience  in the face of crisis.  Can we afford to be reliant on a system based on long tenuous global supply chains and just  
**[0:20:54-0:21:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:20:54):**  in time delivery on a system that lacks the flexibility to respond or adapt to unexpected  events.  As consumers as eaters we've grown further and further away from the people the places  and the natural systems that produce our food.  Even like 25 50 years ago almost everyone had a connection to a farm in one way or another  
**[0:21:17-0:21:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:21:17):**  you know whether it was a great uncle or a grandfather or whatever they used to live  on a farm.  I think that almost everyone had some kind of connection you know they would go there  on their summer holidays or they would hear about their father going to you know do hay  harvest or whatever I think I think that very much was the way of life in the UK for a long  
**[0:21:36-0:21:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:21:36):**  time and until recently I think we've just recently arrived at the point where so many  people just do not have any kind of connection to a farm.  I think that there is just a there is a divide there is a massive divide between people's  understandings of farms and foods and where their food comes from.  Reconnecting with where our food comes from means forging stronger ties not just with  
**[0:22:04-0:22:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:22:04):**  farmers and other food producers but also with the land itself and with the plants and  animals that keep us fed and healthy and that includes insects.  Salma and Khalil Atan are beekeepers in East London.  Their interest in beekeeping was sparked by a situation that will be familiar to many  of us.  
**[0:22:24-0:22:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:22:24):**  Khalil used to have really bad hay fever and most of the summer it would be sort of a dripping  nose and you know swollen eyes and just looked like he'd been crying all the time.  It would be so bad that you know I couldn't go out of the house some days it was you know  debilitating almost for a day.  We found out that oh local honey might actually be helpful it might be one of these things  
**[0:22:50-0:22:56](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:22:50):**  that helps towards hay fever and this was about 12-13 years ago we're talking about  so we were looking for local honey.  It was actually quite difficult to get a hold of in our area it wasn't an easy item to find.  So they took matters into their own hands.  They trained as beekeepers and took on a hive.  
**[0:23:11-0:23:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:23:11):**  And now I hardly have to take anything at all.  You know we have honey day in day out.  I have it in my tea, I have it in my coffee, we have it every single day you know at least  a couple of times a day and I'm sure it's helped me.  Local honey because it's not finely filtered it still contains all the goodness of you  
**[0:23:31-0:23:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:23:31):**  know raw honey and it has all local pollen in there as well.  So if it's the local pollen from the trees and the flowers which is causing your problem  then there's a possibility that it will help you and it's helped me.  Salma and Khalil have experienced the many advantages that come with short transparent  supply chains.  
**[0:23:50-0:23:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:23:50):**  They're in total control of how their bees are cared for and that influences the quality  of their honey.  In 2011 the bees became part of the community at the East London Mosque.  At the time we were actually looking for another site to keep our bees.  So we were looking for another apiary site and we just thought let's just ask.  
**[0:24:12-0:24:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:24:12):**  We didn't know what they would say, we didn't have any expectations and it took them a little  while to get back to us.  They must have had some interesting conversations I think about that.  Yeah I mean we found out afterwards they had a few committee meetings about it and you  know they were really for it.  
**[0:24:27-0:24:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:24:27):**  They were really pleased with the idea, they really liked the idea of having bees on the  roof.  I think a couple of the committee members really really loved honey as well so I think  that helped but they were very very supportive from the word go and that was in 2011.  We had one colony there and now on the roof we have at the moment eight, seven.  
**[0:24:49-0:24:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:24:49):**  We've got seven on the roof and we have four in a purpose-built observation area as well.  Because we've expanded so much now and we have so many hives and we get so much excess  honey, you know we came up with the idea that okay why don't you set up a business and you  know try to sell some honey, make it available to the local community, you know let them  share in some of the goodness of local raw honey as well.  
**[0:25:12-0:25:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:25:12):**  Just as Salma and Khalil were launching their business, Bushwood Bees, the coronavirus crisis  hit.  Of course in January nobody thought we were going to be where we are now, nobody thought  we're going to be in sort of a national lockdown or even international lockdown.  At that time as beekeepers we had special dispensation so we actually had you know official  
**[0:25:35-0:25:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:25:35):**  emails from government bodies saying as beekeepers you can and should go and look after your  bees.  It's wild stock, it's animals at the end of the day that you're going to look after.  It was actually quite a relief to be honest, it was like you know when everyone else is  stuck indoors we're actually allowed to go out beekeeping.  
**[0:25:52-0:25:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:25:52):**  I mean at the time to be honest in March I don't think anybody expected the lockdown  to last so long.  I think at the beginning of Covid like most people we just thought it will probably last  a few weeks and then everything will get back to normal and here we are six months later.  We've definitely had to make some very swift changes to the way that people pick up honey  
**[0:26:14-0:26:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:26:14):**  for example so it's been a sudden learning experience I would say.  We've had to learn how to do online sales quite a lot, we've had to set up our online  shop quite quickly, we'd have to arrange it so that people would collect bags of honey  from the door so we'd have to you know okay what time are you coming we'll leave your  bag at the doorstep.  
**[0:26:35-0:26:39](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:26:35):**  Which was odd because up until then people loved to have a little chat on the doorstep  and you know we loved to talk about where the honey came from and there were always  lots of questions and this was quite clinical but at the same time I think a lot of our  local community and a lot of our newer customers that we gained actually appreciated the fact  that we were trying our best and you know we are in the middle of a pandemic safety  
**[0:27:01-0:27:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:27:01):**  is obviously paramount and I think a lot of our customers did appreciate the fact that  we were making the effort to make collection as safe as possible.  But lockdown did have some benefits, not least for the bees.  The one thing that we specifically noticed is even in our local area that every year  at a certain time of the year and usually unfortunately at the wrong time of the year  
**[0:27:34-0:27:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:27:34):**  we'd get you know the local councils and people like that coming down and cutting the trees  down so you know how they've got this thing about pollarding the trees at certain times  of the year is to keep them small and usually they do that when the trees are at a stage  where it's most beneficial to the insects so they don't unfortunately take account of  what the best time is for the pollinators out there it's just what works for the schedule  
**[0:27:59-0:28:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:27:59):**  that we have but this year what's happened is because a lot of people haven't been able  to get out and do the work that they need to one positive part of that is a lot of the  trees haven't been cut down a lot of the grassland has have been allowed to grow wild and nature  has flourished you know you're getting insects now which you probably haven't seen in a long  time which are coming back to certain parts of the country as well so you know if you  
**[0:28:24-0:28:29](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:28:24):**  look at it from an insect point of view it's actually been very good for them the amount  of nectar coming in especially at the early part of the year was significantly more than  we would get in other in other years you know there's obviously other factors to take into  account you know the year started off nice and warm we had a good amount of rain but  even looking at similar years we've had in the past it's actually been a really good  
**[0:28:48-0:28:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:28:48):**  year and I think a lot of that is to do with the fact that you know because people haven't  been out so much and they haven't been tearing down and making everything so nice and neat  out there it's actually been really good for the environment I think we've had some a far  larger number of weeds out there which pollinators love and that's that's had a real benefit  for the pollinators as well I've certainly noticed more butterflies far more different  
**[0:29:14-0:29:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:29:14):**  types of pollinators out there that you wouldn't normally see in your average summer because  of lockdown people have been allowed to go out for one walk a day so they are really  they were really taking advantage of that one walk a day so they were I think people  were appreciating their green spaces a lot more and I think when you appreciate your  green space you start to think about what you can do to help that green space I think  
**[0:29:39-0:29:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:29:39):**  people have consciously been planting more pollinator friendly flowers shrubs trees etc  as well you know something has changed for the benefit of the bees.  For people running small food businesses like Sky and Jane Angus and Salma and Khalil the  pandemic has presented huge challenges.  They've adapted in inventive ways to keep their businesses afloat and continue serving  
**[0:30:14-0:30:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:30:14):**  their communities but many people have faced a far more fundamental challenge simply getting  enough to eat.  The pandemic has heightened an already urgent crisis in access to food.  In Sheffield one project sought to address this crisis by feeding people in multiple  ways.  
**[0:30:35-0:30:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:30:35):**  Just a heads up this interview includes brief references to suicide and abuse.  My name is Ursula, Ursula Mairi and I am the Managing Director for ADIRA which is a survivor  led mental health and well-being service that supports black people with mental health issues.  We are a bridge between the black community and predominantly white mental health services.  I set up ADIRA to become that kind of beacon in the black community where people could  
**[0:31:06-0:31:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:31:06):**  go for all those things services that were culturally competent sensitive and appropriate  and led by people who look like them.  People say oh mental health has increased because of Covid, nonsense.  Mental health was there before Covid, pain and trauma and death was there before Covid.  Covid has just exasperated it.  
**[0:31:32-0:31:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:31:32):**  When Covid hit a lot of people were losing the breadwinner in the family and were really  struggling and coming to me and saying Ursula I've got no food, I can't feed my kids and  I knew that I didn't even waste my breath saying or referring them to food banks because  I knew they would not go to a food bank.  One because the people there are all white and two because the food is just not culturally  
**[0:31:55-0:31:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:31:55):**  appropriate for us.  I've known white people who have said look you know I'd rather die than go to a food  bank simply because of the connotations attached to those two words, food bank.  Because food banks were started mainly to support people on very low income or on benefits.  What black people there is that sense of because we have this statement in the black community  
**[0:32:21-0:32:25](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:32:21):**  about you know you've got to be this strong black man, you've got to be this strong black  woman, maintain that image at any cost.  Never let the white man see you needing help or wanting help and especially having to go  to him for help.  So to be seen there is an embarrassment.  
**[0:32:40-0:32:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:32:40):**  So Ursula coined the term food pharmacy.  You know when you have a child and the child is ill and they won't take the medicine so  you wrap it in a sweet and give it to them.  That's where the word food pharmacy because I knew if I called it a food bank no self-respecting  black person would come.  
**[0:32:59-0:33:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:32:59):**  First part of it what we did was we had cooked meals.  So we had cooked chicken, rice and peas, plantain, fried fish.  The people who couldn't come out because they were shielding or self-isolating or were elderly  knew that okay then the food that's going to be coming from the food pharmacy is food  that I eat because even something as simple as that can really affect a person's mental  
**[0:33:21-0:33:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:33:21):**  health.  You know it's not a case of oh god if you're that hungry you'll just eat.  No it just doesn't work like that and especially for our elderly their body system is so used  to a certain food it's like suddenly giving a person who's been a vegan for 30 years meat.  You can mess up that person's system by doing something like that.  
**[0:33:41-0:33:44](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:33:41):**  So it's just not that black and white.  Even though the food pharmacy was for the black community it was open to anybody.  Anybody who wanted you know food and one of the cooked meals was for a Lithuanian family  who had been referred to us and they were so lovely god because they took the food it  was cooked and it was rice and peas and chicken and you know the father called us and he said  
**[0:34:04-0:34:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:34:04):**  look you know thank you so much for the food but please don't deliver any more here because  we just can't eat it.  We don't my kids don't like the texture they don't like the taste they don't like the  flavours and I got so emotional because I completely understood absolutely completely understood  why he and his family struggled with Jamaican food you know but I think for statutory services  
**[0:34:30-0:34:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:34:30):**  it's just this is what we've got take it and if you don't then you're not really struggling  then are you which is just not helpful.  As Ursula says having access to culturally appropriate food is not a luxury.  It's not about being fussy or ungrateful.  Quite apart from the fact that being forced to suddenly radically change your diet is  
**[0:34:52-0:34:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:34:52):**  physically disruptive it's mentally degrading as well.  Culturally appropriate provision is about dignity and it's about understanding that  physical health mental health and identity are intimately connected.  In total over that time period for during Covid we fed over 4,000 people that's just  going on by individual food parcels that didn't include because Adyra became a feeder the  
**[0:35:19-0:35:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:35:19):**  food pharmacy sorry became a feeder for other organisations so for example we fed two refuges  and a halfway house for ex-offenders.  That for me was my favourite part of running the food pharmacy because I was the one who  initially reached out to the refuges because I used to be in a refuge 16 years ago and  the refuge that I first reached out to was the one I was in 16 years ago and it was a  
**[0:35:48-0:35:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:35:48):**  refuge where I was moved from London to Sheffield by police and social services and I basically  had a breakdown and didn't want to live anymore and the staff sitting there for two hours  trying to talk me down.  I was in so much pain mentally and emotionally and psychologically I felt like an awful mother  and I'd let my kids down and you know I lost everything and in that moment I couldn't see  
**[0:36:13-0:36:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:36:13):**  16 minutes ahead.  If somebody had said to me just you know focus on the next 16 minutes I couldn't I just was  in the second in the second literally so to be able to go back 16 years later and be able  to feed women who are now there who are now in that refuge who are now in that very very  dark place where I was 16 years ago.  
**[0:36:39-0:36:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:36:39):**  Oh it just means so so much to me.  The thing that was beautiful was the first day I went there some of the staff who were  there 16 years ago are still there so you can imagine the tears that day and what made  it hard was that it was bloody corona so we couldn't hug or anything and that was just  like no because we just wanted to hug each other.  
**[0:37:08-0:37:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:37:08):**  I just wanted to hug those women because they saved my life 16 years ago and to hear them  say you know we know about Adaira we've heard about Adaira we've been following your progress  since you left the refuge we are so proud of you we're so proud of what you've achieved  you survived suicide and abuse and all this and you've not thought well okay I've made  it through off I go and live my best life you've chosen to come back and get other women  
**[0:37:36-0:37:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:37:36):**  who are now in that position and help them through what you went through so oh god the  tears that day oh how we cried.  The first hall we were renting was one of my old churches you know black churches everybody  in the church can cook so when we we put the call out and said look you know we're planning  to set up this food pharmacy and we need some cooks oh there was no shortage there was no  
**[0:38:03-0:38:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:38:03):**  shortage what I love about the black communities we teach our men and our boys to cook so it  wasn't just women in the kitchen it was it was men as well that came and did the actual  cooking and that was all from the church all the cooks were from that church.  We'd have volunteer drivers who would come who were who were white and they used to say  you know coming there every Friday was like walking into a party because you know we'd  
**[0:38:29-0:38:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:38:29):**  have our African music playing or our Jamaican music playing and the volunteers would be  young volunteers are all black could be dancing and you know we have such a laugh and it's  genuine it's not fake it's not because we're trying no it's genuine you know when I go  there to collect the food we are doing dance-offs oh god yeah and to see some of these white  people dance god help me oh jesus and then when they're dancing with my volunteers it's  
**[0:38:57-0:39:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:38:57):**  just like no no no no no that please don't please stop you know it's just a real relationship  that I build up with these people so the food pharmacy in terms of been a success was absolutely  brilliant and definitely needed for the black community.  The food pharmacy was an amazing response to the immediate crisis but as we'll hear  later in the series Ursula expects that many of those the pharmacy served will need ongoing  
**[0:39:29-0:39:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:39:29):**  support to access food.  For the last decade food bank use in the UK has risen every year.  From 2019 to 2020 the Trussell Trust an NGO that supports over half of the UK's estimated  2,000 food banks they supplied 1.9 million emergency food parcels that's 74% more than  five years ago.  
**[0:39:57-0:40:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:39:57):**  This year the situation has got dramatically worse.  In April 2020 food banks reported their busiest month on record.  So how can we ensure that everyone has access to food and not just any food nutritious and  culturally appropriate food?  This is a question we'll come back to throughout the series.  
**[0:40:19-0:40:24](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:40:19):**  The idea of dignity is something that's often absent from discussions about our food system.  It feels like a distraction maybe an optional extra a nice to have but dignity has to be  at the heart of our efforts to create a functioning healthy resilient food system a system that  really does serve everyone.  That means the dignity of all the people in that system the farmers the farm workers the  
**[0:40:45-0:40:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:40:45):**  chefs the processors and you and me the people eating the food and it means the dignity of  the other beings in the system as well the animals and the plants.  As we'll hear throughout the series food is not just a question of calories.  Food is nourishment for the body and soul.  Food is about community culture and our relationship with each other and with the earth.  
**[0:41:11-0:41:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:41:11):**  We are all part of the food system.  In the next episode of Who Feeds Us we'll meet a dairy farmer in Northern Ireland a  halal butcher in Wales and a fishmonger in Shetland.  This episode of Who Feeds Us was produced by Suzy McCarthy with executive producers  Joe Barrett, Abby Rose and me Katie Revel.  
**[0:41:37-0:41:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:41:37):**  The episode also featured an interview by producer Luvchit Dhaliwal.  Thank you to everyone we heard from.  Paul Gordon, Jane Scotter, Skye Gindel, Angus Buchanan-Smith, Salma and Khalil Atan and  Ursula Myrie.  The community collaborators for this episode were Kathy St Germans and Zane Dada.  
**[0:41:58-0:42:02](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:41:58):**  The project manager for Who Feeds Us is Olivia Oldham.  Our artwork is by Hannah Grace and the original music for the series is by Michael O'Neill.  Who Feeds Us is possible thanks to the Farming the Future Covid Response Fund.  We're very grateful to the A-Team Foundation, the Roddick Foundation, 30 Percy and the Samworth  Foundation for providing the funds to make this project happen.  
**[0:42:23-0:42:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-the-hungry-gap#t=0:42:23):**  Many thanks also to Farming the Future advisor Dee Woods for her guidance in bringing the  team together.  