### Farmerama  (2020-08-18)
**[0:00:00-0:00:15](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:00:00):**  Who Feeds Us? From Farmerama Episode 2 Land. Animal. Journey.  This series is a chorus of voices from people across the British Isles, people on the land  and the seas, on allotments and city roofs, the stories of farmers, growers, community  leaders, healers, chefs, beekeepers, fishers and others. This is Who Feeds Us.  We often hear that animal products are unsustainable. In reality though, it's often the way these  
**[0:00:44-0:00:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:00:44):**  products are produced that's unsustainable. A system that, for example, requires dairy  farmers to pour their milk down the drain in a crisis, rather than selling it to their  communities is clearly not a system that's focused on nourishing people or planet. So  who are the farmers, fishers, cheese makers and butchers who are finding new ways to connect  with their customers, their communities and their animals? And how could we all benefit  
**[0:01:10-0:01:17](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:01:10):**  from knowing more about how our cows are raised, our meat is slaughtered and our fish is caught?  In this episode, we hear from a fishmonger in the Shetland Isles and a farmer in Wales  who provides organic halal meat to customers across the UK. We learn how the pandemic has  impacted their work and their relationships with the people they serve.  But we begin in County Armagh, Northern Ireland, at the start of September, with a visit to  
**[0:01:38-0:01:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:01:38):**  the dairy farm and cheese making business run by Dean Wright.  And you can see another small cottage in the background, which is Mudwall Cottage that  dates back to 1600s. Now we lived in that cottage until I was 10. And that would have  been the original house that was bought in 1820 with two or three acres of land on this  building. Our local town has a small population of around 25,000 people. It's not a very  
**[0:02:04-0:02:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:02:04):**  big place in terms of you know, some of the other places in the UK and Ireland, but nice  place to live and nice place to grow up. So I'm truly thankful for what we had as children  and young adults. There was no central heating in that house and it stayed naturally warm  because the walls are three feet thick. Warm in the winter, naturally cool in the summer.  I think that's total sustainability for you. I'm Dean Wright and I'm the founder member  
**[0:02:30-0:02:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:02:30):**  of Ballyless Dairies Ltd here in Portadown, County Armagh, Northern Ireland. Is there  a way of talking to people I suppose? I was born into a farming family. We had a small  family farm. I undoubtedly worked in the meat trade, in the red meat industry for a number  of years. But I suppose as life went on, I would like to do something for myself as I  had a family. I'm the youngest of four sons and I farm the farm and that's basically where  
**[0:02:56-0:03:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:02:56):**  our milk comes from for the cheese plant. The milk doesn't have far to go. Just a couple  of miles down the road that runs alongside the 200 acre family farm to a small industrial  estate where the Ballylisc cheese is made. I'm 47 now. I look back over the years. There's  four generations of the farm that I remember. My own parents, my grandparents, my great  grandparents and then my two daughters. So I can remember actually five generations on  
**[0:03:29-0:03:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:03:29):**  this farm. Who's going to be the sixth generation? I have no idea. No, my daughters are the next  generation. I would never discourage them but I'm not encouraging them to farm. Who  knows? Time will tell that one. So let's go in and we'll see what's happening in here.  In their original pre-pandemic vision of this year, Dean and his colleague Chloe were looking  to continue production of their trademark triple rose white mulled cheese, which they  
**[0:03:58-0:04:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:03:58):**  describe as decadent, as well as developing new varieties at the plant.  The filter there, heat, hot water, water storage, cold water storage, water treatment and everything  else happens up here. The business has been going quite a few years now but we have been  trading for approximately 27, 28 months. We did a lot of research and development work  on how we were going to structure our business, what did we want to bring to the marketplace.  
**[0:04:25-0:04:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:04:25):**  Those were all the things that we did actually before we constructed the plant. So what happens  here is this is the main production room of the cheese. The pasteuriser directly places  the milk into the cheese vats. The milk is cultured, turned into cheese, curds and whey.  Then it's moulded off into these moulds as you can see on the table and then it will  go on to the next phase which will be salted on day two and then it will go into a ripening  
**[0:04:54-0:04:59](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:04:54):**  room at a specific temperature, specific humidity and it stays there for a period of weeks.  We'll move on there next. We catered for food service which was predominantly the hospitality  industry, you know the high end hotels, high end delis, restaurants, that type of things.  Now lockdown came, they didn't have a choice, it wasn't their choice to close their businesses.  It was forced upon them and forced upon the nation. It probably was one of the worst business  
**[0:05:20-0:05:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:05:20):**  days for us as food producers. We lost approximately 70% of our business within 24 hours. Phones  were ringing, if the orders weren't dispatched, do not dispatch it and I don't want any more  product. We are now closing etc etc. It went on. So lose 70% of your business within a  24 hour period is quite harrowing. We're now in the ripening room where the cheese enters  the ripening room on day two. This temperature that we're in at the moment is absolutely  
**[0:05:50-0:05:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:05:50):**  perfect for mould growth. We're going to look at some cheese actually which is on day four  which actually hasn't developed this mould just yet. At day six you will see that nice  cream colour will actually turn into a very, it will be like mist in the morning on day,  late day five, early day six. By early day seven it will be totally white. So there's  a very quick transition once the mould starts to grow. Basically the mould is a protective  
**[0:06:17-0:06:22](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:06:17):**  layer on the outside of the cheese and also that mould actually helps to break down the  milk and turns those curds into, gives them a taste profile, how smooth, how chalky they  are. I would say we were seven days from closure in terms of young business has no natural  reserves. I think that was the key driver. What do we need to do to survive the storm?  We are now in the warm part of the factory. We're sitting here probably plus one. We're  
**[0:06:46-0:06:51](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:06:46):**  in the dispatch chill where you can see all the finished product wrapped and labelled  with our logo ready to go and it's held at one degree here. When you sleep with one eye  open you get very good inspirational ideas. You know, think and think and think and keep  thinking outside the box. What resources have we to play with? What resources are we good  at making? The big challenge for me was the consumer can't get to the shop so the obvious  
**[0:07:22-0:07:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:07:22):**  idea was take it to the consumer. That was a very good starting point. Then what are  we going to take to the consumer? What does the consumer use every day? The consumer uses  milk. Where do we have milk? We have milk on the farm. You know, we had the processing  equipment for the cheese plant here. It wasn't a big transition. Chloe and myself probably  did some of the longest and hardest week we did in terms of seven days. You're talking  
**[0:07:45-0:07:50](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:07:45):**  about 20 hours a day but to turn a concept into reality within five to six days I think  it was a relatively good performance. We refocused, we regrouped and within approximately four  to five days we basically put a doorstep delivery of liquid milk in the local area within a  few hours. As well as the milk from his dairy herd, Dean and his team invited a range of  other local artisan producers to add their products to the delivery service, creating  
**[0:08:17-0:08:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:08:17):**  a new network of producers who had a market again. Then we skimmed whole milk and also  double cream and whipping cream. Tonight's deliveries are sitting there ready already.  We will be able to do our doorstep deliveries tonight at approximately six o'clock.  We're going to need 30 salmon and truffles. So how...  Well I've got 12 at North Clontien. That's 30 cows, you need five more? Right.  
**[0:08:56-0:09:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:08:56):**  We're going to do a door to doorstep milk delivery service in the evening time so your  workload then starts again from sort of five o'clock to ten, eleven o'clock, whatever time  that goes on to. So it's not... lockdown changed our working day quite a lot. We were just  making cheese so sort of we could plan our day quite simply but now you can't plan for  the way other people are thinking. I don't think anybody anticipated what came  
**[0:09:25-0:09:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:09:25):**  down the track at us in March of this year. And I suppose I have a saying for that, you  know, we can't change the direction of the wind but we can adjust the sails.  We brought all our products in not only for the consumer but also in support of those  local producers that were in the same position as ourselves that maybe lost a lot of their  business but didn't have the avenue or the conduit to take it to the consumer. So we  
**[0:09:56-0:10:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:09:56):**  thought why don't we help the other businesses and also provide good quality high end foods  to the customer base that we have taking milk. Why should they not get fresh strawberries,  bacon, bread, apple juice? And these things are all made locally by good business colleagues  and friends that we have here. So why would we not all got together and try to help each  other and I think that's what it was. It was about helping each other as well as taking  
**[0:10:22-0:10:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:10:22):**  another good quality food to the consumer.  Us being in direct contact with the end user who is the consumer, this is a very nice place  to be. We need to react to their needs. What do they want to eat? What is the new foods?  I think this is a really fun part of this business.  We have had probably about 500% growth year on year.  
**[0:11:00-0:11:01](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:11:00):**  Gosh! I'm not surprised.  And London has done very well. The Queen eats this every week.  She does not.  She does, yeah.  For goodness sake!  
**[0:11:08-0:11:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:11:08):**  So Portland and Mason will probably be our biggest customer.  Blimey, that's brilliant to say.  So how long have you been going?  Two years.  Two years?  
**[0:11:13-0:11:14](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:11:13):**  Good.  It's all good.  Oh yes, brilliant. And I love Robert on the hill there. He's a great man for bringing  new stuff.  I would say he's probably, on a pro-rata basis, one of our best customers. But how nice is  
**[0:11:30-0:11:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:11:30):**  that on him, our local grocer?  I know, that's right. But you know, it takes people to bring something new. People are  looking for decent quality.  I am very proud of the people who do eat our food on a daily basis. Our closest neighbours,  people within 10 mile radius, people within Northern Ireland, Southern Ireland, Europe,  
**[0:11:50-0:11:55](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:11:50):**  UK, the Queen, whoever it may be. Every customer is a valued customer.  Absolutely brilliant. We'll get through that in no time.  Some more-ish.  Make sure and tamper it well before you eat it.  Oh right.  
**[0:12:05-0:12:06](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:12:05):**  Is this boy out of the bath?  Yes. He was a bad dog and rolled with something not very good.  These are some of the really nice moments that you get in business. Dear Mr Dean Wright,  both my wife and I want to thank you and your colleagues for giving us something wonderful  in the midst of the pandemic. We bought a round of your Bellyless Triple Rose cheese  
**[0:12:26-0:12:32](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:12:26):**  and it is truly wonderful. We have travelled throughout France and Italy and your cheese  is as good, if not better, than we have ever eaten on our adventures. Thank you so much  for creating another great memory as we finish our round of cheese with crusty bread, a good  red wine over the next few days. Stay safe.  What an amazing bit of post to open for somebody to take the time. Those are the really inspiring  
**[0:12:56-0:13:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:12:56):**  things of the journey that people can actually go to a shop, buy a card and take the time  to write it and put a stamp on it and take it to a post box.  I take a lot of pleasure when I'm feeding people, cooking for them, talking about food,  saying like this chicken was doing this, was eating this and this is why it tastes like  that. Flavours, taste is such a big expression of the diversity and in my opinion the bounty  
**[0:13:34-0:13:38](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:13:34):**  of creation.  My name is Mohsen Hassanin. I am a farmer in South Wales who has an interest in regenerative  agriculture and permaculture and being proactive in the fight for food sovereignty. It's my  life's work really.  Mohsen lives with his family at an old farm in the Welsh valleys.  
**[0:13:59-0:14:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:13:59):**  Tirwen Vach Farm or otherwise known as Tirwen Farm. I've just practised saying that name  only, that's it, I don't speak Welsh or anything you know. There are a few different translations  but I think it means small yew house. So like that's the little farm with the yew tree but  I renamed it Harmony Farm just to make it easy.  He moved to Wales from London where he'd spent a decade in the fundraising business.  
**[0:14:23-0:14:28](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:14:23):**  It was a cushy job and it was really easy and I got paid a nice amount of money to not  do too much stressful work but I got comfortable.  Over those years his growing interest in nutrition and health, in the slow food movement and  permaculture practices began to take up more and more of his time.  That's all I read and all I looked on YouTube like in my lunch time I'll be just looking  
**[0:14:46-0:14:49](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:14:46):**  at farms and stuff and I thought this is what I want to do, this is it.  The countryside was beckoning.  We've had over 300 people come up to the farm since we opened up for like unofficial visitors,  you know friends and family. So yes there is encouragement from our community.  Mohsen lives with his wife and four children and they eat the farm's produce. He's fascinated  
**[0:15:08-0:15:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:15:08):**  by the overlaps between regenerative methods of producing food and the insights of his  Islamic faith.  This idea of permaculture fitted perfectly because it's the ethics, the element of the  ethics inside permaculture so fair share and people care. That it just completely superimposed  perfectly onto our philosophy of what we were, you know our spiritual goals. It's very closely  
**[0:15:31-0:15:36](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:15:31):**  linked to the Sufi understanding of Islam. Within that is a big thing about service to  the community and transforming yourself through service.  This lady from our community went out to Australia and she said something so powerful she came  back and she said I went all the way to Australia to realise that turning off a tap is not about  saving water. And you know something that just sticks in your head forever and what  
**[0:15:55-0:16:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:15:55):**  that was is that it's about being proactive. It's not about a result, it's about being  proactive kind of thing. That was how permaculture was introduced to me and then my teacher specifically  my spiritual teacher was very encouraging of it.  Mohsen is one of the business partners running Abraham's, a butcher and retailer of high  welfare organic halal meat and poultry. They have a strong customer base across the country.  
**[0:16:19-0:16:23](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:16:19):**  But the arrival of the pandemic brought uncertainty.  We had no inclination of which way it was going to go. We caught on when the orders  came in thick and fast and that was it. We were like this is going to be mad. You know  when people say Christmas come early that kind of implies that you're excited and happy  but when Christmas comes we're scared. We're worried about business, we're worried about  
**[0:16:41-0:16:46](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:16:41):**  you know pushing it too far, making sure that the staff are you know resourced properly.  Actually Christmas came early with COVID but it shocked us as well. It was just flat out  for three months and we had like Christmas week every week for like three months. It  just was just nuts. We had people waiting three weeks for meat and stuff. So quite difficult  to manage but at the same time we realised that there's a lot more customers out there  
**[0:17:07-0:17:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:17:07):**  that want to interact with this. I think sometimes it was an availability issue like I had people  asking me look I can't find meat. There's no meat in the halal shop and they're trying  to charge, they're just profiteering so I might as well just buy from you because you've  kept your prices the same but it's cheaper than what these profiteering people are doing  or in my area. So we had a lot of that. We had like you know hundreds of more customers  
**[0:17:30-0:17:34](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:17:30):**  come on board on the website. You know lots of people buying, trying and so on and so  forth. So I reckon we increased business you know maybe a hundred percent for that time,  maybe even 200 percent but at the same time we weren't ready for that. The Coria network  broke down because of the pressure that they were under. There was so much logistics in  it and it's all about not running before you can walk.  
**[0:17:51-0:17:57](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:17:51):**  Asalamu alaikum everyone. My business partner contacted me yesterday and asked me to shoot  a little video to kind of maybe deal with some of the worry and the fear that a lot  of customers have expressed. I did a video, a small video, it's called Corona situation  and it was just like put out in the newsletter to just give people reassurance that we're  not going to raise our prices, we're going to get your meat to you, the meat is out there,  
**[0:18:14-0:18:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:18:14):**  we've got access to it. I think we got a lot of customers from that. He said to the farmers  look we're going to pay you you know what you want and they had respect for us and they  said we're not going to raise our prices just because we can. So we had this relationship  with them. We've limited our chickens on the website now you can buy three I think that's  the amount that can buy because people are panic buying basically and we had to stop  
**[0:18:40-0:18:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:18:40):**  that because it's not fair. We can't hoard. We've seen a lot of people asking questions  that they weren't asking before and I think this is indicative of the broader situation  where people have been interacting with farmers more. I think that the statistic that I read  was that 8 million people bought directly from farms during Covid. There was definitely  an explicit awakening and I had text messages after text messages, phone calls after phone  
**[0:19:09-0:19:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:19:09):**  calls of people asking me these questions and what I saw from friends who I've been  friends with a long time they started to think where is my food coming from. Even though  I've been plugging it to them and talking to them for ages they started to really ask  that question how food is flying all over the place just to get to us like how much  they depend on Spain for example for fruits and vegetables. This really kind of clicked  
**[0:19:36-0:19:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:19:36):**  with a lot of people I think and the Muslim community you know one of the whole things  about choosing the faith of Islam or being brought up in the faith of Islam is the idea  of justice like you cannot have this exploitation going on and I think that kind of opened up  people's eyes.  The American poet and farmer Gary Snyder writes about the interconnectedness and interdependence  
**[0:20:02-0:20:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:20:02):**  of the food chain as being a kind of big potlatch we're all members of. He adds to acknowledge  that each of us at the table will eventually be part of the meal is not just being realistic,  it is allowing the sacred to enter and accepting the sacramental aspect of our shaky, temporary,  personal being.  This growing consciousness around food that Mohsen identifies, it seems to be about being  
**[0:20:35-0:20:41](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:20:35):**  present and aware, being reverent and grateful. These are central tenets of the idea of halal  meat. As well as farming, Mohsen works part time as a halal slaughterman in a local abattoir.  I walk into the slaughterhouse, I tell them I'm here, they then make a break in the line,  which is basically a wash down and a clean up and a get ready for halal. I then slaughter  the birds the exact same way as the last person has, which is basically a stun bath and then  
**[0:21:06-0:21:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:21:06):**  a bleed out, FSA certified, no issues whatsoever, there's no difference. The only difference  is that I'm conscious of it, I'm conscious of God and I make that intention when I'm  slaughtered. So for my community, they want someone who is Muslim to kill their animals  for them and be conscious of that. And that's what halal is in its kind of loosest terms.  I've taken over from someone and I could smell alcohol in his breath, this is like  
**[0:21:30-0:21:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:21:30):**  four o'clock in the morning or five o'clock in the morning. And then I've just probed  and questioned in a very gentle way and he's actually expressed to me that he suffers from  this and he needs to drink to cope with it. And I don't need to do that. Okay, yes, I'm  not there full time. But the reality is that I'm serving my community and that transcends  that effect that killing multiple animals will have on the spirit. So that's one side  
**[0:22:00-0:22:04](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:22:00):**  of it. The second thing is, it's actually a duty within the Islamic tradition. And one  of the most strong sayings of the Prophet is if you slaughter, slaughter well, make  sure you sharpen your knife. And this hadith or saying of the Prophet is about implementation  of Ihsan or perfection in your actions. This idea that every single action, you have to  do it perfectly on this earth. And that's what your purpose is. So it drives this mindfulness  
**[0:22:25-0:22:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:22:25):**  and purposefulness of what you're doing. So when I approach the animal, especially on  farm on farm, I've many times tears have come into my eyes, but I've also understood how  important it is what I'm doing. This animal has to be killed in the right way. And I'm  the right man for the job. You know, I've even read an article about a vegan slaughter  woman, irrespective of religion, but she's purpose driven. She said, I don't eat animals,  
**[0:22:49-0:22:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:22:49):**  but I know I'm very good at killing them quickly. So I should be the person who does it, you  know, being the person who's in a conscious state. This is reverence in itself. And then  you take on the next level where you're actually praising God. So you're being grateful at  that time. So the phrase that is said is Bismillah wa Allahu Akbar. And Bismillah means in the  name of God and Allahu Akbar means great. And what you do is you elevate the animal  
**[0:23:17-0:23:21](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:23:17):**  and you then elevate yourself and your spirit to deal with that harsh reality of taking  life. I've killed a cow on my own farm. And I cried very big tears when I killed her on  this farm. And my son had to actually console me. Like he had to say, you know, and he went  through that. And he when he described the event the other day, and it was like it was  a photographic memory. He literally didn't miss a detail. It was amazing. He was seven  
**[0:23:40-0:23:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:23:40):**  years old. Blood was I was, you know, blood was pouring on my knees and I was crying next  to this cow. That for me is what is missing from our understanding of our connection with  meat. I took so much pride feeding a family the other day where I said that fat has been  rendered from an animal that has lived five minutes away. And that's what we're using  to cook with. I didn't have to fly in any oil from any country. I didn't have to process  
**[0:24:11-0:24:16](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:24:11):**  any oil to localize the food to be close to your food. This is the only way forward if  you want to live that conscious way, I think, because you're going to get stuck in the global  system and COVID has exposed that. 100 years ago, you knew the guy who killed the cow,  you knew the farmer, but now it's like packaged up and sent to you. This idea of Ta'ib, previously  when the scholars looked at it, it was talking about how you knew the person who grew the  
**[0:24:38-0:24:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:24:38):**  wheat so you can understand that the bread was coming from a conscious place. But that  doesn't even exist now. Embedded in that is dignity, because it's about that person being  given the dignity to work, the dignity to express himself in his work. He's given a  fair price. I think dignity and justice are completely embedded anyway, because people's  dignity will not be given unless there is justice. You don't just take because someone  
**[0:25:03-0:25:08](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:25:03):**  says to you is good. Yeah, make your own stuff, make your own creams, make your own beauty  products. I even made my own raw milk baby formula for my twins. Like take charge of  yourself. You cannot just be a consumer, you've got to produce. You've got to be a creator  rather than a consumer. My favourite time of year I think is possibly  spring and early summer. Crops are planted, grass is growing, things are changing, you're  
**[0:25:33-0:25:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:25:33):**  coming out of the doldrums of the winter. How does food get to the table? What happens  to your food before it arrives on the shelf of any deli counter? How many decisions have  got to be made before that food gets there? Now here's us, we're checking the weather  on an hourly basis. Well I watched Dorothy last night and it gives Sunday quite a good  day. It goes to Sunday Chloe. Yeah it gives Sunday quite a good day. On Monday. No it  
**[0:26:01-0:26:05](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:26:01):**  doesn't give Monday a good day. There's a 50% chance of rain at 10 o'clock on Monday  morning but either we mow the grass tomorrow on Sunday and lift it on Monday and Tuesday  and I say to Christopher would he lift a bit of it? And we lift a half of it and he lifts  a half of it. We need three dry days in a row without rain because the aspect of what  we're trying to do is cut this grass and let it naturally dry so to concentrate the sugars  
**[0:26:25-0:26:30](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:26:25):**  in the grass without putting natural water into the pit of grass because what you're  doing is actually diluting the sugar content. I foresee this being a hard few days. I don't  think there'll be much sleep had in the next three to four days. I think it'll probably  be day and night. For loads of farmers I think all the farmers across the UK have probably  been experiencing the same climatic conditions. We're really running very late in the year.  
**[0:26:50-0:26:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:26:50):**  We run the risk of actually losing harvest at this point in time and this is where the  challenges in agriculture comes. Is there enough feed to feed the animals? Is there  enough grain for bread and all this type of stuff? So yes and whatever the shortfall may  be in terms of grain will be imported from other countries but we go back to sustainability.  The climate has become very unpredictable because I think we're getting into a warmer  
**[0:27:13-0:27:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:27:13):**  climate, into a warmer, wetter climate. When it rains now in, like really when you speak  of Northern Ireland here, when it rains we get more thunderous conditions, more rainstorms  now which are basically doing more harm for us. We control everything in terms of the  precision in the cheese plant because we have the ability to control it. We control nothing  in primary agriculture. Climate is everything. When we're trying to grow grain like wheat  
**[0:27:42-0:27:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:27:42):**  and barley and oats, we're trying to grow grass, we're trying to harvest. Ground conditions  and weather conditions are the determining factor how well we do our job really and which  we have no control over. So that's, it's a gamble every day we get up.  Hello, Helen Fish. Yes, hi. Yeah, fine thanks, yep.  We've explored how the pandemic impacted on the lives and work of two farmers in the meat  
**[0:28:24-0:28:31](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:28:24):**  and dairy sectors. Now it's time for a story from the seas, fish in the Shetland Isles.  That's about 110 miles off the UK mainland or to put it another way, a 14-hour ferry  trip from Aberdeen. My name is John Martin Tulloch. I've lived  in Shetland all my life. I started out at the local boatyard as a joiner and moved into  having a small boat and fishing and now a couple of years down the line I'm director  
**[0:28:55-0:29:03](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:28:55):**  of a company that I set up called Island Fish Shetland Limited. So we supply fish locally  and export as well. The boats fish here generally from one to three days. They land to catch  at either Lerwick or Scallow fish markets and they have an auction each weekday that  starts at eight o'clock in the morning and usually runs on until 10, 11 o'clock where  we can buy the fresh fish. We collect it from either market, take it back to the unit, get  
**[0:29:36-0:29:42](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:29:36):**  it filleted and then it's for sale. Generally we try and get everything prepared for the  following day. I think that the most popular fish up here is without a doubt haddock. I  think in years gone by then there's a lot of cod up here but that was maybe too valuable  to eat because it was all exported. People ate haddock and it's the same today at most  of the sales that go through the shop is for fresh haddock. There's really nobody up here  
**[0:30:09-0:30:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:30:09):**  that eats cod. The fish is certainly abundant up here but I think some of the scientists  maybe see it different. We don't get any sea bass or bream. It's mostly haddock, white  and the ground fish like place, lemon sole and meagrams, hake and turbot and halibut  and monks. Born and bred up here, my family goes back about 500 years with Shetland connections.  It's quite idyllic in places. The weather can be quite nice at times and fierce at other  
**[0:30:55-0:31:09](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:30:55):**  times. Really the winter months it's a lot of gales and not much calm spells. I think  the biggest thing to try and get used to if anybody was coming here would be the long  dark nights in the winter time. We were reasonably busy, it was enough to keep us going and then  when we got word of the pandemic and everything was going to be shut down we didn't really  know what was going to happen to the business and really overnight the export market had  
**[0:31:38-0:31:45](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:31:38):**  died down. The local sales went up massively but the rest in some hotels it was just like  a light switch going off. There were no sales that came through for that. Really I think  to begin with a lot of people were panic buying. We were trying to get more and more fish in  to feed the beast I suppose but I think some of the boats they weren't sure what was happening  and some of them wasn't going to go off so they were a big shortage of fish just for  
**[0:32:08-0:32:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:32:08):**  a few days in the very beginning. And then just in the back of that then all the boats  went off and I think with the European market closing down and stuff getting more difficult  to export there were a lot of fish getting landed at the markets but nobody was buying  it so the prices just crashed. Some of the fish wasn't sold but other fish it was just  going for very very cheap. The stuff that's usually exported. The price basically just  
**[0:32:38-0:32:43](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:32:38):**  crashed and then the boats decided well it's not worth the while going off if that's what  all they're getting so again they were a shortage on the back of that but it seemed to even  sell out some of the boats with half of the Shetland fleet would stay ashore for two weeks  of the month while the other half fished and then they swapped the boots so they were controlling  the quantity of fish that was coming in at the time so they got a better price and was  
**[0:33:06-0:33:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:33:06):**  enough to supply the local market. They were all working together and some of the boats  was getting maintenance done so they decided to tie up then and get painted up and other  maintenance and while half of them was fishing so it worked well. The Shetland companies  they all get on pretty well and I think in general they all try and work together and  help one another but I think more more noticeable with the Covid situation.  
**[0:33:42-0:33:47](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:33:42):**  Shetland is home to the UK's second largest whitefish landing port and fishing is a huge  part of many people's livelihoods. John Martin Tulloch's main market used to be the UK mainland  but when the pandemic hit that market disappeared and he had to transform his business.  I don't think anybody knew what was going to happen and well we didn't really know what  to do. My initial thought was to close the shop and try and contain the virus so you  
**[0:34:12-0:34:20](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:34:12):**  weren't spreading it and we decided to close the shop on the Wednesday and we have social  media presence. We put on the social media, we were close to shop but if one of the vehicles  was at the unit then they could just come around to the door and we could supply them  whitefish. So on the Thursday morning there was a knock at the door at I think it was  quarter to ten in the morning and somebody wanting fish and by the time I got them served  
**[0:34:46-0:34:52](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:34:46):**  there were other people that had arrived and I never got out of the shop until just after  five that night and that was the Thursday. The Friday was the busiest day that we had  before we opened and then we decided we were going to close and just do deliveries and  people can book time slots to come and collect. But yeah it was very uncertain what was going  to happen and I think everybody kind of adapted to the circumstances and trying to follow  
**[0:35:19-0:35:26](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:35:19):**  the rules and tried to stay safe I suppose. The oldest son, he's 15, when the schools  was closed and he was working most days helping me in the shop because we tried to keep it  in the household rather than taking in other employees that would be potentially could  spread the virus. The first few weeks then it was really just me and my wife and kids  all helping in the shop. The smallest girl, she's seven years old, she doesn't collect  
**[0:35:51-0:35:58](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:35:51):**  fish but what we did was for doing our deliveries she did drawings and stay safe with a rainbow  or something and then we'd put that in to random bags and put out for delivery. So the  people that got the delivery of fish would notice this drawing in it and they would put  it up in their windows. When we did do our deliveries the next time then we could see  Laura, that's her name, her picture up in the windows. And she would decorate it, paint  
**[0:36:21-0:36:27](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:36:21):**  it, scallop shells and we put that in to different people's orders. So it was just to try and  brighten the atmosphere a bit and lift people's spirits. So that was her job and make him,  at least the middle boy, he was 12. He was helping back fish and just helping out generally.  And Willem, he was helping me process some of the fish. So yeah, it was certainly a family  thing to begin with for the first few weeks. We're supplying local produce as well in the  
**[0:36:54-0:37:00](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:36:54):**  shop. A lot of the people new in Shetland are trying to source local produce, whether  it's fish or beef, eggs, vegetables, anything, try and get it locally if they can. There  is a change. We certainly have a bigger customer base now as before the lockdown. It's nice,  you get a bit of satisfaction if you either catch your own fish or supply fresh fish from  local boats and sell it locally. And for people to come back and say they really enjoyed your  
**[0:37:29-0:37:35](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:37:29):**  fish and you get a bit of a boost to that. But when you ship fish away, you really don't  get much feedback. We tried to diversify and see what the needs of the people and the community  was and just changed how we sold fish to make it more accessible to people that was self-isolating  and that type of thing. We've actually been busier for the lockdown doing deliveries and  people coming to pick up fish. In some ways it's been good for us, but things will change  
**[0:38:06-0:38:12](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:38:06):**  again and we'll have to adapt and just see how people want to buy it, whether it's maybe  even move to online selling and be able to ship through the UK. I think things will change  again but I think the biggest thing that we see is people wanting to buy local produce  more. You look at the whole pandemic, you know, what has it taught us? Life's very precious  and I think the farming community don't enjoy life as well as they should do. I think they  
**[0:38:41-0:38:48](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:38:41):**  see it as a seven day a week job, a 20 hour a day job. You know, it shouldn't be like  that, it should be like any other business, but unfortunately there's not the money in  primary agriculture to invest in labour to give people a life. It's no wonder that the  average age of the farmer in Northern Ireland is 58. You know, why is there no young people  coming into the business? Nine to five farmer, have we ever seen one? No we haven't. You  
**[0:39:09-0:39:13](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:39:09):**  know, I sometimes joke when I say, ah no I didn't do very much today on a Sunday, but  I still work eight hours. I think that's where Northern Ireland differs from other regions  in the UK, that it's not seen to be a professional job, it's like a way of life. And I think  that's where the farming community need to, they need to have quality of life as well  to enjoy family time. This has taught me a lot about family time and that's where I think  
**[0:39:36-0:39:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:39:36):**  the succession planning in our farm, there is some debate hanging over it, you know,  is there another generation that's going to come on and take the farm on? When you look  at the years and years or decades ago, then people just had their crofts and their small  fishing boat and they went off and they caught their fish and they had a few sheep and maybe  a cow to get milk and they were very sufficient. They didn't need things like washing machines  
**[0:40:04-0:40:11](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:40:04):**  and they always seemed to be very busy but they always had time to speak. And now in  the modern world everybody buys things to save time like dishwashers and washing machines  and cars and they seem to have a lot less time to speak to their neighbours because  they have to work so much to pay for all this things that saves time. It's a funny one to  think about. On the farm here we have a building that was an old creamery that was built in  
**[0:40:48-0:40:53](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:40:48):**  1920, 1930. I would need to look at the old deeds in the wartime. That was vested off  us by the British government to bottle the milk from the local farms for the local areas  here and there's real history in that building. The stonework is absolutely impeccable in  it. The next development of the process inside of our business is that we will put a vending  machine into that building. We are moving back in time a hundred years. I think it's  
**[0:41:14-0:41:18](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:41:14):**  bringing history back to the fore that this is what the building was built for. To provide  milk for the local community and that's what we're going to do again. People can come and  bring their own bottles, fill them up, take them away and return as frequently as they  like. You know the old ways were certainly maybe not the worst ways in the world. The  pandemic has probably taught us a lot of things. Where does our food come from? How far has  
**[0:41:48-0:41:54](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:41:48):**  it travelled? The journey, the animal, the land, the atmosphere. Is that food produced  in a dignified fashion? In the next episode of Who Feeds Us, we hear from people who are  coming together to grow their own and in doing so reclaiming collective control of urban  space, of seeds and of our idea of what's possible. This episode was produced by Phil  Smith. The executive producers of Who Feeds Us are Joe Barrett, Abbey Rose and me, Katie  
**[0:42:33-0:42:40](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:42:33):**  Revel. Col Gordon, Zane Dada and Fern Towers worked with us as community collaborators  to unearth the stories of John Martin Tulloch, Mohsen Hassanin and Dean Wright. The project  manager for Who Feeds Us is Olivia Oldham. Our artwork is by Hannah Grace and the original  music for the series is by Michael O'Neill. Who Feeds Us is possible thanks to the Farming  the Future COVID Response Fund. We're very grateful to the A-Team Foundation, the Roddick  
**[0:43:04-0:43:10](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:43:04):**  Foundation, 30 Percy and the Samworth Foundation for providing the funds to make this project  happen. Many thanks also to Farming the Future advisor Dee Woods for her guidance in bringing  the team together. I said to my kids the other day, I used to say, whenever you say to me  what's your favourite animal, I always say a lion because you know, courage and all that  kind of stuff and just, but now I tell them I'm a beaver. They build back the rivers and  
**[0:43:31-0:43:37](https://soundcloud.com/farmerama-radio/who-feeds-us-episode-1-land-animal-journey#t=0:43:31):**  they build back the ecosystem by doing the right actions. The beaver spirit, yeah, the  regenerative action of a beaver and what he does to a river is what I want to take on  and be on my farm and be for the community as well.  