### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2022-05-24)  
### Author(s): Koen van Seijen  

**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  A check-in interview with Pete Overlie, the managing partner of Trailhead Capital on his  journey into the food and egg space and the latest investments made by the fund.  
**[0:00:23-0:00:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:00:23):**  Among them a regenerative, cultivated lab-grown meat company which should help regenerative  farmers 20 or even 100 eggs their protein output.  Does that make you cringe or very interested?  We unpack it all in this interview.  This is the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast, Investing as if the Planet  
**[0:00:43-0:00:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:00:43):**  Mattered, where we talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why my focus on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  
**[0:01:04-0:01:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:01:04):**  our land and our sea, grow our food, what we eat, wear and consume.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  To make it easy for fans to support our work we launched our membership community and so  many of you have joined us as a member.  
**[0:01:23-0:01:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:01:23):**  Thank you.  If our work created value for you and if you have the means and only if you have the means,  consider joining us.  Find out more on comroad.com slash investing in RegenAg.  That is comroad.com slash investing in RegenAg.  
**[0:01:38-0:01:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:01:38):**  Or find the link below.  Welcome to another interview today with the managing partner of Trailhead Capital.  Welcome Pete.  Thank you.  Great to be here.  
**[0:01:51-0:01:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:01:51):**  And thank you so much for joining us on this late or early hour depending on how you look  at it.  But I'm very interested.  We've interviewed your two of your other co-founders and managing partners which obviously we'll  link below in the interviews.  
**[0:02:04-0:02:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:02:04):**  But as a fund, as a first time fund in this space and one of the few funds in the space,  obviously there's a lot to discuss because you've been making investments.  But we'll get to that in a minute.  I would love to start with the personal question we always start with.  How did you end up in this space and focusing so much on soil regeneration and then ending  
**[0:02:22-0:02:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:02:22):**  up setting up one of the first VC funds in the space here?  Yeah.  Great question.  Really, you know, I got into it from a human health perspective.  You know, my background, I was trying to play football for far too long.  
**[0:02:38-0:02:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:02:38):**  You know, in the process it motivated me to optimize human performance.  But it also led to a lot of injuries and too many surgeries.  Just American football, soccer.  What are we talking about here?  Yeah, American football.  
**[0:02:51-0:02:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:02:51):**  Global level.  American football.  OK.  Which I think gets more injuries almost than soccer or not?  Is it?  
**[0:02:56-0:02:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:02:56):**  It's quite a top sport, right?  Both fairly injury prone, but a few more contact injuries in American football.  So you and how did you discover food then as a I wouldn't say as a medicine because  let's not go there yet.  But as a is that a thing in American football, that food, what you're eating and is that  
**[0:03:17-0:03:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:03:17):**  important?  And then how would you describe, let's say, the current thinking or the current general  thinking in American football around food?  Yeah, no, that's a great question.  I probably am a little out of date in terms of how American football specifically is thinking  
**[0:03:32-0:03:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:03:32):**  about it.  But at the time and I mean, of course, this was the eye opener.  You know, I mean, this is going back to the 80s and 90s when I was playing.  And really, we were taught to focus on macro nutrients and essentially cut fats out of  our diet.  
**[0:03:49-0:03:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:03:49):**  So at the time, there was very little known or consideration given to that food.  But really, the evolution for me was, you know, I had gotten well, I mean, background  there was going from, you know, those surgeries, I basically got out of college got into investment  banking, I went into the life sciences group because I was focused on regenerative cartilage.  I got exposed to Ag bio companies at the time.  
**[0:04:18-0:04:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:04:18):**  Ultimately, went back to business school joined a private equity fund.  But along the way, where diet came back into the picture and a better understanding of  the importance of the quality food was, was I was introduced to the paleo diet.  This is about 2011.  So quite a shift from not including fats to paleo.  
**[0:04:39-0:04:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:04:39):**  Just this as a background paleo.  What is paleo the diet just for people that are thinking, yeah, I heard about it, but  they don't really know what it is.  Like, how would you describe it?  Yeah, broadly, it is.  
**[0:04:51-0:04:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:04:51):**  Well, they would tell you no grains, no dairy, no legumes, and avoid processed foods while  focusing on good healthy fats, including animal fats, nuts, etc.  But you know, of course, the more you look into that, you understand some of the nuances  to those grains and to that dairy.  So when you get into the ancient grains, I mean, basically, the premise for paleo is  
**[0:05:16-0:05:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:05:16):**  avoiding the inflammation and leaky gut that some of those inflammatory foods can cause.  So if you get to ancient grains that are a little bit more historically agreeable with  the human digestive system, then you can avoid some of the ramifications of that.  So it's basically taking us back to what we think, which is very debatable, and for many  sides, what we used to eat before we started agriculture or before I started agriculture,  
**[0:05:43-0:05:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:05:43):**  before we stopped being mostly hunter getter, etc.  But did you still remember how because you when you first hear that and you've always  been taught that fat is bad, etc.  Like, did it hit you immediately like, Oh, this is interesting, or was there resistance  first?  
**[0:05:59-0:06:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:05:59):**  Like, do you still remember when the first time you I wouldn't say saw paleo, but the  first time you took it seriously?  What was your response there?  Yeah, total skepticism.  It didn't make any sense to me.  
**[0:06:11-0:06:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:06:11):**  It was like, you know, okay, everything you're telling me is pretty much the opposite of  what I've been taught my entire life.  But truthfully, at the time, I was working for a private equity fund in Japan, the Fukushima  meltdown and earthquake and tsunami had just happened.  And so I think we were in a space where we were willing to explore and just searching  
**[0:06:31-0:06:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:06:31):**  for answers and things to kind of take our mind off of what just happened there.  But you know, so yeah, I doubted it very, very strongly.  But you know, as a result, I had to try it and turned into a little bit of a biohacker  in the process.  So basically, you know, to prove it out was getting essentially monthly blood tests to  
**[0:06:53-0:06:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:06:53):**  track my biomarkers.  And, you know, not surprisingly, basically, everything improved significantly.  So you remember that first time when you saw those biomarkers and you were like, you were  sure maybe you already felt better, but that you were sure this was not going to work.  Did you feel better the first time you did the blood test?  
**[0:07:12-0:07:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:07:12):**  Because then maybe you had a hunch like, okay, this might be a bit not what I expected.  Or like, how was that process?  You know, actually, that's a great question.  I mean, going back to how did I feel?  Like, you know, thinking about the process, it took a few weeks for the body to adapt.  
**[0:07:29-0:07:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:07:29):**  Well, in even the taste buds, you know, taking out some of those sugary foods, but, you know,  within a matter of weeks, it kind of felt like my mouth was reprogrammed and otherwise  bitter or plain foods were, you know, so much richer.  So I've had some hopes, but still some skepticism.  But when I started getting those results back, it was hard to argue with.  
**[0:07:50-0:07:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:07:50):**  I wasn't in a terrible condition, but it was noticeable enough to be able to attribute  it directly to dietary changes.  So yeah, I mean, that was what really opened up the rabbit hole for me.  So I started paying attention to ingredients and foods, realized how hard it was at the  time.  
**[0:08:11-0:08:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:08:11):**  And of course, this is just 11 years ago, to really understand the quality of the ingredients.  I basically had to start at just a level where there wasn't bad stuff in there.  There wasn't stuff I didn't understand.  But necessarily, you know, I was still operating in that private equity fund, but decided to  start angel investing in the space.  
**[0:08:29-0:08:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:08:29):**  That started with some high end CPG companies, but really wanted to start getting closer  and closer to the source.  So started investing in human gut microbiome companies and gave me a better idea of the  causes and ramifications of inflation, inflammation, and ultimately took that back to the source  and started looking directly at ag opportunities, both in land and tech.  
**[0:08:55-0:09:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:08:55):**  So really, I continued doing that, left private equity, took a year off, really wanted to  give some thought to how I could better contribute to the world and in the process saw firsthand  how badly the environment needed so much help.  You know, unfortunately, at the time, I was exposed to regenerative agriculture.  I mean, it just became so blatantly obvious about the importance of soil health in improving  
**[0:09:24-0:09:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:09:24):**  human and planetary health.  So that's an interesting, it's an interesting step beyond, let's go back to our ancient  diet.  And of course, we can discuss like what we used to eat 20, 30, 40,000 years ago.  It's not the same meat, it's not the same grain, it's not the same, etc.  
**[0:09:42-0:09:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:09:42):**  And but I've also seen many people simply saying paleo, okay, I need to eat a lot of  animal protein, no legumes, no this, that, but not going the step beyond thinking, okay,  how does this meat was grown?  Like what this did?  What did this cow ate, or etc, etc.  
**[0:09:57-0:10:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:09:57):**  So do you remember, because it's not so obvious that this turns into a rabbit hole, it could  be simply stopping there, like, okay, I don't do processed food anymore.  I don't do grains.  I do a lot of animal protein, and I feel a lot better regardless of where this comes  from.  
**[0:10:10-0:10:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:10:10):**  And that's okay.  And that's it.  And but no, you took it a few steps further, and actually way further than that.  Do you remember?  Was it just simply you being curious?  
**[0:10:17-0:10:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:10:17):**  Or were you already aware like, oh, this could be quite an energy intensive way of eating  if we feeding it grain and corn and soy?  Or was it an environmental question?  Like, like, why?  Why did you keep digging into at the end into the soil?  
**[0:10:32-0:10:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:10:32):**  Yeah, you know, it was a combination of things looking back on it.  There was, well, there was the trigger that was that was set off in just that.  I mean, what I mentioned before, when you basically turn the information you've been  schooled in on its head and have better outcomes through it.  So it just yeah, that definitely triggered in me a desire to explore and understand more  
**[0:11:02-0:11:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:11:02):**  and really start to question everything.  But yeah, I think in terms of environment, it also, well, it raised somewhat of an inherent  conflict in me just trying to understand.  So okay, well, first of all, qualify, I certainly appreciate paleo diet, there are a million  diets out there for a reason.  
**[0:11:22-0:11:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:11:22):**  I mean, there's a lot of different heritages and evolutions populations over time.  So it doesn't necessarily work for everybody.  But that said, assuming this approach works for a variety of people, like, is that really  telling us that we need to ramp up production and consumption of meat?  And can this world really sustain that?  
**[0:11:44-0:11:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:11:44):**  So yeah, it triggered in me the desire to look into meat production, better understand  that and, you know, of course, it's crazy when you start to dive down that rabbit hole,  right?  How little we know how disconnected we are from the food system.  So really starting to learn what a gainful operation is really like.  
**[0:12:06-0:12:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:12:06):**  Obviously it's eye opening and disheartening.  So do you still want to eat that even if it's better than yeah, whatever factory bread you  were eating or etc?  Yeah, that's an interesting question.  I mean, yeah, we try to often not to see that or prefer not to see that.  
**[0:12:23-0:12:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:12:23):**  But unless now at the moment you see it, you cannot unsee it anymore.  And then you have to act.  Otherwise, yeah, it would just be a very, very big conflict in your head.  Well, and I'm sure you know all too well, there's a very conscious effort to hide that  from the public facing aspect.  
**[0:12:40-0:12:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:12:40):**  And you know, most of those packaging, there is a happy cow in the pasture somewhere.  On the packaging, at least.  Yeah, that's right.  So yeah, it was I mean, a large part of it was trying to understand, okay, this, this  approach is clearly working for me.  
**[0:12:56-0:13:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:12:56):**  And if this is what the vast or, you know, a significant portion of the population historically  followed, then, you know, how does that possibly work?  Because it did inherently make sense to me that, you know, relying on the intelligence  of nature is the right thing to do.  So and that production piece, like feeding the world is something that people are like,  
**[0:13:20-0:13:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:13:20):**  yeah, but how, how we're gonna feed the world in this?  Like, you've done the analysis, you've looked into this, what is your normal response?  Like at a dinner party?  I don't know if you only have friends that are into region ag and food, but let's say  you meet somebody that isn't or like, yeah, that's all sounds great, Pete, but how we're  
**[0:13:35-0:13:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:13:35):**  gonna feed the world?  Like, what is your response?  I'm not looking for the answer here, because it's extremely complex.  But how do you respond to that normally without scaring away like all the dinner party guests?  With a two hour deep dive into production numbers and complexifying agroforestry, silver  
**[0:13:51-0:13:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:13:51):**  pasture, etc.  Like, what's your, I'm looking for, I'm asking for a friend, like, I'm looking for a few  sentences here or an interesting story that can trigger an interesting conversation about  feeding the world.  What's your natural response there?  
**[0:14:05-0:14:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:14:05):**  My natural response these days, I mean, of course, there are a lot of questions and nuances  to scaling regenerative agriculture, but, you know, also qualify when you consider trailhead  and our focus, we focus on on farm opportunities, supply chain opportunities, and consumer related  opportunities.  I happen to focus on the supply chain.  
**[0:14:25-0:14:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:14:25):**  So when that question is posed that that that you suggested, you know, how do we feed the  world?  I say, you know, feeding the world is not the problem.  You know, 800 million people go to bed hungry every night.  That's 10 percent of the population.  
**[0:14:40-0:14:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:14:40):**  We waste 30 to 40 percent of the food that we produce.  So really, I think first and foremost, that is where we need to focus a lot of our attention  in terms of just improving the efficiency and reducing the waste in our system.  I think that's a good one.  Plus, I think that two billion people are overweight or, let's say, consuming more calories  
**[0:15:05-0:15:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:15:05):**  than they have to.  And so it seems mostly a distribution problem if we purely look at calories and not at the  quality of calories, which we definitely should look at.  But it's not that we don't produce enough food now and we're still not feeding the world  because 10 percent goes to bed hungry and 20 percent goes to bed overeating, which in  
**[0:15:24-0:15:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:15:24):**  many different ways, I'm not saying it's their fault, but it's the food system we created  is not feeding us.  And so we better figure out a solution there.  So how did you then end up saying you started making angel investments, you mentioned.  Yeah, some people set up a fund at some point, some people don't.  
**[0:15:40-0:15:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:15:40):**  What was the step there to say, OK, we need a bigger organization and more an institute  basically to start doing these kind of investments at a larger scale in the region, like in food  space.  And it's not enough if I'm investing my own my own money into a number of angel deals  a year.  
**[0:15:58-0:16:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:15:58):**  When you see that opportunity, like what was there like this?  This is actually more than a side thing.  This could be the main thing.  You know, it kind of came knocking on my door.  I had left private equity, made the decision to focus on angel investing in this space  
**[0:16:14-0:16:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:16:14):**  full time.  But luckily, reconnected with Trip, who's actually a longtime friend.  And we started comparing notes.  And this is in 2019.  And he was at the time specifically looking for a couple of partners to raise and launch  
**[0:16:30-0:16:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:16:30):**  a regenerative agriculture fund with him and Bobby, our fourth partner, who I don't think  you've spoken to yet.  So we appreciate that.  So the more we talked about it, while of course, angel investing was intriguing to me, I also  came to appreciate the challenges of adding value and the need for a broader scale approach,  
**[0:16:58-0:17:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:16:58):**  just better understanding the complexity of the food and ag system.  The more I talked about it with Trip and started to discuss it with the other partners, you  know, we were able to piece together a vision that was comprehensive and connected some  of the disparate pieces in that mission to improve some of the challenges of the current  food and ag system.  
**[0:17:20-0:17:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:17:20):**  So yeah, the stars aligned in that regard.  And at the time, it just made sense to form a fund together, particularly given the different  skill sets and experiences and networks each one of us are bringing because there was fortunately  relatively little crossover with each of those.  And just for the people that didn't listen to the previous interviews, which again, I  
**[0:17:44-0:17:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:17:44):**  will link below with Mark and with Trip, in a few sentences, what is Trailhead?  I mean, it didn't change a lot, I think, except that you made more investments.  But in a few sentences, it's always nice to hear from another partner as well how you  would describe Trailhead and where you're at.  We're now talking end of Q1 2022.  
**[0:18:03-0:18:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:18:03):**  So end of March, beginning of April, when this will be out, I mean, depending when you  listen to this.  So where, how would you describe Trailhead now?  Somebody asks you, what is Trailhead to you?  Yeah, really, in just a couple sentences, Trailhead is a venture capital fund investing  
**[0:18:19-0:18:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:18:19):**  in early stage regenerative ag and food companies that improve soil health either directly or  indirectly.  They also increase profitability for the regenerative farmer while improving access and affordability  for the regenerative consumer.  So as you may have gathered from the conversation thus far, certainly consider ourselves mission  
**[0:18:43-0:18:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:18:43):**  driven as we truly believe regenerative agriculture presents the greatest opportunity for improving  human and planetary health.  We believe that opportunity necessarily provides for market returns for better and while we're  investing in inherently impact oriented companies.  So interesting discussion with Mark on a conversation with Mark discussion sounds so heavy on the  
**[0:19:11-0:19:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:19:11):**  if there was tension between regeneration and hunting for unicorns, which I think I  called the episode and he gave a very interesting answer that I've since repeated many times.  Like he said, maybe eventually not if we've regenerated enough land, enough people, enough  communities, enough companies, et cetera.  But there is a window now where he feels, and I think you agree, where there are definitely  
**[0:19:32-0:19:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:19:32):**  opportunities for outsize returns because let's say we're so far below zero that there's  so much to do that there is the potential growth rate or the potential curve of just  soil carbon levels or nutrient deficits, et cetera, is so large that there are opportunities  for outsize returns, even though those returns are maybe a lot higher than let's say an old  growth forest can sustain, which maybe is like 3% people have calculated.  
**[0:19:59-0:20:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:19:59):**  So there's an interesting moment there.  We're so far below that there might be interesting moments for unicorns, although some people  might think, oh, unicorns and region ag, should that or region ag and food, should that even  be possible, et cetera.  So I like the tension there.  
**[0:20:13-0:20:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:20:13):**  How do you see you're saying outsize returns or venture capital returns when investors ask  that question?  Do you have another answer to that?  Like what do you tell them when they put on that skeptical face?  Yeah, they, well, I think we tell them and it necessarily needs to be addressed more  
**[0:20:32-0:20:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:20:32):**  often than I would have thought in that necessarily saying it's impact oriented.  I think investors in our fund or in the market generally think that comes with concessionary  returns.  But you would think that we've tackled that with, I don't know, even beyond Berger or  Tesla.  
**[0:20:53-0:20:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:20:53):**  I mean, there are some interesting with all the debate around them, but some interesting  impacts returns.  I mean, if you were early in that, you made some Oatly as well, some interesting runs,  let's say.  Do you feel that skepticism when you have been going out into the market?  
**[0:21:11-0:21:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:21:11):**  You know, I think it may not be skepticism, but it warrants addressing and explaining  that because this is impact oriented, it is not concessionary.  It is, yeah, I think the explanation and putting it in perspective is yeah, because of the  outsized opportunity and improving human planetary health, we expect outsized returns.  But yeah, look at the food and ag venture capital investment spectrum historically.  
**[0:21:43-0:21:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:21:43):**  And really, we consider a lot of the investments that we're participating in food tech or ag  tech, but with a regenerative filter layered in there.  So if you look at that market historically, that's right, ag tech and food tech combined  up until about 2020 had somewhere around eight unicorns historically, eight exits over a  billion dollars.  
**[0:22:06-0:22:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:22:06):**  But in the last few years, those have accelerated rapidly.  You know, historically, a lot of the companies were acquired in relatively early stages by  some of the big strategic players to take them off the market or simply because they  didn't have the luxury of venture investing in the first place, because that was historically  about 2% of the capital contributed to early stage startups, because historically, food  
**[0:22:32-0:22:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:22:32):**  and ag companies took longer to develop and more capital to develop.  So it wasn't as compelling a venture capital investment.  But we're at a point where consumer demand and awareness is significant enough and tech  has improved enough that both of those factors together can accelerate that timeline and  provide for those outsized returns.  
**[0:22:57-0:23:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:22:57):**  And let's talk about the portfolio, like what investments have you made recently?  What are some exciting ones we can share?  I mean, they're on the website, your portfolio is on the website.  So we're not disclosing any secrets here or scoops or news, but I still would like to  unpack a few of them.  
**[0:23:18-0:23:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:23:18):**  What investments, let's say also in your part of the investment theme, have you been mostly  excited about?  Most excited about?  Yeah, I would say so really, since you last talked to one of my partners, we've been making  investments in what were that address waste reduction, traceability, transparency, carbon  
**[0:23:41-0:23:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:23:41):**  markets and regenerative meat.  So you know, as I mentioned, really, I focus on the supply chain.  And broadly, to me, that means trying to improve efficiency and connectivity in the regen system.  So we see that minimizing the role of middleman, enabling decentralization and reducing some  of the waste that we talked about, because yeah, bottom line, we want to increase that  
**[0:24:03-0:24:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:24:03):**  8% of the price that's going to the farmer.  To try and move the ball in the right direction for all of those characteristics, well, one  of the investments we made and great companies we partnered with was FoodMaven.  So not sure if you've heard of or seen the FoodMaven before, but they made a bit of a  pivot and really now provide better tracking and pricing for food items, including those  
**[0:24:32-0:24:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:24:32):**  that are regeneratively sourced.  So they do this by having restaurants and other institutional food buyers download a  browser extension.  They're able to see real time prices across a broad district of their network and in the  process select for a regen characteristics.  
**[0:24:47-0:24:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:24:47):**  So they've also partnered with Google to help build out the internet of food that Google  Food for Good has proposed, which is really addressing one of the major issues with the  food system.  It's just disparate and disconnected.  So that effort, really through some of the technology and software that FoodMaven provides,  
**[0:25:12-0:25:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:25:12):**  enables better transparency into the various nodes in the system and therefore better connectivity.  So yeah, we love FoodMaven for a lot of reasons, but one in particular is the ability to increase  awareness and demand for regeneratively produced food.  Which is something you see as an opportunity or something that's still lacking in terms  of it's great to have many more farmers in transition, but if nobody buys it or nobody  
**[0:25:38-0:25:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:25:38):**  knows it's there and it goes into the standard, even the standard organic commodity markets,  if you would be certified, we sort of lose that potential for storytelling, for premiums,  for food as medicine, for nutrient density.  Like we lose all of that because it just goes into the big pile.  It seems like you've been making investments specifically to tackle that, to decommodify  
**[0:26:01-0:26:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:26:01):**  these, which is not really a word I found out actually, but I've been using it, decommodify  the supply chains or the supply webs.  Yeah, that's exactly right.  I mean, certainly more regenerative food needs to be produced.  But yeah, I mean, for one of the elements that FoodMaven addresses that I didn't even  
**[0:26:21-0:26:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:26:21):**  touch on is basically they automate aggregation of food items, which is, you know, if you  really understand that, it's surprisingly hard because it's very manual because a lot  of the time you may have 20 or more names for the same food item.  So they've collected enough data points that they can kind of automate that and piece that  all together.  
**[0:26:43-0:26:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:26:43):**  But what that process has prevented has been appropriate labeling of regenerative or even  organic food items.  So appropriate value has been hard to ascribe to those actual food items.  So this goes a long way in helping appreciation for food items produced in that manner.  And I mean, of course, in this case, they are not investing, I mean, they're investing  
**[0:27:08-0:27:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:27:08):**  in technology, but it's not that they have to build enormous factory.  So there is potential there that your investment dollars go a bit further than if you have  to set up a massive robotics factory or something like that.  In that theme of transparency and getting more dollars to or shifting, let's say the  food dollar spend, have you made other investments that are, of course, they're all exciting,  
**[0:27:31-0:27:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:27:31):**  but other investments that we have to talk about?  Probably we have made other investments that are worth talking about.  And you know, I mean, there's a few that we can touch on.  Right.  Food making falls into that software category.  
**[0:27:48-0:27:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:27:48):**  We've made another software investment company by the name of Swarm Engineering.  I mean, essentially they're democratizing AI to find supply chain solutions for food  and ag companies.  So really helping them to optimize efficiency, but also enabling them to solve for sustainability  characteristics in the process.  
**[0:28:06-0:28:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:28:06):**  Because when you say Swarm Engineering, it sounds like a robotics company, but it's maybe  just my thinking about swarms.  But it's not the case.  So how would you describe that as a what's a use case for Swarm Engineering?  What's a typical client?  
**[0:28:20-0:28:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:28:20):**  So yeah, a typical client.  Let's say it could be, yeah, I don't want to disclose specifics of who their customers  are.  I think, you know, is it a supermarket?  Is it a restaurant chain?  
**[0:28:35-0:28:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:28:35):**  Is it a hospital?  Is it a private person like me?  It is typically a, it could be a conventional ag company.  It could be a big brand name company, you know, food and ag company as well.  And basically, they may be using Swarm Engineering.  
**[0:28:53-0:29:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:28:53):**  So basically, Swarm provides this library of algorithms that they develop or aggregate  and basically apply to food ag companies after they fill out an interactive questionnaire.  So some of the use cases for that would be really solving for a proper blending of inputs,  really balancing resource management and routing appropriately, but also layering on sustainability  metrics, or also enabling better selection of sustainably or regeneratively produced  
**[0:29:29-0:29:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:29:29):**  ingredients in the formation of a product.  So in some ways, it's really on the recipe blending side of food processing, not in a  bad way.  Most food is blends, most food are mixed and figuring out better or different mixtures.  There is the blending aspect and better mixtures component to it.  
**[0:29:54-0:29:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:29:54):**  There is the logistics component.  There is, and some of that logistics is appropriately routing some of that regeneratively produced  food.  In some ways, it's a bit of an extension to what Howgood offers, which you've looked at  and talked about before.  
**[0:30:13-0:30:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:30:13):**  But that being a sustainability database, you can appreciate what certain food items  do in terms of moving a product from degenerative to sustainable to regenerative.  This really enables the company that's putting that product together to help find that product  or find that ingredient and get it to the source so that that product can be made.  You mentioned regenerative meat.  
**[0:30:40-0:30:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:30:40):**  Let's unpack that a bit.  What's the investment you've made in that space?  What is regenerative meat in this case?  In this case, it is a cultivated regenerative meat company.  Broadly, we recognize regenerative meat faces some real challenges in scaling.  
**[0:31:01-0:31:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:31:01):**  And Omeat represents a much better alternative to capo meat until it does.  Really what Omeat is bringing is a very compelling technology.  It enables cost parity with the current options out there because it's got a growth medium  that reduces the cost 99%.  They partner with regenerative ranchers by placing bioreactors on the farm to couple  
**[0:31:24-0:31:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:31:24):**  with the land and really provide them an additional income stream.  It increases the output of regenerative cow by 20 to 100 times and replicates the regenerative  nutrient density of a regenerative cow.  Checking the boxes of improving farmer outcomes, scaling regenerative meat in one way, localizing  the system and reducing negative externalities.  
**[0:31:52-0:31:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:31:52):**  It is a code.  Okay, let's unpack that one a bit.  I would say many people probably would say, oh, cellular ag or cultivated meat.  I can see them cringe basically, although this is a podcast.  And what you're saying, we're doing this localized working with the regenerative ranchers and  
**[0:32:08-0:32:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:32:08):**  basically taking a cow that has all the nutrient density, has been on pasture, his or her mostly,  most of it live and use that as the input.  Because that's always the discussion in these.  What are the growth mediums?  What's the input?  
**[0:32:23-0:32:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:32:23):**  What's the energy costs?  How are we going to build these massive facilities that we've never done before at this scale?  The only thing time we've done it is at medicine facilities, but they're much smaller.  And you're saying we're taking a much more decentralized approach and using as input,  the regeneratively grown, if that's even a thing, the regeneratively grown towards regeneratively  
**[0:32:44-0:32:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:32:44):**  grown cow as an input and sort of 20 or 100 X that in terms of protein output, which sounds  very interesting.  Is nobody else working on that?  Is that like, Oh, me, this seems, is that a, I've never heard about it.  Is that an exception there to take that partly farmer approach almost to, to cultivate it  
**[0:33:03-0:33:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:33:03):**  meat?  Yeah, we think it's unique and that's exactly why we like it so much.  And I think that is a proprietary process.  You say it's a transition or yeah, it's a, it's a, until it scales enough, but this could  also be, this could also be the scale.  
**[0:33:19-0:33:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:33:19):**  Like do you see this as a temporary solution as an end solution potentially, or how do  you see this in, in let's say the scaling of regenerative meat production or pastures  and such.  The regenerative meat production, we absolutely support and want to scale, but I, you know,  recognize and even if that increases tenfold, that gets to 10% of the market.  
**[0:33:44-0:33:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:33:44):**  So that's going to take a long time and we're going to further the development of that in  the process.  But in the meantime, this does present a potential alternative for conventional incumbents to  replace actual KPO meat.  You know, and as a result, in the spirit of being a bridge builder and working with some  
**[0:34:08-0:34:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:34:08):**  conventional ag companies at one end and regenerative companies at another, there are some conventional  participants that are looking to be involved here and actually start to use this product  when it is ready for market.  So yeah, we're encouraged that this could be.  How far is this for, for market?  
**[0:34:27-0:34:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:34:27):**  Like how, when can I eat this?  Depending on where I am obviously.  It's early stage.  It's going to be a few years.  Well I should say it's early, I should say, sorry, it's going to be a few years before  
**[0:34:39-0:34:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:34:39):**  it fully scales.  But of course there are samples and beef ready already.  Just not at a commercial scale yet.  And you mentioned it holds that niche and density that we're known at that actually  draw you to the space to begin with of the pasture raised and proper pasture mixture,  
**[0:34:59-0:35:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:34:59):**  holistic management, etc, etc.  Of mob grazed, whatever we want to call it.  So have you seen that under, I wouldn't say under microscope, but like have there been  lab tests showing that what comes out of these bio reactors compared to, I'm always saying,  almost saying the standard one, but there's no standard here, but against the bio reactors  
**[0:35:18-0:35:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:35:18):**  of the ones that let's say don't pay any attention to the input of where the cells come from.  Have we seen differences there already?  Like can we see those nutrient differences or is it too early for that?  So you can.  You can look at those and we did discuss that.  
**[0:35:34-0:35:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:35:34):**  As you can imagine, this warranted some healthy debate internally.  So well, yeah, hopefully this is not too proprietary and you can cut it out if it is at the end.  So really, yeah, basically all the inputs, the cells, the growth medium, the scaffolding  are all directly taken from the cow in really what is a minimally invasive biopsy.  So basically you get the molecular, cellular, DNA and nutrient density level that's more  
**[0:36:04-0:36:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:36:04):**  or less identical to the meat from the cow.  That's been tested and that's what the results have shown.  Wow.  And how difficult is it for, because I see these, it's interesting because we've had  not on a podcast, but we had a company present a tonic actually on decentralized insect growing  
**[0:36:23-0:36:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:36:23):**  to keep it at a farmer's level, to make sure we don't have to transport all of the inputs  and outputs because there's a lot of fertilizer coming out, good fertilizer, not the chemical  one where we pay certain countries.  But there's a lot of moving around of stuff, but then always the question is, okay, it  doesn't make sense to centralize it in a big facility where you control everything, but  
**[0:36:44-0:36:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:36:44):**  you also have the risk of infections and the whole thing goes down or does it make sense  to decentralize?  But then you're not on top of it constantly.  How difficult is it to run?  Will it be to run like a bio-reactor like this?  
**[0:36:57-0:37:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:36:57):**  Is that, does an average rancher need to get a biomedical degree or bioengineering degree  to be able to run this?  Is this remotely?  Like how tricky is this to do this decentralized?  Because it sounds super nice, but I'm also thinking, yeah, what if something goes wrong  
**[0:37:12-0:37:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:37:12):**  and it's a long drive to replace something or to go and check, you lose the whole fat  basically of bio-reactor.  What's the scale level needed to keep this running and to make sure that the other protein  comes out on the other end?  It's still going to be a significant facility and it's going to be selective ranches that  
**[0:37:31-0:37:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:37:31):**  make sense for it, but it's not going to necessarily be the rancher who's running it.  The company is going to be on site facilitating that.  They've got a team and the leading scientist in the world in the space leading that effort.  So really they're going to be the ones addressing that.  So why is it then to do it on site?  
**[0:37:53-0:37:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:37:53):**  Is it that easy access to the growth mediums to the cows?  Do you need that?  Or is it mostly to add revenue to the farmer?  What's the driver of this decentralization?  Do you need to be close to the source?  
**[0:38:09-0:38:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:38:09):**  Is that helpful in this case?  I have no idea if freshness is important here or not.  Is that a thing or otherwise you have to transport a cow with a lot of stress to a facility seven  hours down the road?  I mean, I can imagine that's not the point.  
**[0:38:20-0:38:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:38:20):**  Or what's the proximity here?  Why does it matter so much?  Being close to the source is a major driver.  But of course, being able to partner with the rancher and necessarily being able to  focus on regenerative ranchers is certainly an added benefit.  
**[0:38:38-0:38:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:38:38):**  And how do they respond to this?  I can imagine the cringe on their face.  Like, yeah, we're going to place a bio director and that's going to need some convincing,  I think.  Or do they click quickly and get on board with weekend 20x or 100x your work, basically,  
**[0:38:53-0:38:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:38:53):**  your work on the protein side, not your work, obviously, on restoring the land, because  there you still need the animal footprint.  But we can sort of there's a multiple here that you don't see because otherwise you have  to do 20x your herd, which is definitely needed, but not so easy to do.  No, very good question.  
**[0:39:13-0:39:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:39:13):**  Very important one and certainly one we thought about.  I mean, as we were going through the diligence process, we called up, I mean, really, even  before we made the investment, we were working hard to work with the team and see what we  could do to, of course, build our confidence and conviction, but also help them further  their plans.  
**[0:39:34-0:39:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:39:34):**  And so in the process, made a lot of calls to ranchers.  And I don't want to speak out of turn, but it would be some names that you recognize  and people you probably know.  So significant regenerative ranchers and they were very receptive to it.  And so we're having conversations with the company now.  
**[0:39:51-0:39:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:39:51):**  Very, very interesting.  I mean, you would require some explaining and to your investors probably as well.  And so, OK, I think we very interesting to follow this and other ones that you're excited  about.  Are things you're still missing?  
**[0:40:09-0:40:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:40:09):**  Let's say if you look at a portfolio overview, like I would love to have a company because  we're really missing, I don't know, a remote sensing one.  I'm just the first word that popped into my mind.  Like what's like what would be nice from a portfolio level to still to still have as  you're obviously going to make quite a few more investments and then follow up investments  
**[0:40:29-0:40:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:40:29):**  over the next years?  Sure.  I would say one of those categories that I particularly would like to fill is a fintech  company.  And, you know, fintech come in a variety of forms.  
**[0:40:42-0:40:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:40:42):**  But broadly speaking, a company that falls in that space, we've looked at a number, haven't  quite got there yet, are talking to a few now.  So are optimistic that happens soon.  And really to focus on economies for the farmer or what fintech, what should it address?  Like really significantly move the needle for the business side of the farmer and the  
**[0:41:07-0:41:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:41:07):**  rancher?  Is that what you're looking at?  Because I think there's a lot of space to improve there for sure.  For sure.  For sure.  
**[0:41:13-0:41:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:41:13):**  I think it's improving access to financing options in one way.  So it could be, you know, of course, you've had Dan from Stuart on a few times.  You know, I mean, of course, they're a terrific example of exactly the kind of fintech company  we look at.  But you didn't invest, right?  
**[0:41:30-0:41:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:41:30):**  We did not.  I know you, you are in.  Congratulations.  We're very, very, just for this very small investor Dan let us in.  But yeah, it's been, we didn't set any terms.  
**[0:41:41-0:41:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:41:41):**  Let's say it's a few thousand, but I'm very happy to be part of the journey because yeah,  I hope it will be more honestly, but it's such a crucial and such an underappreciated  and neglected space.  Like how to get more, not VC money, also that, but more quote unquote boring money into the  space loans, et cetera.  
**[0:41:59-0:42:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:41:59):**  And banks are just not there to provide it for people that want to grow.  And that's right.  I think we see some opportunities there where, right, I mean, the banks have not evolved.  They're still incredibly opaque.  And, you know, it takes forever to actually get a loan approved.  
**[0:42:14-0:42:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:42:14):**  So any, anything that's really helping to improve financing options for farmers is a  big step in the right direction there.  And there are a lot of opportunities out there.  So no doubt you've seen a few financing platforms and yeah, a few that unfortunately Trailhead  was just not off the ground just yet to invest in those companies.  
**[0:42:36-0:42:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:42:36):**  So there will be more, there will be more, but yeah, no, it's a massive space.  There's so much refinancing needed.  There's so much, and it's so difficult to get, to get loans or to get, I mean, not even  the time, but it takes, it takes forever.  If you even get it.  
**[0:42:52-0:42:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:42:52):**  And it just, it just really stales an industry that wants to, wants to grow and can grow  and wants to meet consumer demand.  And yeah, it's just not there.  And, or the solutions are not there, but the money is out there.  So yeah, those bridge builders are crucial and very interesting.  
**[0:43:07-0:43:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:43:07):**  I wouldn't have expected you mentioned FinTech, but it makes a lot of sense.  Yeah.  Yeah.  I mean, I think it's a good example of, well, in some of the ways I think about, you know,  VC and food and ag right now.  
**[0:43:22-0:43:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:43:22):**  Yeah, absolutely.  The rest of VC can be leading examples of some of what's to expect in the space.  And food and ag is just somewhat lagging in that.  You know, which is understandable given the inherent points of friction, you know, and  you just can't iterate on a daily basis and instead essentially have annual harvests that  
**[0:43:43-0:43:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:43:43):**  require things to move a little bit more slowly.  But again, that's accelerating and you can see where FinTech for the broader world has  gone in the last 10 years.  And you can see a lot of potential for that in the food and ag space to come.  Yeah.  
**[0:44:00-0:44:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:44:00):**  Great.  And let's shift gears a bit to a few questions I always like to ask, not necessarily at the  end, but in this case, where are you contrarian?  We've touched upon a few points, definitely inspired by John Kemp, this question.  So where do you when you go to RFSI, I always mix up the Regenerative Food System Investment  
**[0:44:20-0:44:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:44:20):**  Forum, which is going to be in Colorado actually in October.  So or go please.  We might be there.  Not sure yet.  But when you are there and you're with, let's say, the bubble of regen investments, where  
**[0:44:32-0:44:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:44:32):**  do you think fundamentally different?  Yeah, I think trying to be the bridge builders that we are.  The only way to be a contrarian point of view is that big ag will be part of the solution.  It's hard to fight those incumbents when they have such a vast amount of capital and resources  and really feel there are benefits to swinging them in the right direction by offering them  
**[0:44:56-0:44:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:44:56):**  some creative expansion opportunities.  But of course, we're seeing it now, you also have to establish standards and hold them  to them.  So that is one area that feels like a bit of a contrarian point of view.  Also would say that innovative food and ag capital doesn't need to be concessionary.  
**[0:45:19-0:45:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:45:19):**  And that doesn't mean it's extractive.  We've probably covered that.  But I think, yeah, again, doesn't hurt to repeat it.  Perhaps the reminder is needed.  But the dots aren't always connected there.  
**[0:45:36-0:45:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:45:36):**  Basically, mission driven venture capital really should be win-win-win.  If you're investing in businesses that are necessarily impact oriented, VCs or minority  shareholders and everybody's incentives are mission aligned.  From my perspective, that means you just got to ensure you've got patient capital.  So we've been very conscious about pursuing LPs who are mission aligned and appreciate  
**[0:46:01-0:46:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:46:01):**  the timelines.  But again, longer timelines shouldn't mean any compromises on returns.  I mean, I think some of the best investments ever are long term holds.  I've heard like in the case of Google, John Doerr never sold.  And you can imagine what that is.  
**[0:46:18-0:46:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:46:18):**  And take Sequoia, for example, just established an Evergreen fund for longer hold periods.  So yeah.  This opens a whole rabbit hole.  Are we going?  Yeah, we're going.  
**[0:46:30-0:46:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:46:30):**  There we go.  So what do you, I mean, there's a question there obviously on the Evergreen structure,  which is not the current fund structure.  Is that something you are thinking about for like next funds?  As I know, if this fund is successful, and probably it will, this is not, I mean, you  
**[0:46:48-0:46:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:46:48):**  don't stop here.  Like, is it something you're, I'm not saying planning, because you're definitely not planning,  but thinking about, okay, what would a fund to look like?  And is Evergreen then something or a longer period fund, something you are interested  in or potentially exploring?  
**[0:47:06-0:47:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:47:06):**  It has been a consideration.  I think when we got things off the ground, we didn't want to complicate them any more  than necessary, just pretty much with standard terms and structure.  So it's certainly a consideration in the future.  I mean, in an ideal scenario, I kind of like the concept of a Berkshire Athaway, where  
**[0:47:28-0:47:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:47:28):**  you can accumulate a portfolio of companies and partnerships that, where we could be perhaps  a little bit more value add and active in those efforts.  I think you take the case of Berkshire, where they're clearly passive, but they do provide  some network benefits there.  But yeah, with that structure, yeah, yeah, exactly.  
**[0:47:56-0:48:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:47:56):**  I think you have some aggregation of resources and network effects and yeah, really the intention  to hold those forever.  So there's some appeal to that.  But then to your question about, you know, future funds and how, how at least I'm thinking  about this and we're comparing notes on this internally on a daily basis.  
**[0:48:16-0:48:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:48:16):**  Well, I wouldn't say daily, but on a regular basis.  Are the LPs ready for that?  Like potentially, like that's, is there enough interest potentially?  I mean, it will be a few years before you do that.  Like, do you see like there's, would it be possible to raise a 50 million like you're  
**[0:48:34-0:48:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:48:34):**  doing now or five zero or more?  Like is this, or is it mostly we need in this, we need to stay in the lanes, at least in  terms of fund structures to be able to raise enough to put it to work as we have 10 years  left or nine years or whatever the number is to make, make a dent?  Yeah, I think it, I mean, if the consideration is an evergreen fund or some other kind of  
**[0:48:58-0:49:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:48:58):**  structure, it's a conversation to be had when that additional fundraising starts.  And yeah, since we were still wrapping up the first fundraise, that conversation is  going to be down the road, but it's certainly a consideration.  I think the intention for the next fund would be, yeah, very much in the lane and very consistent  with what we were pursuing at this point, but necessarily a bit larger fund so we can  
**[0:49:23-0:49:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:49:23):**  expand the ecosystem, community and.  A double, you always have to double the second one, right?  Yeah.  That's the two X's to double.  And so what if we took that away and you actually tomorrow morning, which is in a few hours  
**[0:49:34-0:49:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:49:34):**  only for you, I'm very sorry for this late call.  And we're going to, I'm going to be conscious of your time and wrap up soon.  But what if you be in charge of a billion dollar fund and it could be an holding structure  or like you don't have LPs, you won an enormous lottery.  You have to invest it though.  
**[0:49:49-0:49:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:49:49):**  There's one condition, but a timeline could be, or horizon could be extremely long, extremely  short.  But where would you prioritize this?  Where would you put that to work in the food and X sector?  If the food and X sector, maybe you put it somewhere else and maybe nuclear fusion.  
**[0:50:05-0:50:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:50:05):**  But what would you focus on mostly?  I don't need the exact dollar amounts, obviously.  I just need, what are your top sectors or sub themes you would, you would put money  to work if resources were sort of unlimited?  Yeah.  
**[0:50:17-0:50:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:50:17):**  You know, I think it would be a bit of an expansion of what we just started to touch  on.  Yeah.  First, that similar early stage, but larger fund.  But yeah, it would be a few different pockets of capital because again, a few different  
**[0:50:32-0:50:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:50:32):**  pockets are needed from our perspective to address all the opportunities and needs within  the food and ag system.  So another one would be a land and infrastructure fund, which is necessarily a different risk  and return profile.  I'd want to add a pool for something like Mad Ag's Perennial Fund for progressive transition  
**[0:50:54-0:50:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:50:54):**  financing.  And then maybe something like what Stephen Orenreiner is doing at Grounded Capital.  Basically a fund for moving aspiring, well-sized, well-established companies and food brands  to move along the curve from conventional to reach ed.  I think that's needed and momentum worth building on.  
**[0:51:15-0:51:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:51:15):**  But maybe that's not all of the money and you got to put a little bit of a pocket fund  for just policy and education.  Lobbying is probably the highest potential investment, but it's not something we covered  a lot.  We will do a few interviews on that.  
**[0:51:33-0:51:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:51:33):**  It's not my favorite topic.  But it's so important.  But yeah, not the most sexy subject to talk about.  And as a final question, if you had a magic wand and you had one, you could do it at once  only and don't start like I would do three, et cetera, just one.  
**[0:51:52-0:51:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:51:52):**  What would you change in the space or in the sector or globally?  It could be anything.  I've said before, better taste buds or global consciousness or everybody's meditating.  I mean, it could be literally anything.  What would you use your magic wand for?  
**[0:52:06-0:52:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:52:06):**  Just one.  Yeah, venture capitalists always want to make multiple bets, et cetera.  In this case, you just have one.  I think that's going to have to be a tax on negative externalities like greenhouse gases.  So yeah, broadly speaking, certainly wary of any revenue distortion there.  
**[0:52:33-0:52:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:52:33):**  But I think that's got to be the one option or one string to pull.  I mean, there are a few others.  I mean, if the one could be waived, there are a few other thoughts on where wishes could  be spent.  But yeah, I think that's the one that's a tough one to answer.  
**[0:52:54-0:52:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:52:54):**  We have to start paying for externalities.  It feels like we're moving slowly in that direction.  Of course, we're going to have an endless debate about carbon equivalent, which is way  too simplistic, or CO2 equivalent, sorry, and other things.  But at least let's start somewhere.  
**[0:53:11-0:53:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:53:11):**  You cannot on a finite planet treat it like it's an infinite waste dump like we're doing  now basically.  And that has to stop.  There's no way around it.  Certainly agree with that.  
**[0:53:24-0:53:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:53:24):**  And as we're talking through it a little bit, I mean, another wand to be waived, but very  much in line with this.  I mean, now that you mentioned it is really, you know, could food be priced based on nutrient  density?  So, certainly appreciate what Dan Kittredge is doing there.  
**[0:53:41-0:53:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:53:41):**  But you know, if that nutrient density is in line, it is inherently incorporating better  soil practices and better use of that land.  Did you see the paper coming out of David Montgomery, or Montgomery, sorry, and Anne?  I had not yet.  That's a, I will put it in the show notes.  
**[0:53:57-0:54:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:53:57):**  So, they published the paper recently, a few weeks ago.  And I think it's part of their upcoming book.  And I hope because he already mentioned it when we interviewed him many years ago that  they're working on a book on nutrient density.  And they've shown a very significant connection between soil practices, so farming practices,  
**[0:54:17-0:54:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:54:17):**  agriculture practices and nutrient density between conventional organic and farms that  have been on a regenerative journey for I think, at least 15 years.  And they looked at beef, pork, a number of grains and a number of vegetables, and very  small sample size that we shouldn't get all too excited about it.  But it feels like a sort of watershed moment.  
**[0:54:36-0:54:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:54:36):**  Like it feels like there's somebody that did a proper, a team of researchers, obviously,  it wasn't just David, but to show that connection between healthy soil, healthy produce, healthy  gut.  The next level is healthy gut and healthy people, but at least let's show the healthy  produce side.  
**[0:54:51-0:54:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:54:51):**  And there were significant differences even between higher end organic meat like beef.  And I think that they looked at the gate at the gate Brown's farm, and the regenerative  grown or the, let's say the pastures that have been on a long journey, they could show  significant differences, which is interesting, because we go sort of everybody, the higher  end organic and then but it could still be higher end organic soil and corn that has  
**[0:55:14-0:55:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:55:14):**  been fed to these cows.  And it just doesn't show in I mean, coming back to the earlier discussion on beef, it  just it just shows in the end result, which is very, very interesting.  So I hope we're going to see a lot more research.  But this seems like quite a significant milestone in let's say the nutrient density space.  
**[0:55:33-0:55:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:55:33):**  So I will put a paper below.  It's super readable.  I read it, which means it is readable.  And we hope to have David, obviously, David and Ann on the show soon to unpack this and  where that research is going.  
**[0:55:45-0:55:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:55:45):**  Terrific.  And I think that's there's also a perfect end to to this conversation.  And I want to keep you any any longer because it's very late.  And appreciate very much this this update.  And of course, the story of how you got here, but also the update on on Trailhead Capital.  
**[0:56:02-0:56:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:56:02):**  So thank you so much.  Absolutely.  Thank you so much for having me.  Thank you so much for listening all the way to the end for the show notes and links we  discussed in this episode.  
**[0:56:17-0:56:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:56:17):**  Check out our website, investing in regenerative agriculture.com forward slash posts.  If you liked this episode, why not share it with a friend or give us a rating on Apple  podcast that really helps.  Thanks again and see you next time.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  
**[0:56:48-0:56:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:56:48):**  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  There are 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to  put money to work in regenerating soils.  
**[0:57:04-0:57:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:57:04):**  And I've been following the space since 2011 and recording these podcasts since 2016.  We thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  
**[0:57:18-0:57:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:57:18):**  How have we picked interviewees?  And what questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  
**[0:57:26-0:57:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:57:26):**  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  You, the soil builders and investors in this space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  
**[0:57:39-0:57:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:57:39):**  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management consultants, etc.  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  
**[0:57:59-0:58:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:57:59):**  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  
**[0:58:13-0:58:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:58:13):**  that among the listeners of this podcast we have people with very different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  
**[0:58:28-0:58:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:58:28):**  It's currently a series of 17 videos mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to ride along.  We're gonna look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  
**[0:58:51-0:58:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:58:51):**  if you're a soy builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're gonna look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  
**[0:59:08-0:59:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:59:08):**  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment please find professional investment advice.  
**[0:59:23-0:59:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/pete-oberle#t=0:59:23):**  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  