### In Search of Soil  (2021-00-01)
**[0:00:00-0:00:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:00:00):**  So, we meet again.  Soil macrophauna.  Earthworms, beetles, ants, termites.  They're the engineers of the soil.  They open up pathways to allow air, water, and roots to go deep down in the soil, and  
**[0:00:33-0:00:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:00:33):**  they help hold soil together by creating aggregate particles.  Today we're talking about soil macrophauna with Italian researcher Adriano Sofo.  Dr. Sofo is someone who spent a career looking at small animals within the soil and the effects  that they perform on the soil.  In addition to macrophauna, we'll also be talking about the benefits of sustainable  
**[0:00:56-0:00:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:00:56):**  or regenerative agriculture.  How practices like no-till can make a big difference in soil structure and how we can  add more carbon to the soil.  Let's get into it with Dr. Adriano Sofo.  This is In Search of Soil.  
**[0:01:15-0:01:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:01:15):**  When you look at traditional agricultural practices, you have chemical fertilizer, you  have chemical sprays for herbicides or fungicides, you have tillage.  Is there one of those that you think is worse than the others in terms of depleting soils  of organic matter and reducing biodiversity?  Of course, all of these practices can reduce organic matter and reduce biodiversity.  
**[0:01:59-0:02:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:01:59):**  But especially for soil fauna and microorganisms, tillage and ploughing are very important,  relevant.  So we observed a significant increase of biodiversity in plants, plant biodiversity, soil biodiversity  in no-tillage soil or in soils with minimum tillage.  Why this?  
**[0:02:36-0:02:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:02:36):**  Because most of the fertility of a soil and of the biodiversity is in the first 30 centimeters  of soil.  And the traditional practices adopted by farmers in our area, plough soil, included ploughing  up to 30 centimeters and more so they can destroy completely the microfauna.  And in this way, we select bacterial and fungal groups that are deleterious for the agroecosystem  
**[0:03:17-0:03:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:03:17):**  and we destroy fauna filaments.  And these filaments are extremely important because they are a kind of concrete between  soil and the other elements.  So a sustainable soil which of fungal hyphae can resist erosion, can resist runoff to soil  losses.  
**[0:03:44-0:03:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:03:44):**  And so there are a wide range of benefits.  All these benefits impact on soil biodiversity, soil organisms, especially the microfauna  like healthworms, ants, beetles, for example.  And this fauna contributes to the soil fertility, to the biological soil fertility.  And they also affect the physical status of a soil because it increases macro porosity.  
**[0:04:18-0:04:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:04:18):**  And if we increase macro porosity, we also increase water retention, we increase soil  gases and oxygen so the soil is well aerated, rich of oxygen.  And we avoid the proliferation of deleterious bacteria like the netrifying bacteria that  are abundant in asphyctic soils.  When you look at no-till versus minimum-till, no-till would, I think you would say would  
**[0:04:58-0:05:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:04:58):**  be better than minimum-till, how would you define minimum-till?  I can give example from our system, the olive orchard we are talking about.  No-till is completely, it's a soil without any tillage.  But sometimes minimum-till is necessary.  For example, when the pruning residues or the crop residues from cover crops are cut,  
**[0:05:36-0:05:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:05:36):**  they must be incorporated into the soil.  So sometimes, and we have to cut this because for example cover crops compete with plants  for water because water is a limiting factor in our environments.  So they must be cut.  When they are cut, they must be incorporated into the soil.  
**[0:06:02-0:06:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:06:02):**  So sometimes a light harrowing is incorporated into the soil.  A tillage up to 10 centimetres is needed or 5 to 10 centimetres to incorporate this organic  matter into the soil and following the process of humification.  If you look at the soil profile, so here, you have surface and then you have below the  soil.  
**[0:06:41-0:06:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:06:41):**  If you're only tilling 5 to 10, you're up here.  And then traditional tillage you're saying could go down to 30.  What band of the soil profile do you think plays the greatest role when it comes to agronomy  of growing crops?  In other words, is there one band of this soil that you really do not want to disturb  
**[0:07:09-0:07:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:07:09):**  where a lot of the organisms are, where a lot of the action is taking place?  So is that why it's only 5 to 10 centimetres deep because that band isn't as important  as say 10 to 30?  From my experience and considering our experimental fields, our fields are in arid environments.  So the first centimetres of soils usually are not so wet, like the band from 10 to 30  
**[0:07:53-0:07:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:07:53):**  centimetres.  And most of the soil moisture is in that band between 10 and 25 to 30 centimetres.  But also, most of the biodiversity, if the soil is not disturbed, of course, and of macrofauna,  biodiversity is in that band.  So mostly it depends also on irrigation, of the irrigation type.  
**[0:08:30-0:08:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:08:30):**  If the soil is an orchard is drip irrigated, irrigated with microjets, or just applying  water, the whole surface.  And of course, another part very rich in biodiversity is the rhizosphere.  So it is the, independently from the depth of soil is the area close to the root surface.  So I think that if we apply minimum tillage, there is not a big damage, even because many  
**[0:09:12-0:09:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:09:12):**  soil organisms live not in the litter, but in the layer between 15, 10, 15, 30, 40 maximum  centimetres, many healthworms, for example.  If you're in an arid environment and you have that band of soil at the top, that it kind  of acts like a mulch, right?  It dries out and it prevents transpiration directly from the wet to the atmosphere.  
**[0:09:49-0:09:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:09:49):**  If you had that cover crop growing and you cut the cover crop and you just let it lay  on soil surface, instead of integrating it in, and you move that wet band up higher directly  to soil surface, is there a benefit to that?  Is there a benefit to having a complete organic matter cover litter over the whole surface  versus a more bare surface with that dry band?  
**[0:10:27-0:10:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:10:27):**  So you mean the difference between incorporating the organic matter applied into the soil,  the first layer of soil, or let it on the surface?  Yes.  Yeah.  There are benefits and it depends.  
**[0:10:45-0:10:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:10:45):**  Of course, if we leave the organic matter from pruning residues from cover crops on  the surface, we have benefits because we reduce transpiration, we reduce erosion and we don't  disturb at all the soil.  So microorganisms are very well preserved.  But the mineralization of this organic matter is lower.  
**[0:11:19-0:11:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:11:19):**  So we need time.  So this is a good option if we combine the residues kept on onto the soil, above the  soil, together with mineral fertilization.  But if you want to produce humus and let that nutrients are released from organic matter,  we need to incorporate it into the soil, at least in the first centimetres.  
**[0:11:54-0:12:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:11:54):**  Because in the soil we have much more than in the litter, we have the highest biological  activity.  And another important factor is the surface to mass ratio.  So it is very important, at least in our climate, to reduce, to increase the surface of the  organic matter.  
**[0:12:26-0:12:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:12:26):**  So we have to shred the leaves and pruning residues and everything.  And this allows microorganisms to decompose fastly into the organic matter.  And it also depends, the choice depends also on the water content and on the irrigation  type.  If the water content is high, we can leave the organic matter above the soil, like a  
**[0:13:00-0:13:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:13:00):**  cover, kind of cover onto the soil.  If the soil is dry, it is better to incorporate the organic matter, the residues in the first  centimetres where the activity of microorganism is higher due to water content.  So the choice depends mostly on the climate and on the irrigation type.  If you were in a lab setting and you had two pots and one had, let's say they're one metre  
**[0:13:40-0:13:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:13:40):**  deep pots, and you had one where it had a 10 centimetre band of dry soil at the top  and you put plant A in that pot, the next pot, same depth, same plant goes in, but soil  was wet, like you ensured that soil was wet directly to soil surface.  Do you think you'd see a difference in plant health in the soil that was moist, the 100%  of the soil profile versus one that was only moist, some level below the surface?  
**[0:14:19-0:14:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:14:19):**  Yeah, also in this case, it depends on the crop.  I have experience with orchards, so with tree crops, and what did I learn from these systems  that of course we have compared to herbaceous crops, we have deeper root systems.  But also in this case, the situation changes according to the crop.  For example, if we compare two extremes, so if we compare olive trees, a typical crop  
**[0:15:03-0:15:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:15:03):**  from our environments, our climates, our soils, and kiwifruit, for example, that is also cultivated  in our systems, we have two completely different behaviours.  The root systems of olive trees are very deep, up to 2, 3, 4 metres.  So the absorption of water is mainly concentrated in below 50 centimetres and more.  So in that case, irrigation is quite important.  
**[0:15:48-0:15:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:15:48):**  For example, drip irrigation, so concentrating irrigation just in the soil were explored  by roots and let this water get down, go down, so the water must have the time to arrive  to the deepest layers of the soil.  At this end, for olive, for example, we have very high water use efficiency and they can  resist to very low water potential, so very low amount of water into the soil.  
**[0:16:33-0:16:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:16:33):**  If we compare this crop with kiwifruit, for example, the roots morphology and system is  totally different.  And kiwifruit has a shell of system, so the roots develop in the first layer of the soil  and they explore the first layer up to maximum 30, 35 centimetres, not more.  So if we cultivate, for example, olive in soil with a dry layer, the top, dry top soil,  
**[0:17:11-0:17:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:17:11):**  doesn't matter.  It is not so important.  If we cultivate kiwifruit, it is very, very important.  So it mostly depends on, also in this case, on the crop, on the tree crop and on the irrigation  system that it is applied according to the crop that is cultivated.  
**[0:17:37-0:17:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:17:37):**  Yeah, so most people listening to this are going to be growing herbaceous crops, vegetables,  and I would think they'd be in the, they'd be closer aligned to kiwi than olives.  So for vegetables, also in this case, I did some researches about them and the root morphology  and root architecture is very, very important also in this case.  So if we cultivate, for example, cabbage or rapeseed that belong to brassica, family,  
**[0:18:16-0:18:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:18:16):**  they have a taproot, so a very long root, deep into the soil.  So in that case, they are less affected by dry top soil.  If we cultivate, or cereals is the same, if you cultivate other crops, like legumes, for  example, they have more diffuse root system, so not a taproot system.  And so they are more influenced by the moisture in the top soil.  
**[0:18:55-0:19:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:18:55):**  I know you did a study looking at different forms of irrigation and you've alluded to  this a little bit.  The most common forms of irrigation here in the States would be drip and then just overhead  sprinkler.  So when I think about the two, and I guess microjets are going to be similar to an overhead  
**[0:19:18-0:19:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:19:18):**  in terms of coverage.  When I think of drip, you get a concentration on one point of the soil and then you get  it, it kind of bubbles out over time.  When you get a microjet or sprinkler, it's like rain, you're applying it evenly over  the surface.  
**[0:19:33-0:19:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:19:33):**  How should growers think about irrigation systems and the differences between a microjet  or overhead versus drip and how that could affect plant growth?  Firstly, the most important thing is the efficiency of these systems.  Drip irrigation is very efficient, so the amount of water is required is very, very  low compared to the microjets.  
**[0:20:08-0:20:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:20:08):**  For drip irrigation, we use them in several agro ecosystems, for several crops, especially  for tree crops, for peach, for example, for nectarines, for olive.  And it is very, very efficient and we cover on average 20% of the soil surface.  This system has many advantages from an environmental point of view because the wet soil is less.  And in the wet soil, we have the highest losses of carbon as carbon dioxide because soil respiration  
**[0:20:57-0:20:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:20:57):**  is very, very high.  So we have losses of carbon and losses of organic carbon, but concentrated just where  the drip system is located.  If we apply microjets, of course, we must use much more water.  The efficiency is 65-75% and we can cover almost the whole soil.  
**[0:21:33-0:21:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:21:33):**  And also in this case, it depends on the crop.  It depends on the root system.  So the choice of an irrigation system is based mainly on the water availability, firstly,  but especially on the architecture and morphology of the roots of the crop.  So if a crop, if a root is concentrated, is below the plant, is a taproot, is along the  
**[0:22:02-0:22:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:22:02):**  soil profile, it is deep.  A drip irrigation can be fine.  The roots are shallow or they are concentrated in the first layers of the soil.  In that case, microjets are preferred.  And also in this case, from my experience, we have crops that need microjets.  
**[0:22:37-0:22:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:22:37):**  For example, kiwifruit is like that.  And other ones that are better with drip irrigation.  With drip irrigation, we have many environmental benefits and economical benefits.  So in thinking about that, I mean, that makes sense.  If the crops that get most of their benefit in the upper soil profile, then you want that  
**[0:23:03-0:23:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:23:03):**  to be as wet as possible because that's where their roots are.  That's where you want biological activity.  If the plants are going deeper with their roots, then drip's okay because the water's  just going down, down, and it's not covering as much of that upper band.  That's the basic gist of it?  
**[0:23:20-0:23:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:23:20):**  Yeah.  That's the basic reason or the choice.  And of course, mostly depends on the water availability in the place where you cultivate.  And in fact, drip irrigation was discovered and applied in Israel, for example.  They are expert in this, but now it is spread in all the Mediterranean basin for tree crops,  
**[0:23:45-0:23:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:23:45):**  for example.  So always it depends on the crop and on the crop density and the water availability, the  choice.  So it is not a matter of arid or wet climate, but it depends on the density and on the root  morphology.  
**[0:24:12-0:24:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:24:12):**  Does tillage play a role in soil drying out?  If you had an area that had a nice moisture profile on the soil and I till it, is that  soil going to want to dry out faster now?  Mostly depends on the soil composition, if it is a sandy soil or a clay soil.  And usually if we till, we have, in most of the cases, we have lots of water from the  
**[0:24:52-0:24:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:24:52):**  top soil and a higher mineralization.  So we have losses of water and of carbon at the same time.  And another danger is that if we plough or we till, we can have soil compaction.  So we have a loss of water and carbon from the top layer.  And at the same time, we have compaction or in the worst case, seeding of the soil and  
**[0:25:29-0:25:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:25:29):**  deeper layers.  And so I was reading yesterday that most of the most fertile soils cultivated lost from  20 to 60% of organic carbon in 50 years.  The prairie soils, the most fertile soils.  And in Germany, where I am actually, we have losses of 60 hectares per day of soil.  
**[0:26:06-0:26:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:26:06):**  60 hectares every day.  And of soil seeding, so a soil that is completely lost forever.  And Italy, where I come from, where I work, is the European country with the highest consume  of soil.  We lost in the tilled soils, we lost 100 times more soil by erosion compared to the sustainable  
**[0:26:40-0:26:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:26:40):**  soils.  So the erosion is 100 times faster.  And this is very similar to the results that we had in our systems.  When you read this, you're doing research, and this is over, like you said, a medium  long term, 20 year study.  
**[0:27:05-0:27:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:27:05):**  Why isn't sustainable agriculture viewed as a better option for people doing the farming?  Why does conventional still hold so much clout?  When the data seems to show that one is clearly better, not just for now, but for the future?  This is a very interesting question and very complex.  Because we, I think because we, at least me, I work in academic.  
**[0:27:54-0:28:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:27:54):**  And so among the researchers, these things are very well known.  If we look, if we read the FAO reports, the IPCC reports, and other reports, all of them  say that soil is important, not only for a productive point of view, but from an economical  and environmental point of view.  And the environment today is extremely important.  
**[0:28:27-0:28:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:28:27):**  We are looking at the effects of climate change.  And we don't often we don't think that soil contains the amount of carbon, the atmosphere,  and the biosphere at the same time.  So the carbon stocks in the soil are very important.  And so carbon can be a sink for soil for carbon.  
**[0:28:57-0:29:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:28:57):**  So it can be a sink for carbon.  But the problem is, at least in the country where I live and I work, is the dissemination  of this message to farmers.  Other things are changing very fastly.  The last years, the integrated agriculture, the regenerative agriculture, the organic  
**[0:29:18-0:29:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:29:18):**  agriculture increased a lot.  And organic production in Italy is today very high compared to 20 years ago or 30 years  ago.  So the message the message are arriving, but there is a kind of we need time.  Time is needed to transmit this knowledge to the young generation, to the young farmers.  
**[0:29:43-0:29:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:29:43):**  Many of the young farmers that are starting to cultivate you, especially after the crisis  economic crisis, they decide to be farmers have a degree.  They have studied so they know these things.  While the traditional farmers of course are more ignorant.  So they often they did cannot receive the message behind these new practices.  
**[0:30:18-0:30:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:30:18):**  So I think that we must focus especially academia, universities, research centers on the communication  and dissemination starting from the children.  So I think that the reason why the sustainable techniques, eco-friendly techniques, there  are several names, but the substance is always the same.  The reason why they are not applied is that the concept we should transmit the message  
**[0:30:58-0:30:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:30:58):**  that agriculture is important.  It's a multifunctional practice activity.  It's not important only production, but it is also important to sustainability.  So your soils must be fertile for a long time for many generations.  And the benefits don't be that must not be immediate, but they must last during time.  
**[0:31:28-0:31:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:31:28):**  And most difficulties and understanding for the farmers is understanding the importance  of their activity for the environment, the importance of the soil management on the environment.  But today the things are going much better than 20 years ago.  There is a lot of research and a lot of revocation, dissemination.  I look this is positive from a positive point of view.  
**[0:32:02-0:32:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:32:02):**  And did I hear you right that the soil holds as much carbon as the atmosphere and biosphere  combined?  Yeah.  Soils have the same carbon of the atmosphere and the biosphere combined.  And of course, the most important thing for carbon is water, oceans.  
**[0:32:34-0:32:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:32:34):**  And the oceans every day mitigate our effects, deleterious effects on the environment.  They absorb a lot of carbon as carbonates.  But soil after oceans, soils are the second sink of carbon in the world.  In trying to build these complex soils that can sink carbon and all for getting kids involved  early, I mean, when you start to look at some of the macrofauna, I mean, that's where I  
**[0:33:05-0:33:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:33:05):**  think kids can see that it's not something you need a microscope for.  They get it.  Can you talk about the importance of soil macrofauna and maybe even start out saying,  define what is macrofauna?  Because I think people take macrofauna in the soil for granted and microfauna get all  
**[0:33:28-0:33:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:33:28):**  the credit and all the kind of the popularity.  Yeah.  So the scientific definition of microfauna is animals below 100 microns.  One micron is one million of a meter.  And for mesofauna, we define organelles between 100 and 100 meters, microns and two millimeters.  
**[0:34:01-0:34:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:34:01):**  For macrofauna, we can imagine earthworms, for example, or insects.  We define animals, soil animals from two millimeters to 20 millimeters.  And then we have megafauna, the animals that are visible, the more evident animals that  are above 20 millimeters.  And in addition, we have another definition very common to find is microflora is scientifically  
**[0:34:41-0:34:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:34:41):**  is quite wrong because it's not a flora.  They are not plants, but they are bacteria and fungi.  And so we have these four components that work all together in the soil.  So we can see the soil, we should imagine the soil not from only a productive point  of view, but under an holistic vision.  
**[0:35:08-0:35:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:35:08):**  So the holistic vision, there are several researchers, recent researchers that explore  the soil, not only from a mineral point of view, but also from a biological point of  view.  In a soil, there are minerals, there is organic matter, there are animals, there are bacteria,  there are fungi, there are microorganisms.  
**[0:35:36-0:35:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:35:36):**  And of course, there are also pores, pores filled with water and air.  So soil is a living system.  It is not something that it is not some is not something where organic matter only decomposes,  but it is something alive.  And if we may imagine that 25% of biodiversity is in the soil, 24, one quarter of biodiversity  
**[0:36:15-0:36:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:36:15):**  is in the soil.  And most of this biodiversity is not known at all.  If we imagine that ants constitute the 10% of the biomass of the all animals or together,  we can have an idea of the importance of soil from a biological point of view.  Of course, from a scientific point of view, scientific point of view, soils can be considered  
**[0:36:47-0:36:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:36:47):**  as soils, even if there is no life in it.  We talk about soils from Mars, for example, planets, soils from deserts, where there is  no life, there is little life.  But most of the cases, soils are alive.  There is cooperation between microorganisms, plant, roots, animals, and sofona.  
**[0:37:16-0:37:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:37:16):**  And that work all together in soil composition.  And I have I had a lesson from a very important for me, in my opinion, Italian pedologist,  maybe not very well known, is Giovanni Haussmann.  He considered the soil as a placenta, I'm reading now.  And what he said, the man who physically and culturally is far from nature environment,  
**[0:37:53-0:38:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:37:53):**  from the soil, from agriculture and tradition, can be considered as eradicated, alienated,  confused, capable of only damaging himself to others and to the environment.  So soil can be, must be, look, so seen as a living ecosystem.  And all the production depends, 90% of life depends on soil.  The macro fauna in the soil, so that would be worms, ants, beetles.  
**[0:38:38-0:38:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:38:38):**  What role are they playing in all of this?  Let's start with worms.  The most important, they have several roles.  And most of these roles are beneficial from soil.  And earthworms, for example, termites, ants, some beetles can be defined as ecosystem engineers.  
**[0:39:09-0:39:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:39:09):**  Why this definition?  Because they dig into the soil, they build nests, burrows, and they mix organic matter.  So they are like engineers.  They change physically and chemically the soil.  So they increase macro porosity.  
**[0:39:35-0:39:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:39:35):**  So the soil with macro fauna are usually richer of air, of oxygen.  And they shred organic matter, leaves, and so residues, and they increase the surface  of this organic matter, organic material.  Increasing the surface of this material, microorganisms of bacteria and fungi can decompose better  this material.  
**[0:40:07-0:40:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:40:07):**  And so if they decompose better, more nutrients are released, more nitrogen, more phosphorus,  potassium.  And so plants can absorb more nutrients.  So soil fertility increases.  So it's a kind of trophic net where you have the producers that are roots, their plants,  
**[0:40:34-0:40:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:40:34):**  photosynthetic organisms, and then you have the shredders.  Macro fauna usually do this.  So they cut organic material in smaller pieces.  And then you have the decomposers that are mostly microorganisms.  So macro faunas are a very important role because they, macro fauna, live in the soil,  
**[0:41:06-0:41:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:41:06):**  usually in the top soil.  But most of organisms are concentrated in the litter, but some of them can live in the  deeper soil.  So the main advantage is the physical changes that macro fauna causes in the soil.  And these physical changes in turn can affect chemical fertility and biological fertility  
**[0:41:40-0:41:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:41:40):**  of microorganisms.  So everything is interconnected, intertwined.  If you think about ants, I don't think they get any credit, at least with the, even gardeners,  when it comes to building soil.  I think worms get all the credit.  
**[0:42:02-0:42:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:42:02):**  What role do ants play?  And hearing that quote that ants are what, 10% of biomass?  There's a lot of ants.  What are they doing in the soil?  Ants are, usually ants are concentrated in the hot environments.  
**[0:42:26-0:42:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:42:26):**  So in the arid environments, much more than in the coldest part environments.  But ants are ecosystem engineers.  They protect, so they change the physical structure of the soil.  They are very strong predators of pathogens of other organisms that eat plants.  So they are competitor of herbivores, for example.  
**[0:43:09-0:43:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:43:09):**  So they can protect plants from other organisms.  And they can protect roots from damaging insects.  They can change the, with their nests, they can change the physical structure of the soil.  So they can increase water infiltration and water holding capacity.  And so in arid soil, you must, for example, irrigate less.  
**[0:43:48-0:43:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:43:48):**  So you have benefits because your soils are richer of water.  So all these microtome faunal organisms are not dangerous for plants.  If you look at ants versus earthworms, if they were in the same environment, do you  have a sense of which one does more in terms of aeration, creating micro-porosity?  Is it worms or is it ants?  
**[0:44:29-0:44:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:44:29):**  Both are, they are quite similar from certain point of view for the sides, more or less.  And they are part of the microfauna.  They can be defined microfauna.  But their functions are totally different.  Earthworms are more abundant in the wet soils.  
**[0:44:52-0:44:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:44:52):**  So they need more water.  And ants are more abundant in the dry soils.  Both are ecosystem engineers.  So they change the structure of the soil.  But there is a difference because usually ants eat sugars.  
**[0:45:12-0:45:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:45:12):**  So they have different, they eat differently.  While earthworms eat soil.  So eating soil, they mix this soil with the enzymes of their gut, their stomach, and then  excrete the soil, the same soil, enriched of enzymes, enriched of other organic matter.  So the castes of these earthworms constitute a very fertile soil.  
**[0:45:48-0:45:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:45:48):**  So the earthworms are clove soils.  And so they mix the organic matter.  And they cause the bioturbation.  The bioturbation is the change of the soil, the physical structure of the soil.  They mix, for example, they transport the fertile soil, the top soil, to the deeper  
**[0:46:13-0:46:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:46:13):**  layers of soil.  So they increase also the fertility of the deeper soil.  And they increase aeration.  They increase biological activity.  They enrich soil with enzymes.  
**[0:46:32-0:46:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:46:32):**  Ants are different.  Of course, they can physically, can change the physical structure of the soil, but are  not so efficient like earthworms.  And this is also why Darwin spent the last years of his life studying macrofauna, studying  earthworms.  
**[0:46:56-0:47:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:46:56):**  He wrote a book on this.  If somebody wanted to increase the number of earthworms in their soil, is it as simple  as add organic matter and moisture?  Simple yeah.  Earthworms are not so, not so efficient.  
**[0:47:26-0:47:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:47:26):**  They don't require much.  But they, for sure, they need water and organic matter.  They live in the organic, decaying organic matter.  They compost organic matter.  And at the same time, you need for sure water.  
**[0:47:44-0:47:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:47:44):**  So these two things are important for their growth.  And of course, you can enrich soil.  You can also buy earthworms and increase the earthworm activity and earthworms abundance  and numbering your soils.  It's a practice that is normally used to increase by adding earthworms to the soil.  
**[0:48:15-0:48:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:48:15):**  But you must prepare the conditions for their growth.  But in this case, it also depends on the species of earthworms.  Some species of earthworms live in the litter.  Other ones in the top soil, other ones go deeper.  So if we want to increase earthworms, I think the best way to do is not adding by yourself,  
**[0:48:52-0:48:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:48:52):**  because it is very difficult, hard, because especially if you have big lands, big soil  surface, you will need so many earthworms, but it is avoid tillage, increase organic  matter and increase water, if possible.  These are the three conditions.  Because earthworms per tubes change physical structure of the soil.  
**[0:49:23-0:49:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:49:23):**  They mix the soil, but of course, they can be reduced if the soil is stilled.  When you look at increasing porosity in the soil through macrofauna, they're digging all  these tunnels, allowing air and water to get into the soil.  That's one of the reasons we try and do tillage, or we do tillage, is to try and recreate that.  We take a dense soil and we want to fluff it up.  
**[0:49:59-0:50:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:49:59):**  But we know when we do tillage, you do that and it deflates, it collapses.  Why don't the tunnels and all this activity from macrofauna, why is there no collapse  from that?  Yeah, that's a very, very good question.  I think that tillage is a very strong practice.  
**[0:50:27-0:50:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:50:27):**  So it disturbs the soil completely and it destroys the macro aggregates of the soil  and the physical structure of the soil.  So the main reason why we till is not improving the soil fertility or soil aeration, but eliminating  weeds.  So if we want to eradicate plants, we till.  
**[0:51:09-0:51:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:51:09):**  If we want to have the soil bare, completely bare, we till.  So it is a very easy practice to apply.  So we usually till the soil because it is simple.  On the other side, the activity of macrofauna is completely different.  It is not so intense like tillage.  
**[0:51:37-0:51:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:51:37):**  It is distributed in different layers of the soil.  So there is a kind of equilibrium.  So if we think that the evolution of this organism, we can imagine why they are called  engineers.  They are called engineers because they know, not in a conscious way, of course, they know  
**[0:52:08-0:52:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:52:08):**  the limits of the soil.  So they know how to build, they know the density of the nests, the density of the tunnels.  They are in equilibrium with the soil and they act in a long term.  So it is not like tillage, it is like ploughing.  It is an intense and strong practice that disturb and destroy completely, firstly the  
**[0:52:47-0:52:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:52:47):**  physical structure of the soil, but after the physical changes, we have also the chemical  changes.  And after the chemical changes, we have a decrease of the biological fertility and we  expose the soils to oxidation, to the oxygen.  So we have a very high mineralization and it has sense only combined with mineral fertilization.  
**[0:53:17-0:53:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:53:17):**  While the fertilization carried out by microfauna is completely sustainable, it doesn't require  external inputs.  I think that if we till the soil, apparently we increase aeration in the first layers,  but at the same time we pose compassion in the layers below.  In many Italian soils, after 20, 30 years of intensive cultivation, we have very severe  
**[0:54:04-0:54:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:54:04):**  problems with soil quality.  Many of our soils are compacted after 20 years of tillage, 20 years of mineral fertilization,  20 years of decrease of organic matter, 20 years of decreasing biodiversity.  So apparently if we want to act faster, we plough till the soil and we increase aeration  of course, but at the same time we don't know other secondary effects of tillage.  
**[0:54:45-0:54:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:54:45):**  In the subsoils, many often I observe the soil compaction that starts from 40 centimeters  of soil.  So many farmers try to avoid the detrimental effects of the decreasing soil fertility by  increasing soil mineral fertilization, water supply, so they irrigate more, they put more  nutrients, more fertilizers, trying to save plants, to save crops.  
**[0:55:25-0:55:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:55:25):**  Because they only concentrate their attention on the first layer of soil.  They often don't know that soils below 30, 40 centimeters, 50 centimeters are completely  compacted.  So if we till a soil for a long time, of course we have an increase of soil aeration, but  it is often just apparent, it is not like that.  
**[0:55:58-0:56:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:55:58):**  The situation is totally different in the deeper layers of the soil, where aeration  is very, very low.  In many soils, also recently in the trials that we are conducting, I observed compacted  soils without macropose.  They are the increases of carbon dioxide and they are normal because there is a soil breath.  
**[0:56:33-0:56:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:56:33):**  But the differences with sustainable soil are very, very high.  So the physical damage of the soil decreases their fertility.  So if you didn't turn the soil and you had compaction, let's say you had compaction to  start, and you want to speed it up, to speed up the reversal of the compaction.  If you ran a subsoil plow through there that didn't invert, it just helped break up that  
**[0:57:15-0:57:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:57:15):**  compaction from below, do you think that is a path worth looking at?  Is that a tool in the toolkit, I guess is a better way to say it, to move towards something  more regenerative or do you think that it is just not needed at all?  Yes, maybe you mean soil rippers.  So kind of like a ripper.  
**[0:57:47-0:57:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:57:47):**  In many cases, this is very effective.  So rippers are very effective because they don't disturb the soil, soil layers, they  don't mix the soil, they don't expose the soil to oxidation, but they increase aeration  from the cracks they form.  And this is a good method, especially for crops, for tree crops, when we want to regenerate  
**[0:58:17-0:58:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:58:17):**  the root system.  If a soil is compacted, usually we have problems with roots because roots need oxygen for respiration.  And if a soil is compacted, the oxygen content is quite low.  So the roots start to decompose.  What can we do in this case?  
**[0:58:42-0:58:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:58:42):**  We can use rippers to cut the dead roots and let them regenerate again, increasing soil  aeration.  So another good option is, for example, in tree crops, is the dealing the soil in the  inter-row area, for example, and filling them with soil just not along the tree row, but  in the inter-row areas and fill them with organic matter.  
**[0:59:16-0:59:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:59:16):**  So sacrifice some parts of the field and so working in those parts and filling them with  organic matter, so increasing aeration because soil gases can diffuse both vertically and  horizontally into the soil.  Have you ever seen this tool, a broadfork?  Yes, let me.  
**[0:59:47-0:59:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:59:47):**  I have never seen it, but no, I have never seen it.  The theory would be, you push this down into the ground, this is on a small scale, like  the farmer is standing on it, and then he pulls back on those poles and those forks  slice or kind of cut up through the soil and you work your way down the field.  Push it in, slice.  
**[1:00:18-1:00:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:00:18):**  So it's a way of, on a small scale, aerating the soil while not mixing the layers up.  And I was just curious if you had any thoughts on that.  I have never seen it, but I can understand the importance, the function.  Of course it can increase aeration, but can it be applied in a productive field?  I think it's so much library.  
**[1:00:55-1:00:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:00:55):**  It'd be very small scale.  You'd have to ask.  Small scale, in the permaculture, for example.  Yeah, at small scales, yeah.  I guess coming to this then, what do you think, if you had restored soils using regenerative  
**[1:01:13-1:01:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:01:13):**  practices, do you think you'd ever need to do anything to the subsoil?  And you just say, hey, let the roots, let the macrofauna, they'll do it.  Once you get your soil to a certain point, is there like a point of, you never have to  do soil, you never have to do subsoiling, you never have to do a ripper because the  soil's nature is taking care of that?  
**[1:01:44-1:01:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:01:44):**  Or do you think there always is a need to some extent, to some degree, to go back and  maybe have to do those types of activities?  This is the principle of permaculture.  So let the environment as it is.  So in the productive crops, I think it's very difficult.  
**[1:02:08-1:02:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:02:08):**  So there is always something to do.  It's very hard to let the things as they are.  So it can be a disease, it can be a decrease of organic matter into the soil, so you have  to increase organic matter and compost and the menu, or you have to contrast and disease  a pathogen.  
**[1:02:35-1:02:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:02:35):**  So this equilibrium is not possible in agriculture, in the productive agriculture.  Why?  Because like I said before, agriculture is, agroecosystems are ecosystems, so of course  they reach an equilibrium, but this equilibrium doesn't give benefit only to the crop, but  to the whole community of organisms.  
**[1:03:07-1:03:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:03:07):**  And so in the productive agriculture, of course, there are less intensive organic practices  that are, sometimes you can apply natural products and products are not, mineral fertilizers,  for example, or chemical, not chemical, producing substances, but from time to time you for  sure you have to do something.  Different concept is in the permaculture where there is an ecological view where crops are  
**[1:04:01-1:04:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:04:01):**  not at the center of the ecosystem, but they compete naturally with other plants or animals,  but you can do this at a small scale, but if we imagine that one third of the soils  are lost, we lost one third of the fertile soils, so soils are becoming more important  than water, they are a natural capital, and we are almost 8 billion inhabitants, food  is not enough for everyone.  
**[1:04:47-1:04:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:04:47):**  So regenerative agriculture and sustainable agriculture is very important, but of course  it requires labor.  Right, so I'm maybe thinking of that in a practical sense for farmers, do as little  as you need to do in terms of interfering, but at the end of the day you are producing  a crop, you need that crop to grow well, so if you have to step in with certain practices,  
**[1:05:21-1:05:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:05:21):**  and do it, but there's always choices, one is more of a gentle approach, one is more  of a harsh approach.  Yeah, the gentle approach also requires knowledge, so you can act gently on the crops if you  know how the agro-ecosystem works, how they function, so knowledge is very important.  Sustainable agriculture, it is possible to apply sustainable agriculture, there is a  
**[1:06:01-1:06:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:06:01):**  lot of scientific knowledge on this, the problem is disseminating, transferring this information  to the farmers.  One area I'm thinking of now is organic matter, and obviously it's important on the small  scale, a lot of farmers are adding organic matter to the soil with compost.  If you had two scenarios, one would be, let's say I laid down 3 centimeters of compost directly  
**[1:06:34-1:06:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:06:34):**  on the soil surface, I didn't integrate it into the soil, I just layer it right on top.  The next would be I put down that same 3 centimeters, but I mix it in to say the top 10 centimeters.  Would the difference between those methods be in case one, it's going to mineralize slower,  because I have to wait for the macro fauna to get it and bring it down, and I maybe prevent  some evaporation because I now have this organic cap.  
**[1:07:11-1:07:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:07:11):**  And then in scenario two where I've mixed it in, I'm putting more food into that upper  horizon of the soil so it's mineralizing faster.  Is that really the only difference between the two, is it a mulching effect and a mineralization  rate effect, or is there something else I'm missing from layering versus mixing?  Of course if you don't mix the organic matter, you preserve soils entirely.  
**[1:07:44-1:07:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:07:44):**  So you don't disturb any macro fauna, you don't disturb animals, you don't disturb high  feed, so it is not only mineralization, but if you don't incorporate the organic matter  into the soil, you preserve biodiversity of the soil.  So you preserve the ecological nice, the ecological habitats of many microorganisms and fauna,  and soil fauna.  
**[1:08:26-1:08:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:08:26):**  So it has beneficial effects on soil biodiversity.  This in turn gives also benefits to the agricultural production.  If you preserve the fungal network, plants and crops of course can absorb much better  nutrients, for example phosphorus, because the fungal filaments, the high field fungus,  help plants to absorb nutrients.  
**[1:09:00-1:09:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:09:00):**  At the same time, many microorganisms produce exudates, also roots produce exudates, so  substances that are separated from their bodies.  And these substances can act as a kind of glue, so they preserve soil agarates and they  keep them safe from erosion.  So the situation of incorporating the residues into the soil is totally different because  
**[1:09:42-1:09:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:09:42):**  you destroy much of this biodiversity.  From all your work studying systems, how would you define what sustainable agriculture is  today?  Sustainable agriculture is something that can last over time.  So it requires of course life, biodiversity is extremely important for sustainability.  
**[1:10:13-1:10:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:10:13):**  If we don't want to intervene continuously on soils, we must accept that most of the  work must be done by soil organisms.  We don't have to reduce soil biodiversity.  And sustainable agriculture is something that is regenerative, it is not necessarily organic,  it is something that increases carbon into the soil, that increases biodiversity, it  
**[1:10:49-1:10:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:10:49):**  can be defined as restorative conservation agriculture, something that preserves soil,  but soil is viewed as a living ecosystem where there is a kind of equilibrium.  So we must preserve this equilibrium.  What would you want farmers to know if you look at your research and thinking about the  future?  
**[1:11:24-1:11:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:11:24):**  I think that farmers should know that they have a capital in their hands.  They have precious things.  They must preserve resources, preserve water, but not only water, considering the interactions  between plants and soil, considering the importance of soil biodiversity, considering the soils  as alive.  
**[1:12:04-1:12:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:12:04):**  So they should be convinced on this and for convincing them, it is important to know that  environmental benefits can give economic benefits, economical benefits.  So in the short term, conventional intensive agriculture can seem better, but in the long  term, in a durable term, if we consider more years, a longer period, sustainable agriculture  is more convenient from different point of view because soils not only give production,  
**[1:12:58-1:13:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:12:58):**  they are not only useful for production, but they are useful for a wide range of ecosystem  services.  They purify water, they purify atmosphere, they act as a sink of carbon, they can contrast  climate change, they can store, preserve biodiversity in their layer, they can be extremely important,  not only for production.  
**[1:13:25-1:13:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-20-AdrianoSofo-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:13:25):**  So the responsibility of the new farmers, the young farmers is huge today.  They can contribute to the future of the earth, of the planet.  Thank you.  