### In Search of Soil  (2020-00-28)
**[0:00:00-0:00:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:00:00):**  So we meet again.  You kind of shoot yourself on the foot because as you apply the fertilizers, it makes it  a soil more amenable to weed growing in it.  The weeds serve a purpose.  The voice you're hearing?  
**[0:00:33-0:00:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:00:33):**  That's Dr. David Johnson.  David is a molecular biologist and soil scientist focusing on fungally dominated composts and  carbon sequestration.  David sees compost as more than just adding organic matter to the soil.  It's a way of inoculating and adding biology to the soil.  
**[0:00:53-0:00:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:00:53):**  Today the conversation is going to range from fungally dominated compost and how little  you actually need to add of it to the soil to see an improvement to improving soil by  recreating and rebuilding the soil ecosystem, not just one part of it.  David and his wife also created the Johnson-Sue Bioreactor as a way to create fungally dominated,  high quality compost to be used in agriculture.  
**[0:01:20-0:01:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:01:20):**  As a scientist, he's absolutely brilliant and I hope you get a lot out of this conversation.  Let's jump right into it with Dr. David Johnson.  This is In Search of Soil.  So David, the first thing I really want to ask you was in all your years of dealing with  microbes, what has been the most fascinating thing to you?  
**[0:01:44-0:01:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:01:44):**  Is there one thing that really stands out and just blew your mind when you found it  out?  Well gosh, there's a lot of things, but I think what really started to put it together  was the influence of our own stomach, our microbiome in our stomach on our health and  our well-being.  
**[0:02:00-0:02:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:02:00):**  And the number of things that they do and their relationship to our health, how they're  about 80% of our immune system, and their ability to turn on and off genes in our body,  all of this is fascinating.  And it just transferred to the soil how we're seeing a regeneration of that soil microbiome  has so much influence on the productivity of the system, nitrogen fixation, phosphorus  
**[0:02:32-0:02:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:02:32):**  solubilization.  And as we bring it back, how much influence it can have.  That has to be the biggest eye-opener.  We woke up one morning and we had to pinch each other to make sure this wasn't a dream,  that it was real.  
**[0:02:50-0:02:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:02:50):**  The potential that we saw to bringing these microbiomes back in soils.  Where do you think agriculture's current understanding is of microbiology when it comes to soil?  I think we can say we know it's there.  We know it's more complex than we'll understand.  But do you think agriculture really respects how important it is and how important the  
**[0:03:14-0:03:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:03:14):**  balance of those microbes are?  At this point, there's very few.  The people that are out on the leading edge are seeing this.  They know that's it.  But we're still probably back in the 60s looking at microbes as pathogens exclusively, not  
**[0:03:35-0:03:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:03:35):**  as beneficial parts of the system.  But we're getting there.  I mean, we see Monsanto and Bayer start to bring out biologicals now because they see  this is the future.  It's just a matter of time.  
**[0:03:50-0:03:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:03:50):**  I think this will be the agriculture of the future.  Our understanding is still very limited on this.  We're just scratching the surface.  It's such a complex system.  Elegantly complex.  
**[0:04:03-0:04:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:04:03):**  Totally complex nonetheless as far as the decisions we make in agriculture, how we treat  the soil, all the different operations that we perform on the soil.  We still have a lot to learn on that.  But there's so much potential when it is brought back properly.  What we're seeing both in rangeland and cropland.  
**[0:04:26-0:04:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:04:26):**  If we look at rangeland or cropland, where do you think the biggest miss is right now  in terms of biology in those soils?  So we're not talking chemicals or anything like that that can obviously harm that biology.  But in terms of the biology present in those soils, are farmers not doing enough to encourage  the right kind?  
**[0:04:47-0:04:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:04:47):**  Are they not doing enough to encourage any kind?  Are they just too much of one?  Where do you see soils right now?  I think most of the practices that we've adopted over the last 150 years have been degrading  soil microbiomes.  
**[0:05:05-0:05:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:05:05):**  Either through plowing or disking or the application of all the different biocides.  All of this has been a negative influence on building solar biology.  And as I say, those farmers and rangers that are out on the leading edge, they understand  that that is what they're raising, is the soil biology.  The bacteria are the grass of that system as far as the consumption by organisms at  
**[0:05:32-0:05:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:05:32):**  higher trophic levels.  And they're understanding that if they do the right management techniques, they can  bring those soils back.  Many of them have.  We've seen some very interesting changes in rangeland.  
**[0:05:49-0:05:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:05:49):**  Half of us here in the Chihuahuan desert, we have one rancher that's gone from 250 acres  per cow to 25 acres per cow.  Just with grazing management.  And this is not an unusual story.  We see another rancher here in central New Mexico, Nancy Ranny.  
**[0:06:07-0:06:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:06:07):**  How she's gone from four species of grasses to 45 species of grasses in less than a decade.  And bringing back, in our area, I live in the desert.  And it's the desert because of one reason.  It's because we overgrazed it.  It used to be grasslands belly high to a horse when the Spaniards came through.  
**[0:06:27-0:06:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:06:27):**  But then with our grazing techniques, we grazed it into a desert.  And nice to know is with proper grazing, you can bring it back.  But that seems to be the only mechanism is what developed on the Great Plains with the  bison and how they were kept in tight herds with predators.  And they were moved along at regular intervals, it deposited their dung and their urine and  
**[0:06:50-0:06:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:06:50):**  their saliva.  Basically inoculating that grazing land as they every time they would go over it.  Because the manure would be rolled up into small balls by the dung beetles placed in  the ground and composted in place.  It was just a great inoculation event.  
**[0:07:08-0:07:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:07:08):**  And it built up some impressive grasslands.  I mean soil carbon five, six feet deep, the ability to grow forage in even low water environments.  The rancher Alejandro Correo, south of us, he gets seven inches of rain.  And he's brought it back from a complete desert, just scrub mesquite and greasewood.  And he now has grasses belly high to a horse.  
**[0:07:39-0:07:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:07:39):**  So we can do the same thing in our crop land as well.  Focusing on restoring that microbiology in the system.  And it's a system.  That's what we need to look at it as.  It's not just bringing back fungi.  
**[0:07:56-0:07:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:07:56):**  It's not just bringing back bacteria.  It's a whole system that we have to recreate in that cycling of the carbon and cycling  of the nitrogen.  It's an energy equation.  We have completely destroyed the productivity of these soils.  
**[0:08:12-0:08:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:08:12):**  We're working with compromised photosynthetic capacity on these soils.  And as we bring this biology back, we can increase the amount of photosynthesis, the  capacity of that certain area of land to actually capture the sun and capture the carbon and  restore that system.  Because the biology seems to be key.  
**[0:08:39-0:08:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:08:39):**  It is for us.  And it appears to be the same for the soils.  When you go from four species to I think you said 40 species in that example.  What's changing in the soil to allow those extra X number of species to now say I can  grow there.  
**[0:08:57-0:09:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:08:57):**  It's not just all manure being deposited.  In other words, if we just took grassland and we just put manure over the top of it  or compost over the top.  So it's again, it's the restoration system.  It takes a certain amount of disturbance as well.  
**[0:09:14-0:09:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:09:14):**  I could recommend a video that Peter Vick put out on a rancher in Texas that the name  of it is Herd Impact.  You can get it on carboncowboys.org.  He has 10 short mini documentaries on how these rangelander, these grazers have changed  the soil.  
**[0:09:36-0:09:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:09:36):**  This particular one in Texas, in order to restore the soils that were just barren, it  took a certain amount of impact on that soil from the hoof action.  It's as I say, it's a system that we're trying to bring back in all these different compartments,  into the design of the hoof of the cow and how its impact on the soil.  The saliva and also the tearing of that grass when the cow eats it produces hormones that  
**[0:10:11-0:10:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:10:11):**  increase plant growth as long as you don't take it back too far.  In the Great Plains, usually only about 40% of that forage was actually consumed by the  animal.  About 60% was either trampled into the ground or left there for a food resource for microbes.  There's a certain amount of the carbon that has to go back into this system in order to  
**[0:10:35-0:10:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:10:35):**  start rebuilding these soils.  But if you have reduced photosynthetic capacity on the front end, which is what we're really  fighting right now, unless we bring that back, we're not going to be able to build the carbon  up in the soils the way we should be able to.  The fungi we're finding in a research project, again with Peter Bick in the Southeast, looking  
**[0:10:56-0:11:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:10:56):**  at about five pairs of ranchers doing either the adaptive multipathic grazing and a conventional  for at least a decade.  What I'm seeing in the research that I've done is it's the fungal community that we've  destroyed in all these systems.  It's the most fragile, but the fungi function as both logistics and communication.  
**[0:11:22-0:11:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:11:22):**  They transport elemental nutrients in cooperation with the bacteria in the soil to the plant  in exchange for the energy that that plant has captured to fund or energize that system  in the soil for the microbes to be able to extract or fix the nutrients from the atmosphere.  If we can't bring back that photosynthetic capacity, we're not going to really be able  to fix these soils.  
**[0:11:46-0:11:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:11:46):**  But the nice thing is we can.  We've seen in this research the ability to increase productivity five times on forage  production in these systems.  As you bring this biology back, it starts stacking on itself, increased carbon into  the system.  
**[0:12:04-0:12:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:12:04):**  We're also seeing on the back end a reduced respiration rate, at least a relative respiration  rate.  The carbon that stays in the soil longer, you get a better carbon use efficiency.  Most of the ranchers or most of the scientists are going to look at this and say, okay, you've  increased carbon by 14 times.  
**[0:12:28-0:12:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:12:28):**  You've increased the soil microbial community biomass by five times.  Going to the current perspective, you're going to increase respiration.  But the funny thing is as you bring this fungal community back, as you bring the whole system  back in into operation, you are going to respire a little more carbon, but it levels off.  So relative to the amount of carbon that you have in the soil to start with that could  
**[0:12:57-0:13:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:12:57):**  be oxidizable or respirable by the microbes, they don't respire it.  They put it more into more biological growth than into respiration.  That increasing the biology in the system increases the ability of that system to extract  the nutrients from the soil parent material.  The system just starts stacking and building on each other.  
**[0:13:21-0:13:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:13:21):**  More nutrients available, more energy and carbon available in the system, more plant  growth.  At least that's what I'm observing.  It's not only in grazing, but in crop land as well.  You talk photosynthetic capacity and increasing that to build up the below ground biology.  
**[0:13:43-0:13:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:13:43):**  What is it above surface that's happening that's helping below surface?  Is it just more sugars coming out of the roots, more exudates coming out of the roots?  So the more you can grow up top, the more is being pumped down below?  I think a lot of it is that having the microbes there to make the nutrients available.  In photosynthesis and in nitrogen fixation, they're all protein structures that are performing  
**[0:14:09-0:14:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:14:09):**  all these metabolic functions.  In every protein, you have metal cofactors that allow these energy conversions to occur.  This depends on magnesium as far as the capture of the energy from the sun.  But there's a whole suite of other proteins along the line in the transferring that energy  that are required for an efficient flow of energy.  
**[0:14:37-0:14:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:14:37):**  If you don't have the microbes in the soil to extract those nutrients and make them vital,  I'm talking more than just nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium.  These plants use almost all of the 92 naturally occurring elements on the periodic table.  There's no way as farmers and ranchers that we can contemplate what we need to add to  the system or what we need to make available as far as these micronutrients to make the  
**[0:15:03-0:15:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:15:03):**  system function properly.  And yet nature has over the last 45 million or 53 million years on grazing land has developed  a system that's quite efficient at doing this if we allow it.  If we look at the Great Plains as they used to be, and I know there's some still small  sections of the original still intact with these deep, deep soils.  
**[0:15:29-0:15:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:15:29):**  And then we have cropland that has been treated conventionally for let's say 100 years.  And it's what we classify as poor soil compared to that Great Plains soil.  Can you walk on it through a step by step process, not in terms of how, but in terms  of as we change our management practices, what would happen to that poor soil on its  way to becoming that deep Great Plains soil?  
**[0:15:58-0:15:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:15:58):**  What does that story mean?  Well, you know, I have to take you back to what we're seeing in the human microbiome.  In one instance where they've done an experiment and they've removed fiber from the diet of  mice to see what happens to that stomach microbiome.  They have a decrease in diversity in that system.  
**[0:16:23-0:16:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:16:23):**  The more generations it goes through, you just get a decreased diversity all the way  through.  You would think, okay, we'll bring the fiber back, you know, just bring the carbon back  in your soil.  But it doesn't restore that microbiome structure.  
**[0:16:39-0:16:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:16:39):**  It doesn't bring back diversity.  The only way it brings it back is if you come in with an inoculation from a healthy microbiome.  And we're seeing the same thing in humans that if people suffer Crohn's disease, IBS,  decades, some people die from it.  Some people have resections of their intestines, more antibiotic regimes.  
**[0:17:01-0:17:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:17:01):**  And yet they find out that if you can bring the microbiome from a healthy individual,  like in a fecal transplant, and put it in to the person with IBS or Crohn's, in many  cases they can be cured in 24 hours.  And it seems to be that essential or important in these soils that we've broken is to bring  that biology back.  
**[0:17:27-0:17:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:17:27):**  We see just with an inoculation of the compost in the bioreactor, we did research in a project  in Wilcox, Arizona, where we came in with two pounds of compost per acre as an extract  that we injected into the furrow at planting.  In that research, what we saw is we compared a conventional approach with 256 pounds of  nitrogen.  
**[0:17:55-0:18:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:17:55):**  We had an intermediate treatment with 15% of that, or 38 pounds of nitrogen in that  two pounds of the compost.  And then we had another treatment just with the compost, the two pounds per acre rate.  What we saw is we matched productivity to the conventional with the beam or the compost  plus 15% productivity, 15% nitrogen.  
**[0:18:23-0:18:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:18:23):**  That 218 bushels of corn.  And this was quite unexpected because we replaced probably 180 pounds of nitrogen in that system  just with biology.  And in the compost only, we only suffered a 6.6% loss in productivity.  So there was again, about 140 to 150 pounds of nitrogen that we brought into that system  
**[0:18:50-0:18:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:18:50):**  just with the biology.  So it's from what we're seeing in this research is that you need to be able to bring a healthy  community back into this.  And the compost process that my wife and I developed seems to give you a very robust  and diverse microbial community.  
**[0:19:11-0:19:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:19:11):**  We see as you allow it to mature, we see a four times increase in the diversity of the  microbes.  You'll see microbes that start out in the composting process.  And at the end of that year, they're not dominant.  Some of them aren't even present, but they've been replaced by a whole nother suite of microorganisms  
**[0:19:30-0:19:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:19:30):**  that have much more diversity and much more capability.  So again, we're learning a lot on this.  It's not all known.  We're still at the very beginning and say scratching the surface as I was saying earlier  to you.  
**[0:19:48-0:19:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:19:48):**  Is inoculation enough?  Meaning it has, well, I mean, in the sense of it has, there has to be food in that soil  for the organisms you're putting into that soil to consume.  So and I know this is generalizing, but do you think that most soils, there's enough  food there for microbes?  
**[0:20:12-0:20:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:20:12):**  If you add microbes, at least some will be able to proliferate, multiply, and establish  themselves?  Or do you need that inoculant plus food source or the inoculant at the same time?  It's again a system.  And the microbes won't do it by themselves.  
**[0:20:32-0:20:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:20:32):**  This is not magic.  They need a living plant at all times to have that carbon flow.  It's kind of like banking, you know, you need a certain amount of money going into your  savings account in order to build things up.  But it's a system that we're trying to restore and having a plant grow all the time, either  
**[0:20:54-0:20:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:20:54):**  cover crop or commodity crop is essential to restoring the biology.  It won't happen without plants.  It's that relationship that developed between the soil microbiome and the plants that make  this planet what it is today.  So I know from watching some videos of presentations you've done, when you've applied some of the  
**[0:21:14-0:21:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:21:14):**  compost to different properties, it's very sparse, I would say, compared to what some  people do.  Imagine you took a sheet of white paper and you kind of threw a handful of seeds on it.  You're going to see a lot of white around those seeds.  And that's the rate that you're applying and you're seeing a big difference.  
**[0:21:30-0:21:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:21:30):**  I know at least in the small scale farming world, a lot of compost application is you  have a white sheet of paper.  You put compost on, you have covered that white sheet of paper and you can see zero  white.  So on one hand, beforehand, you have the concentrated inoculant going into the soil.  
**[0:21:49-0:21:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:21:49):**  On the other hand, you have people just piling compost on.  Do you think that an approach of just constantly putting on compost is it's working, but maybe  you're working too hard or it's not really a means to an end?  Is there some way that people can move from this, just dump it on to a more sparse application?  Well, yeah, that's what we're seeing.  
**[0:22:14-0:22:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:22:14):**  I started out at 400 pounds per acre, which is a dusting.  So it's not a nutrient amendment the way we're developing this.  It's an inoculant of the microbiome.  We're down now to two pounds per acre.  Even having success.  
**[0:22:34-0:22:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:22:34):**  I mean, the farmer was $80 an acre more profitable by using the compost from this bioreactor  and that research in Wilcox.  This was a very, very poor soil that we started.  It was very compacted.  Some of the infiltration rates on it were above 10 minutes.  
**[0:22:59-0:23:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:22:59):**  So it was a very compacted soil.  We did grow a cover crop on it before we planted this first year.  Instead of growing into the soil, the root mass would push the soil up.  So when you drove over it, it was like driving over a corrugated surface.  So we didn't start with a great soil on this.  
**[0:23:20-0:23:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:23:20):**  We did have one cover crop under our belt on it.  But then we came in with the biology and we saw that dramatic improvement in the productivity  without the use of nitrogen minerals.  So it's, again, it's a system that we're bringing back and understanding that it's not magic.  It's just biology, microbiology.  
**[0:23:46-0:23:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:23:46):**  And it depends on a constant flow of energy, just like we do.  If we don't have energy, we're cavemen.  If we have a little more energy into the system, we start to be able to do more things.  We start to be able to procreate more.  You start even more energy, you start to have specializations of the different organisms.  
**[0:24:10-0:24:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:24:10):**  Add a little more energy into the system.  Eventually, you'll have synergy in these systems as you bring the biology back and the energy  into the system.  It's all about energy flow on this planet.  And it's the microbes that developed all the different protein structures to capture that  
**[0:24:28-0:24:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:24:28):**  energy and to channel it through living organisms.  And this is what we have to try to restore, is that whole system that evolved on the planet  and to our benefit as far as being able to grow the food that we need to grow.  Restoring a poor soil is more better initially.  And I'm thinking small scale here.  
**[0:24:53-0:24:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:24:53):**  Somebody who has a thousand acres, they love the sound of two pounds per acre.  Somebody who has one acre could say, I can do two thousand pounds on my one acre.  That's not a problem for me to distribute that out.  Is there an assumption or is there a direct correlation between, took really high quality  compost at the food source and inoculant in one and you put more of it on a poor soil  
**[0:25:19-0:25:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:25:19):**  initially you're going to get results that much faster?  Yeah, I can just relate what I've done in the research.  I just did an experiment looking at the influence of garden and these are still low rates at  two pounds, five pounds, 10 pounds and 20 pounds per acre rate.  I saw no difference in the productivity between that many different rates.  
**[0:25:46-0:25:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:25:46):**  But what I did notice in, I had another experiment going on beside it of a in-furrow treatment.  All those were in-furrow, they were sprayed in as I planted the seed, but I had one where  I sprayed the inoculant on top of the surface.  And then I watered it in immediately.  There was double the productivity of the injected into the furrow at planting compared to spraying  
**[0:26:12-0:26:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:26:12):**  it on top.  So it was pretty dramatic to see these plants doing double the productivity, same amount  of water, same amount of sunlight.  And yet the productivity was so much higher when the biology was right there with the  seed when it germinated.  
**[0:26:31-0:26:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:26:31):**  So higher rates, I don't have the data in between 400 pounds and 40 pounds.  That would be something to look at.  But I've been looking at larger scale productivity because I know we need to make a change.  I see 70 farmers hitting a brick wall as far as they've destroyed the soil fertility.  They're making cents an acre on profitability.  
**[0:27:02-0:27:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:27:02):**  And yet they know they can't pass this land on to their son or their daughter because  it would be a burden to them.  And yet as you bring back the system and its functionality, farming becomes fun again.  I've never seen happier farmers and more profitable farmers.  And those that are starting to look at this as a biological system, that are starting  
**[0:27:25-0:27:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:27:25):**  to use that power of observation to say, okay, what do I need to do next?  It's not intuitive.  Nature depends on diversity.  Diversity not only in the community of microbes are there, but also in the activity that goes  on above the soil.  
**[0:27:45-0:27:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:27:45):**  As far as what you plant, when you plant, how do you treat this, how do you treat that.  There's a full lifetime of education in farming.  It's not all easy button.  You do it this way every year.  So there's a lot to learn, but observation will be key.  
**[0:28:02-0:28:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:28:02):**  It sounds like that's a case where an inch could make a big difference.  I'm thinking you're drilling in seed.  It's not going in that deep, but you're injecting the inoculant in with the seed as you're drilling  it in versus you put it on soil and then you water it in.  This intuitively to me, it doesn't seem like number two, the water in method would leave  
**[0:28:25-0:28:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:28:25):**  it that far away, but apparently there is enough of a difference there that that biology  needs that root interaction right away to really get going.  Why do you think that is?  Yes, it's just having that community available as it germinates.  The Hagerty's in Australia, when they do the very similar injection rate, it's two kilograms  
**[0:28:52-0:28:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:28:52):**  per hectare, which is almost identical to two pounds per acre.  You can see pictures of the seed and how much, barely German germ, the cotyledon's only about  an inch long.  Yet the rhizosphere that's developed in that community that is impressive, has devoted  a lot of energy to associating with those microbes.  
**[0:29:14-0:29:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:29:14):**  If they're not there and available, it just seems like the plant just flounders.  I could show you a picture of what it looks like.  There's a dramatic difference of where I've injected and where I sprayed it on top.  So on a small scale for somebody farming, maybe the ideal way to get this going would  be if you're doing a lot of transplanting of your plants, would be when you're seeding  
**[0:29:45-0:29:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:29:45):**  these plants, you're either coating that seed or you're quote inoculating that seed in the  beginning in the nursery.  So when it goes into the field, you're transporting that cube of soil that has not just roots,  but a community with it that goes into the soil and then it can multiply out in the soil  once it's there because the plant and obviously that community are staying together.  
**[0:30:07-0:30:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:30:07):**  Seed coatings work.  The hagridies also, they spray their seed with the inoculant as they feed it into their  hopper.  I've done some experiments where I've sprayed the seed and planted it dry and sprayed the  seed and planted it wet.  
**[0:30:23-0:30:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:30:23):**  And there's a dramatic difference between dry and wet.  Wet will outgrow the dry treated quite handily.  So it's having that living community available at germination that seems to make this work  so well.  At this point in the episode, I mean, we're talking a lot about inoculant compost, your  
**[0:30:44-0:30:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:30:44):**  specific way of making compost.  I want to introduce people to the idea of the type of compost you make.  At its core, what are the base principles around the compost that you're using?  The method that we developed maintains several, four key factors on this.  It's aerobic.  
**[0:31:06-0:31:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:31:06):**  It always has oxygen.  The way the bioreactor is designed with the columns up the middle, you're never more than  6 to 12 inches from ambient air.  So it's a completely aerobic process.  It's a process that operates at about 70% moisture content.  
**[0:31:26-0:31:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:31:26):**  That's critical.  It's undisturbed.  You never turn it.  You don't need to.  As long as it's aerobic, as long as you have the 70% moisture content, the biodegradation  
**[0:31:39-0:31:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:31:39):**  process goes forward and it seems to increase in diversity, the microbial diversity, the  longer that you let it go.  Also we employ worms in it.  So it is a vermicompost as well.  And the worms, we only put in about 100 worms, the red wigglers.  
**[0:31:57-0:32:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:31:57):**  Just after it gets down past 80 degrees Fahrenheit so you don't cook them.  And they will, about 100 of those will populate that pile completely by the time it's done  and it'll be full of baby worms.  And the ending texture is a lot like clay.  You can squeeze it between your fingers.  
**[0:32:17-0:32:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:32:17):**  You can squish it into a ball when it's done.  And it's, the microbial community is pretty impressive.  When I do metagenomics on it, we see about 2,700 species of bacteria.  We see probably 4 to 500 species of fungi.  So it's, that's another thing that's having it 70% moisture content, having it aerobic,  
**[0:32:44-0:32:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:32:44):**  that allows fungi to proliferate.  And you end up with a significant number of fungal spores because over that year you start  to consume all the energy resources in that compost.  So what does the fungi do when it runs out of food in its environment?  It'll sporulate so it can live when conditions are better.  
**[0:33:04-0:33:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:33:04):**  So we see a significant number of spores.  And that's what we're putting in with the extract is we're seeing spores of fungi and  also a lot of bacteria.  So it's restoring that community through that process.  With a clay-like texture at the end of it, I think that's different than a lot of compost  
**[0:33:26-0:33:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:33:26):**  you see people buy that looks more like, it's kind of mulchy.  It still has identifiable bits of organic matter in it.  It have a different hand feel or kind of friable.  What are the big differences you see in Johnson Sue bioreactor compost versus traditional  compost?  
**[0:33:49-0:33:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:33:49):**  They sell a landscape yard near you and they sell compost.  What are the differences in those methods?  Well, the methodology, they're turning that compost several times in the first week.  So the fungal community never really gets to develop.  And every time they turn it, the system reheats up.  
**[0:34:08-0:34:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:34:08):**  So you don't go through that phase.  In this composting method that we use, you're through the thermophilic phase and that heating  phase within a week and the temperature starts to go down.  It depends on what you put into it.  As far as how high the temperature goes, the more nitrogen you put in there, the higher  
**[0:34:27-0:34:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:34:27):**  the temperature will go and the longer it will stay.  But normally, the heating phase is four to five days.  After that first week, you're pretty much through and the temperature will start going  down.  This whole system allows that fungal community to dominate.  
**[0:34:44-0:34:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:34:44):**  So you don't see that in turned compost because every time they turn it, they destroy all  the fungal hyphae.  You can see this within 24 hours after you fill that bioreactor in the method that we  use, you can go and you can start to pull the organic matter that you put in apart and  you can see all these hyphae, both of the fungi and actinomycetes just completely populated  
**[0:35:08-0:35:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:35:08):**  the pile.  So the pipes that we put in the middle, I think there's six pipes that we put in there,  but after 24 hours, you can pull those out.  I mean, the hyphae from the actinomycetes and the fungi have completely threaded that  pile together.  
**[0:35:23-0:35:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:35:23):**  So you have a column once you pull those pipe out that doesn't collapse.  As it matures, the whole system will start to fold in on itself.  You'll end up with something that looks like a very rich dark chocolate cake at the end.  If you grab it and have any moisture in it, you can squeeze it and it does just meld together  like clay.  
**[0:35:48-0:35:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:35:48):**  That's what we're observing in the compost process.  I think one of the biggest comments I've seen on the one that I built was a lot of people  have suggested, add this to it, add that to it.  They're all nitrogen sources and they're all saying, do this and it'll speed it up.  They're missing the point here that the goal isn't fast results.  
**[0:36:08-0:36:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:36:08):**  The goal is the right results and that just takes time.  So if you did try to speed this up by adding fish emulsion or whatever to it, what are  you trading off?  What are you missing?  That's a good question.  
**[0:36:25-0:36:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:36:25):**  I tried at the beginning on some other, you know, before we developed this by trying to  add nitrogen to the system to speed it up.  It failed.  What I see is, you know, a lot of the resources I used to make these piles are very low in  nitrogen.  
**[0:36:42-0:36:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:36:42):**  I mean, you're talking leaves, 50 to 60 to one or higher.  And I saw that the benefit is allowing the system to fix its own nitrogen with free-living  nitrogen fixing bacteria, you start to develop those community of microbes that can do that.  And I saw there's plenty of nitrogen in the composting process because I see a lot of  free-living nitrogen fixers.  
**[0:37:10-0:37:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:37:10):**  That community develops very strongly in these composts.  You know, I've got the metagenomic data that I can show you.  This group right here, they're free-living and they're a major component of the system.  So I think the more you can leave it alone and let nature take its course, it's like  a good wine or a good cheese or good bread.  
**[0:37:33-0:37:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:37:33):**  All of these, you know, it's a system that you kind of let nature do what she's done  for millions of years.  And the results seem to show a much better compost.  So is this idea that you see a lot out there of 18 days to finish compost, 30 days to finish  compost.  
**[0:37:52-0:37:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:37:52):**  Do you think that's doing more harm than good?  Whether you're sure you're adding organic matter to the soil and that will help your  soil in the long term, but it's like you're only focusing on half the picture.  You're not seeing the whole picture.  I think from the research I've seen, if you can allow nature to do it in her time frame,  
**[0:38:18-0:38:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:38:18):**  the results are much better.  I mean, I don't know that they can use theirs at a two pound rate and see this type of benefit.  I know the Hagerty's observed in Australia, they got their compost from one person on  the east coast of Australia and they're on the west coast.  They had it shipped all the way across Australia, which is not a small country.  
**[0:38:42-0:38:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:38:42):**  And they thought, well, we'll just use somebody else's compost.  And it failed.  So I think that's what we're doing an experiment right now to see how consistent these composts  made all across the USA to see how different they are or how similar they are.  So that will hopefully answer a few of those questions that we have on it.  
**[0:39:05-0:39:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:39:05):**  As I say, there's still a lot we don't know.  But what we do know is it's beneficial to plant growth.  It can be applied for a cost from 25 to 50 cents an acre if you're a large farmer.  It grows great tomatoes just straight.  If you're a regular farmer just doing a garden at home, you can't go wrong with this stuff.  
**[0:39:28-0:39:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:39:28):**  It really makes a difference in the way plants grow.  What are your thoughts on forcing air into the system, injecting air into the system  where you're not turning it?  You take that exact same setup, you observe all the other base principles and you're not  keeping it moist, only you are blowing air into it.  
**[0:39:46-0:39:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:39:46):**  I've read some studies on that and it seems like fungi can just increase their efficiency,  growth rates, give more oxygen present.  I see, okay, well you are using an outside input.  It requires some extra parts.  But I don't see it changing what you're going for that much.  
**[0:40:05-0:40:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:40:05):**  What are your thoughts on that?  From what I would say to even dry the pile up if you're forcing air through it.  This is more, we developed this basically both for third world and to be able to do  it in a first world country with parallel processing.  The bioreactor is four foot diameter, five foot high.  
**[0:40:31-0:40:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:40:31):**  We wanted it as energy free as far as having input.  The biggest input is a gallon and a half of water a day being sprayed over the top and  allowed to go through by gravity to keep the moisture content at 70%.  That's the only energy impact into this system.  I think we were concerned, I guess, more with third world when we designed this just to  
**[0:40:57-0:41:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:40:57):**  make sure that they could do something like this.  We do have those bioreactors going in three different countries in Africa, India, Pakistan,  Siberia, believe it or not, Crimea, all over Europe, New Zealand, Australia, South America,  Central America, and many here in the US and Canada.  I think it's the less energy input, the less work you have to do with this, the better  
**[0:41:29-0:41:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:41:29):**  off it is.  Don't think you'll speed it up that much by blowing air because as long as the pile is  aerobic, what more does it need?  It doesn't need any more airflow.  The research idea I found that anything more than a foot into a compost pile goes anaerobic  
**[0:41:46-0:41:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:41:46):**  within minutes.  We're never more, as I say, more than six inches to a foot away from ambient air.  This pile stays aerobic all the time.  I can't see the need to actually pump air into it.  No, no, fair enough.  
**[0:42:01-0:42:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:42:01):**  Another big question I see is, kind of answered it there, but give me your thoughts on this,  I'm doing this here in Southern California, nice weather year round.  A lot of people in temperate climates have said, well, how does this work in an area  where I have four months of true winter?  You mentioned Siberia.  
**[0:42:18-0:42:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:42:18):**  If you go from a warmer climate or say a tropical climate to something temperate and cold, do  you see performance or do you just need more time?  If you can keep it warm, keep it from freezing.  You had one large one done in central Colorado where they had to put it into a greenhouse  and they used a different system, same principles, but they did a 30 by 40 foot bioreactor with  
**[0:42:45-0:42:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:42:45):**  all the pipes and everything and a floor underneath that allowed the airflow and they were successful.  They produced a really good compost, about 100 tons of it.  And the pile didn't get down to 32 degrees, but when they went in and dug, the worms were  still active.  So it may take a little more time in a colder climate, but you need to keep it from freezing.  
**[0:43:10-0:43:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:43:10):**  It's a living organism.  The worms in there are transiting and having their impact on the biodegradation process  and all the other organisms as well.  So if you can either keep it inside.  We had one dairy farmer in, was it Manitoba, that keeps it in his dairy barn and his cows  
**[0:43:30-0:43:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:43:30):**  keep it warm.  And we had another one in Quebec that is looking at, he keeps an anaerobic pile going that  he can maintain airflow to, to keep the temperature of that pile up.  He has a water loop through that and he runs that into an aquaculture that he keeps good  to minus 45.  
**[0:43:51-0:43:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:43:51):**  So it's, you can stack hay bales around it, maybe put a heat tape underneath it.  Just innovate as far as trying to keep it from freezing, put it next to a warm building  and hay bale that or inside.  Some people are doing it inside in their shops and just keeping it where it won't freeze.  But there are tougher environments.  
**[0:44:15-0:44:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:44:15):**  Yeah, we're in New Mexico, so that's not an issue.  Although we've been down to minus 16 for three days in a row on some of my bioreactors and  not above zero and they still did fine.  As long as there's a warm up period after it.  And the great thing about it, you want to put it inside a barn or shop is there's really,  
**[0:44:34-0:44:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:44:34):**  I haven't noticed any smell.  I know you claim that.  I can verify that there's no odors, there's no flies, none of that.  You're not watering enough to have like water drained through the bottom of it.  So it's a relatively clean system to have inside.  
**[0:44:49-0:44:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:44:49):**  Yeah, it's quite unique that it doesn't smell.  That's the biggest problem.  What shuts down composting operations is the smells, the odors, and also the fluent that  runs off from the process.  But there's no runoff from this process when it's done right.  
**[0:45:07-0:45:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:45:07):**  And there's no smells.  As long as you put the pile together right, you won't have smells.  Does the system scale up and down if you keep those same base principles?  Never more than 12 inches away from oxygen.  So if we had enough up pipes that we eventually removed, we kept it at that moisture content.  
**[0:45:28-0:45:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:45:28):**  But I go bigger.  You had a 30 by 41 so obviously it can go a lot bigger.  Did you go smaller?  One thing I've tried a lot here over the years before I even discovered yours is I've done  this in trash cans where I drill holes in the side of a trash can down the center.  
**[0:45:43-0:45:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:45:43):**  I've always put a tube in there.  After I saw your system initially, I didn't.  But just put the tube in the center.  It took me a little while to figure it out.  It works really well I think.  
**[0:45:52-0:45:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:45:52):**  It took me a little while to figure it out too.  If it wasn't for my wife, Wei-Tien, this bioreactor would never be.  I would have been turning compost by hand in a windrow.  Sure, sure.  So credit to her.  
**[0:46:06-0:46:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:46:06):**  I mean it makes it easy and I always left the tube in there and then I went back and  watched the videos and like oh he's pulling the tubes out and I was really nervous to  pull the tube out.  I was too.  No problem.  
**[0:46:17-0:46:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:46:17):**  The school of hard knocks and serendipity here.  And the wife saying, I'm tired of washing your clothes.  We're going to do this.  So just do it, do it.  So yeah, with the system, can you scale up and down or do you need a perfect mass?  
**[0:46:38-0:46:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:46:38):**  We have some people scaling down.  I can never have enough of this.  You put about 2,000 pounds of wet material into it in this size bioreactor and you end  up with 700 pounds product.  So if you're a farmer, you can get what, 350 acres.  
**[0:46:56-0:47:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:46:56):**  Looks like if it's a really good compost, you could probably get a full section off  of one bioreactor.  So how much do you need?  As I say, you can never have enough, at least when you're doing research and people asking  you for it, all that.  
**[0:47:12-0:47:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:47:12):**  But one bioreactor can cover a lot of area if you need it to.  And yet you can parallel process them, make more units, start them at different times,  have them available at different times.  It's really easy to, with the finished product, just open that cage up and be able to access  the compost the way we designed it.  
**[0:47:38-0:47:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:47:38):**  And then you can close it back and hold it, just keep it going.  The finished compost, if you have any leftover, we'll make a smaller bioreactor, about a two  foot diameter, about 18 inch high, and we'll put the compost in there.  We'll throw a drip system or irrigation system on it to keep it wet, and we'll put alfalfa  on the top to keep the worms fed.  
**[0:48:00-0:48:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:48:00):**  But it can go for a long time.  I've had some up to four years, and eventually I had to use it.  So I don't know past four years, but it stayed good up to four years.  As long as you keep, put some alfalfa, ground up alfalfa on top to keep the worms fed, and  they're doing what they do in a system.  
**[0:48:21-0:48:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:48:21):**  One of the more popular trends in smaller scale homesteading gardening for vegetables  is wood chip mulching over garden beds.  If you think about the base principles behind the bioreactor, we're never more than 12 inches  away from oxygen, we're keeping it moist, it's slow.  What are your thoughts about, let's say we didn't put the material into the bioreactor  
**[0:48:47-0:48:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:48:47):**  and we just laid it down on our production beds, it was only 10 inches thick, so even  the bottom wasn't 12 inches away from ambient air.  We're watering it to keep it moist.  Do you think you're using anything in that type of system versus having it in that cylindrical  bioreactor, so composting quote in situ versus creating compost in a composting device?  
**[0:49:14-0:49:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:49:14):**  You know, since you said wood chips, wood chips, I only use wood chips in this at the  beginning because I started with dairy manure.  I'm now just using straight leaves or straight alfalfa to compost.  Just something that breaks down easier.  The wood chips are ideal for the garden.  
**[0:49:35-0:49:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:49:35):**  I think any type of cover that you can offer to that soil to allow that in situ restoration  or that microbial community, I do it on my garden.  I mulch my garden heavy because, well, number one, I can't keep up with the weeds if I don't  do it and it's so much more beneficial as far as I use less water.  Just to have the biology working there, I don't have to haul it in.  
**[0:50:04-0:50:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:50:04):**  I definitely recommend mulching if you have a garden.  It's just a no brainer when it comes just to the weed issues.  They keep a nice environment there where you have your roly polys and they will pretty  much clear cut anything that tries to sprout underneath that mulch.  I found that out the hard way with a cover crop that I rolled and planted cotton into.  
**[0:50:32-0:50:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:50:32):**  Roly polys would come in and clear cut my cotton.  You do have to do transplants that way unless you protect a seedling, a seed either with  I'll use a court glass jar for when I'm seeding like my cantaloupe or my tomatoes or my chilies.  I'll just put a jar over it till it germinates and that keeps the insects from coming in  and clear cutting it.  
**[0:51:01-0:51:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:51:01):**  There's a lot you'll learn on this as you go through the process.  Again, observation is really helpful.  One thing I love the idea of is multiplying it out in the form of an extract.  Let's say you have one bioreactor, 2,000 pounds in, 700 pounds of finished product out.  Now you want to increase that and essentially turn it into more than 700 pounds.  
**[0:51:27-0:51:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:51:27):**  How can somebody go about making an extract to coat seeds with?  On the seed coating, if it's strictly a seed coating, I would go with a slurry.  That's really simple.  Take about 10 pounds of compost and I'll add a cup of milk where it has about a tablespoon  of molasses in it.  
**[0:51:48-0:51:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:51:48):**  Then I'll add enough water to make a slurry like a pancake batter.  I'll push that through a screen to get all any of the large organic matter that didn't  degrade, something that would go through a seeder small enough.  I will take one quarter of that with a 50-pound bag of seed and I'll tumble that in a cement  mixer for about a minute and a half to coat the seed.  
**[0:52:12-0:52:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:52:12):**  Then plant it as quickly as you can, even damp.  It will actually flow better, a little damp in your planter if it's a large system.  Then you've got that slurry coated seed.  The extract is different.  You just make an extract.  
**[0:52:29-0:52:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:52:29):**  I have a YouTube channel that most of this is available on as far as making the slurry  and coating the seed or making the extract.  That's another mechanism.  If you forget what I say here, you can go on YouTube and just look for me and then you'll  find my channel.  
**[0:52:47-0:52:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:52:47):**  There are not great videos, but I think enough to help you get the idea of how it works.  Yeah, that's what I use actually to build mine.  So I found it very helpful.  Oh, okay.  Long lines of extract, what are your thoughts about using it as a tea?  
**[0:53:06-0:53:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:53:06):**  Put some in, bubble it, and then use it as a foliar spray, not to provide nutrients to  the plant, but just to get that beneficial microbiology on the surface.  Okay.  Yeah, the Hagertys do that as well.  They'll do a seed coat, an injection, and they come back with a foliar after the plant's  
**[0:53:28-0:53:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:53:28):**  about six to eight inches high.  They see benefits.  When I look at making a tea, as you're saying, you're brewing it.  You're putting in food resources to boost the microbial community.  I've done some analysis on the community of these systems.  
**[0:53:45-0:53:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:53:45):**  As you brew it, you start to bias the population.  You start to lose the diversity where the microbes that can utilize the nutrients that  you put in there will increase in population.  The others that don't, that are maybe secondary or third down the line on the different byproducts  of other organisms, they will fade away.  
**[0:54:09-0:54:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:54:09):**  So I saw a loss in the diversity of the system as you brew it, just because of the nutrients  that you add to the system.  Do you think you could maintain that diversity, yet get the benefit by doing something like  this?  I add some number five cups of it to a bucket.  
**[0:54:31-0:54:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:54:31):**  I fill that five gallon bucket with water.  I just stir it around enough to agitate it and kind of cleanse the material, organic  matter of anything that's on the surface.  I've mixed it up.  Now I use that straight, so I just stir it and go right out to the plant.  
**[0:54:47-0:54:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:54:47):**  That's basically an extract.  I just recirculate.  I have a system with an agricultural pump and I recirculate it to a 55 gallon drum.  I keep washing the compost with that water that's recycling.  So that's, the extractor's online as well, but it's, you're right, it's just knocking  
**[0:55:10-0:55:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:55:10):**  the microbes off the organic matter.  What we're seeing, I did some analysis on this, we were seeing about 83 million bacteria  per square foot put into the field, in that field in Wilcox, and a little over 10 million  fungal spores at that two pound rate.  So per square foot, that's a pretty significant number of microbes, especially when you bring  
**[0:55:36-0:55:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:55:36):**  that diversity back in.  Have you seen any correlation in any of your studies between the amount of quote, weeds  in the soil and the progression of that soil from something that's more bacterial dominant  to something that's closer to imbalance, fungal to bacterial?  You know, only from what I've heard from Australia, where they saw about year eight into the system,  
**[0:56:04-0:56:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:56:04):**  they start to exhaust that weed seed bank.  Having the cover on the soil, rolling those covers is very helpful in keeping weeds down.  We saw that in Wilcox.  And we have an aerial of that and we were looking at where they've applied the conventional  synthetic fertilizers.  
**[0:56:25-0:56:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:56:25):**  The weed pressure was much heavier in that treatment than it was in either the beam with  the 15% or the beam only.  And beam is biologically enhanced agricultural management.  It's just using, restoring biology into the system.  But we noticed from an aerial significant weed pressure from the use of the synthetic  
**[0:56:45-0:56:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:56:45):**  fertilizers.  You kind of shoot yourself on the foot because as you apply the fertilizers, it makes it  a soil more amenable to weed growing in it.  The weeds are, they serve a purpose.  They're there trying to restore that soil.  
**[0:57:03-0:57:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:57:03):**  And you can watch the different sequences as you improve the soil that you'll move from  one weed to another.  Like here in the desert, if you go out and scarify the soil, you'll have tumbleweeds  for three years.  And after that, another weed will come in to help restore that soil.  
**[0:57:23-0:57:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:57:23):**  But those seeds are out in the desert.  And yet that desert, if it's undisturbed, they don't germinate.  And yet when you come in and disturb that system, you see that the tumbleweeds will  germinate and they're voracious in growing.  It's amazing what a tumbleweed can do in a shorter time.  
**[0:57:43-0:57:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:57:43):**  But it's as you keep the covers on the soil, you have a complete community of micro arthropods  and they're eating those weed seeds up.  That's another thing.  The different parts of this system, the micro arthropods and their function, the beneficial  insects and their function in the system, as you bring all these back into the system,  
**[0:58:09-0:58:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:58:09):**  it starts to function properly.  We've come in and we've cut it off here or cut it off there, create a problem.  So this is where the observation comes in.  We were talking to some cotton farmers in Turkey and they were having a red mite problem.  Well, they're also having thrips.  
**[0:58:28-0:58:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:58:28):**  Well, there's thrips that feed on the red mite population and the eggs that the red  mites lay.  So you have to start developing that beneficial insect community as well in this system.  It's an elegant system.  It's really neat to study and see how things work when they work properly.  
**[0:58:49-0:58:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:58:49):**  But we need to allow that to move forward and to promote that as much as we can in our  agriculture.  I see people listening to this or growing annual vegetables in a system where you have  a crop go in and you're rotating it out, the next crop goes in.  Is this crop rotation, if you're pretty on in terms of your timing where one crop comes  
**[0:59:10-0:59:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:59:10):**  out, next crop goes in, is that enough, quote, permanent cover?  Or do you think you could go even further for vegetable farmers, like having a perennial  cover crop growing in addition to the vegetables?  Or is the rotation of vegetables sequentially enough to get the above ground part working  to feed all that below ground microbiology?  
**[0:59:34-0:59:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:59:34):**  Well, we see Singing Frog Farms in California.  They do six, seven different successive crops on their land.  And they're seeing that they come in with sets, but they'll cut the other vegetable  previous vegetable off at the surface, leave the root in the soil, and just plant the next  vegetable crop into that soil.  
**[1:00:03-1:00:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:00:03):**  And they're being very successful at it.  And it's enough to pump them out of carbon into the soil for those organisms to survive.  It looks like they were having to apply compost before, but I think they've moved away from  that and they've completely restored that system and that community.  For now, it's pretty much self-supporting as far as the carbon flow, the energy flow,  
**[1:00:29-1:00:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:00:29):**  as long as you have something growing.  What have you seen with your research with the theme of just that?  Do you think you can get to the point where you can get off compost or if not, can you  get down to that two pounds per acre level?  Can you get the system where it just grows itself and you are never making compost again  
**[1:00:54-1:00:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:00:54):**  to improve it?  You might make compost because you have the gas around and you need something.  I think if you're just using it for commodity crops, you will have to inject every time.  When I put it down at 400 pounds per acre and I kept a crop growing, I never had to  add again.  
**[1:01:12-1:01:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:01:12):**  And I kept seeing year after year after year of successive increase in growth.  We saw a five times increase after the first year and we saw another five times increase  from that year to year six.  If you put it on heavy and keep it covered, keep something growing, I don't think you'd  ever have to apply again.  
**[1:01:36-1:01:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:01:36):**  But if you're using it in a commodity crop where you have row cropping and you're putting  it in such low amounts, I think you would have to keep doing that until you could build  your soils up.  And that would involve having covers in between or breeding and grazing in.  But if you're putting it that light, I think you would have to do it every time.  
**[1:02:01-1:02:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:02:01):**  That's research that we want to do, but we haven't got the funding to do that yet.  We're working on some other projects right now.  Do you have any thoughts on soil mineralization of let's say annual crops where you're exporting  biomass from one property somewhere else?  And if you're not reapplying some sort of biomass to reintroduce minerals, are you exporting  
**[1:02:29-1:02:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:02:29):**  minerals from your soil enough to detrimentally harm the soil?  Or do you think that there's enough minerals in the soil, the more biologically active  the soil is, it can mine it from the bedrock, all the little bits of rock and things like  that in the soil.  So this idea of remineralization maybe isn't as important as some people might emphasize?  
**[1:02:53-1:02:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:02:53):**  As long as you have the biology and along those elements are there in that soil parent  material, they can be extracted by the microbes.  That's how this planet developed.  We take such small amounts out, what 96% of it that we pull off of a field is either carbon,  hydrogen, oxygen, or nitrogen.  
**[1:03:16-1:03:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:03:16):**  All of those have been gases at one time and you're pulling them in as a gas.  They're in the atmosphere, they're freely available.  The other elements, you are pulling some out, but it's such a small amount.  And like phosphorus, we have probably over 40 years supply of phosphorus that we've dumped  in the soils that's inaccessible to a plant because there's not the right biology there  
**[1:03:40-1:03:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:03:40):**  to make it available.  Due to soil physical chemistry, the phosphorus gets locked up and the plant can't access  it unless it has the right microbe.  We saw 15 species of phosphorus solubilizers in this compost develop in soils where we  had applied the compost.  
**[1:04:03-1:04:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:04:03):**  So pretty much if the element is there, it can be extracted by the microbes.  We even see that one microbe can extract gold from soils.  And if it can do gold, possibly the most impervious to break down, metal, if they can do gold,  they can do pretty much anything.  I qualify this as long as you have the nutrients there.  
**[1:04:29-1:04:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:04:29):**  In some cases, like the soil we're working with on one research project, they don't have  selenium and they don't have molybdenum.  Molybdenum is very important in nitrogen fixation.  It's a co-factor in the enzyme for fixing nitrogen.  We also see selenium is very important for immune systems in plants and how they react  
**[1:04:57-1:05:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:04:57):**  to other organisms trying to attack them, even viruses.  So if it's there, I believe then the microbes could mine it.  If it's not there, you may have to supplement.  And I usually will do a total elemental analysis on the soils that I start to work with just  to see if there's any underlying issues of one element missing.  
**[1:05:23-1:05:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:05:23):**  So critical, like molybdenum.  If you don't have that, hamstring your ability to fix nitrogen.  That's key in this system is having those organisms function properly.  I know when nitrogen is fixed, it's expensive in terms of carbon.  Maybe it's like 10 to one, I forget the exact ratio.  
**[1:05:43-1:05:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:05:43):**  12 units of carbon for one unit of nitrogen.  Does that give some credence to this idea of growing a nitrogen fixing plant with another  type of plant?  If you think of this, sister's example, beans grown with corn, with squash.  Beans are fixing nitrogen.  
**[1:06:01-1:06:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:06:01):**  The nitrogen fixation process requires a lot of carbon to make that happen.  Maybe the bean can't produce enough itself.  So now you have another plant, corn and or squash, which is pumping out its own source  of carbon into the soil around those beans.  Does it make sense to have a nitrogen fixer and a non-nitrogen fixer paired together to  
**[1:06:25-1:06:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:06:25):**  make sure there's enough carbon in the soil or is the biology just going to do that?  I think I've always gone with mixed species, multi-species covers.  Just to try to take advantage of that synergy that develops between plants is really interesting  research done in Canada.  They compared multi-species covers to a single species, triticale.  
**[1:06:51-1:06:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:06:51):**  You can see in the triticale, they didn't get a lot of rain.  In the triticale, it didn't get a bit calf high.  Yet, in the multi-species mix, same amount of water, when the fields were right next  to each other, you had a cover crop that was above your needs.  How these plants work in synergy together is another great thing that we need to explore.  
**[1:07:17-1:07:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:07:17):**  They help each other in many ways in the flow of that energy and the utilization of water.  You're seeing an increase in above-ground biomass with the bean approach.  Does quality of product move linearly with that?  Sometimes a big blueberry looks good, but it doesn't necessarily taste as good as a  smaller blueberry.  
**[1:07:46-1:07:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:07:46):**  Do you see plants growing big and expressing their genetic potential how they should, or  are they growing big at the expense of, say, whatever commercial goals we might have for  that plant?  Yeah, there's no comparison on tomatoes.  We did 62 pounds of tomatoes on one tomato plant in this stuff, just playing around.  
**[1:08:12-1:08:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:08:12):**  The taste, of course, commercial tomatoes have no taste.  We're starting to look into the nutrient availability.  The tests are very expensive, so it's something that we're working towards now.  We have some things going, but that would be the next step.  If you're growing more biomass, does it have more nutrients in it?  
**[1:08:40-1:08:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:08:40):**  Is it more nutrient dense?  That's a great question.  I can't answer that one yet.  All I know is that we have much higher sugar content in these plants.  I know that the cows, when they see these plants, they will make a beeline towards them  
**[1:08:59-1:09:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:08:59):**  as compared to your regular pastures.  Cows are pretty smart, very selective.  They'll test all the different available plants in a field before they'll go graze.  They know.  So higher sugar means more efficient rate of photosynthesis and or more photosynthesis?  
**[1:09:20-1:09:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:09:20):**  Yes, it's directly correlated to photosynthetic plants because you're making sugars.  Everything on this planet is made from sugar.  That's the original building block for everything on this planet.  Every protein, every fat.  It's interesting that it all comes from sugar.  
**[1:09:43-1:09:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:09:43):**  So if you have an above ground portion of a plant that is struggling, what's happening  below ground that's potentially causing that?  Let's assume it's not under insect attack.  There's no herbicide or anything like that.  Let's just say it's poor biology.  
**[1:10:01-1:10:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:10:01):**  At the root soil interface, what are some things that might happen below ground that  would negatively affect what's happening above ground?  Oh, just not having a complete community there to do what needs to be done, kind of like  a factory.  If you're manufacturing cars and a few of your workers don't show up, it stops the whole  
**[1:10:28-1:10:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:10:28):**  process.  It's having all the organisms there to function in what job they do.  Nature won't always pick the same because a lot of these organisms have multiple capabilities.  A lot of your pseudomonas, they have several capabilities in carbon cycling, nitrogen cycling,  phyto-hormone production.  
**[1:10:59-1:11:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:10:59):**  Just having the community there that can do the job essentially.  If there's no other issue, if there's nothing wrong with the chemical or the elemental component  of the soils, if it's just the biology, then it's probably just not having the right microbes  there.  Because I think a lot of people miss this.  
**[1:11:18-1:11:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:11:18):**  I think they think the root goes down and it just sucks up whatever it needs out of  the soil, but it needs something in the soil to present to the root and then there's an  exchange there.  Is that what's probably potentially missing?  Yeah.  
**[1:11:37-1:11:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:11:37):**  It's our own perception of us.  We don't realize that cell count, we're 90% microbial as a human.  Gene count, we're less than a tenth of a percent human.  It's predominantly microbes.  It's what makes us up and what makes us operate.  
**[1:11:56-1:11:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:11:56):**  It's the same thing for the plant.  I think the plant is our artificial experiment one for microbes, artificial intelligence.  It wasn't mobile enough so it tried us.  We're number two and kind of went awry somewhere on us.  If you think humans, a lot of people in studies have now shown that there's a direct link  
**[1:12:22-1:12:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:12:22):**  between health and the amount of gut flora that you have and the diversity of gut flora.  Have you seen enough in terms of observation and data to say that plants grown in the healthier  soils in your trials are more resistant to pest pressure and or disease?  No doubt.  Other people, their research that they've done, the higher Brix, actually insects don't  
**[1:12:50-1:12:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:12:50):**  like a higher Brix plant or a higher sugar content cell.  They will avoid.  Usually insects are attacking the distressed plants, those that are having trouble.  There's research that I've seen that pretty much demonstrates the healthier the soil is,  the healthier plant is, the less impact that you'll have from insects.  
**[1:13:14-1:13:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:13:14):**  Same thing with fungal diseases, blight and things like that and tomatoes where maybe  they're very susceptible at a certain time of year in the poor soil but this could increase  their resistance.  What I noticed when I was first starting doing this, we were in a greenhouse with another  researcher that was studying soil fungal phantophthora on chili.  
**[1:13:39-1:13:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:13:39):**  We noticed that an extract of this did as well as any of the fungicides that they were  offering on the market.  What you're doing is you're bringing back what I see as a competitive innovation.  You're bringing back a healthy community that can repel any particular organism being dominant  like phantophthora.  
**[1:14:02-1:14:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:14:02):**  We've heard of them.  Also if you'll dip seed potatoes in this or dip a tree that you're going to transplant,  you get a better transplant or you get a reduction in the attack by different fungi in the system.  It's like us.  We depend on that diversity in our microbiome for our health and the soils are the same  
**[1:14:26-1:14:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:14:26):**  way for the health of that plant.  It depends on that diversity.  As I say, it's competitive innovation.  Everybody keeps each other in check instead of having a niche that gets destroyed like  you put an insecticide in there and it kills a certain niche of microbes and causes a problem  
**[1:14:44-1:14:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:14:44):**  because other organisms will move into that niche.  If they're pathogens, then you've got a problem.  But if you have a whole community of interacting microbes that keep each other in check but  beneficially work together, then it's a system that seems more amenable to profit and far  into waste.  
**[1:15:09-1:15:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:15:09):**  What are your thoughts on the importance of mycorrhizal fungi and putting those into a  system when you plant seeds and they require living roots to survive so you can't multiply  those out or create them in a compost pile?  Do you think using them in parallel with type of compost in your system or another high-quality  compost makes sense?  
**[1:15:36-1:15:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:15:36):**  Is it beneficial?  Or is it kind of like just a you might see results, you might not?  You know, the spores of mycorrhizal fungi are floating in the air, they're in the soils.  What I noticed is you bring that a balanced, diverse microbial community back to the system,  I saw 23 species of mycorrhiza develop in a soil.  
**[1:16:04-1:16:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:16:04):**  So I think it's more having the environment, having all the players there that can really  bring the mycorrhizal community up.  You can try a test area and see if it helps.  I always recommend that to farmers, you know, try a small test area and see if you get any  benefits from it.  
**[1:16:29-1:16:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:16:29):**  For the most part, I think they're there.  They just don't have the right environment to survive in.  They need the helper microbes, just like all of us depend on somebody else in this society  for production of a good or to buy what we do.  So it's the same thing in the soil.  
**[1:16:50-1:16:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:16:50):**  It's a biological barter, so to speak.  And having all the organisms there, some of them can start to thrive that couldn't before.  That would be your mycorrhizal.  Try it in a small area, see if it works.  Are there any ways for people to kind of see where their soils are at now?  
**[1:17:12-1:17:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:17:12):**  Say they think they have good results now.  And they think, oh, my vegetables are growing great.  I have great tomatoes, I have great lettuce in the field.  They're wondering, okay, could it be better?  Is the best thing to do, you got to try it?  
**[1:17:27-1:17:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:17:27):**  Or is there some sort of test?  Can you see this under a microscope?  Can you send a sample soil somewhere to say, okay, where is my community?  From what I've observed as a molecular biologist, I don't see a good test yet.  I see a lot of looking at fungal to bacterial ratio through microscopy.  
**[1:17:51-1:17:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:17:51):**  You can get such varied results that you can't really make heads or tails of what's going  on.  It's blatantly obvious, yeah.  But I've sent the same compost sample in and had to analyze three times.  And I got three different results going from bacterial dominant to fungal dominant.  
**[1:18:13-1:18:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:18:13):**  So that scares me away from, it is helpful.  Phospholipid fatty acid analysis.  The originators of that test to look at the microbial makeup of that system, say do not  use it for a fungal to bacterial ratio.  So you can use it for change over time, but not as a good comparison because they depend  
**[1:18:40-1:18:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:18:40):**  on phospholipid fatty acids.  And we've put certain groups of phospho fatty acids into one group saying they're fungal  based and some bacterial based.  But there's bacteria that produce the fungal phospholipid fatty acids and there's fungi  that produce the bacterial.  
**[1:19:02-1:19:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:19:02):**  So it's not a great test for doing fungal to bacterial ratio.  I think the science is still weak in that area.  I know my wife puts it this way, that there's not one single test that lets us know if we're  healthy as a human being.  We have to go through a series of analysis in order to really maybe even then figure  
**[1:19:29-1:19:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:19:29):**  out what's wrong with us.  I think we know more about humans than we do about soils, so we're way far behind as  far as being able to diagnose the health of the soil.  You think it's worth the average person, farmer, to get a microscope and look at their...  Yes.  
**[1:19:50-1:20:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:19:50):**  Just the realization, looking at the life in that soil, realizing it's a living organism.  That kind of puts the perspective into that, well, maybe I need to treat this different.  Seeing that much life and that much activity going on in the soil, it's eye opening for  a lot of people to see all that activity.  Another thing that I think a lot of people maybe judge their soil quality on, if you  
**[1:20:26-1:20:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:20:26):**  send it in for a soil test, the number that comes back is there's an organic matter percentage  on there and a lot of people hang their hat on.  I have.  Oh, yeah.  Is that potentially misleading?  
**[1:20:41-1:20:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:20:41):**  The second part of that would be, is there a percentage of organic matter that's too  much?  If you have too much organic matter, biology isn't consuming it fast enough.  That might say, okay, well, there's a bad problem.  You're just dumping organic matter onto something that just can't eat it quick enough.  
**[1:21:04-1:21:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:21:04):**  What are your thoughts around percentage of organic matter in relation to soil health?  Is there an upper limit where there could just be too much?  Yeah, it's not that simple.  What I've seen as far as soil carbon, a lot of farmers, just anecdotal evidence, seen  how their soils and how their plants respond, they're seeing a change at 3% soil organic  
**[1:21:30-1:21:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:21:30):**  carbon, soil organic matter, excuse me.  That'd be about 1.72% soil carbon.  They see the dynamics change in how a plant grows.  I did a greenhouse experiment looking at change in soil carbon and change from bacterial dominant  to fungal dominant.  
**[1:21:49-1:21:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:21:49):**  I saw the maximum productivity, the maximum photosynthetic capacity occur at 3% soil organic  matter, same place that farmers are.  I think there's some truth to, you do need a certain threshold of carbon in that system  for it to function properly.  It's an energy vehicle.  
**[1:22:13-1:22:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:22:13):**  It's an energy resource.  It's the biology as well.  I don't know that too much.  We see Gabe Brown hitting 8, 10%, up to 12% in some of his soils.  I've not seen a problem.  
**[1:22:36-1:22:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:22:36):**  He had five inches of rain each year for the last three years on his pastures, and yet  we went to visit him in July and he had grasses up over the hood of his four by with five  inches of rain.  These completely changed the dynamics of that soil, brought the carbon back, brought the  soil biology back.  
**[1:23:00-1:23:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:23:00):**  To have a system that efficient that he could use five inches and produce that much forage  out on a pasture is amazing.  Most people struggle with getting forage grown, but his, with the grazing management that  he uses and how he treats the land.  He has some impressive results.  
**[1:23:24-1:23:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:23:24):**  For as good as his soil is, do you think he, his soil could benefit from some of the extracts  that you talked about or buying this fungal?  I'm trying to catch up with Gabe.  Since he has the grazing, you don't need this if you have grazing.  I'm just trying to emulate what nature did and what he's doing, what Will Harris is doing,  
**[1:23:55-1:23:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:23:55):**  Alejandro Creo.  All of them can outperform me with the animals.  We can do pretty well.  We can definitely restore and regenerate these soils in agriculture with this system.  Where it might be useful in a grazing context is if you are, some of the earlier examples  
**[1:24:14-1:24:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:24:14):**  you had, you're starting with a poor pasture or a limited species pasture and you're trying  to move that along quicker.  In addition to your rotational grazing, you could introduce some of this compost to help  get that inoculate going, get the flywheel moving in the system.  But once it's going.  
**[1:24:33-1:24:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:24:33):**  Yeah.  As I said, the cattle with grazing makes everything go forward.  It will help maybe.  We're starting to look at some inoculations in grazing management, but the jury is still  out on it as to what the impact is.  
**[1:24:53-1:25:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:24:53):**  Putting this all together, for people watching along with this at home, I think the big takeaways  for me are one, slow down on your composting.  Maybe change your process to get more diverse compost that maybe errors on the fungally  dominated side.  I'm gathering a lot of soils are probably maybe more bacterial dominated.  
**[1:25:17-1:25:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:25:17):**  Oh yeah, we're very bacterial dominated is the problem.  We don't have the fungi.  Which is I think a big misnomer.  I think a lot of people have this assumption that trees, tree crops need fungi and herbaceous  plants need a bacterial dominated soil.  
**[1:25:39-1:25:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:25:39):**  And maybe that's true for some herbaceous plants, but not the ones we typically grow.  Normally from what Lane Ingram has shown, it's about a one to one fungal to bacterial  ratio and we're sitting in ours at.03.  So we are very bacterial dominated in our agricultural soils here.  It's practically no fungi in the system.  
**[1:26:04-1:26:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:26:04):**  So get some fungi back into the system, restore that biology and then keep some sort of little  living cover on surface to keep bringing nutrients and exudates and sugars down into that system  and then just kind of watch it go.  Step back.  Resist.  
**[1:26:23-1:26:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:26:23):**  Don't try to do anything.  Try to just observe and maybe you can help it, but most often if you just observe, you'll  figure out what you need to do next.  If you found that that's a curse and maybe you have that too of we want to try and do  too much, the human wants to try and move it along.  
**[1:26:44-1:26:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:26:44):**  You pick up any agricultural catalog and the amount of soil amendments and things you can  pour onto your soil is insane where yes, we need to maybe steward or kickstart this along  to undo a lot of what we started, but it really is just at some point, it's just time and  good stewardship.  It's hard to resist trying to do something.  
**[1:27:11-1:27:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:27:11):**  Hey, you want to build a bioreactor, a Johnson-Sue bioreactor, they can look up your video, find  plans of that online.  Where can people go to learn more about the work that you're doing?  I suggest California State University, Chico.  They have a center for regenerative ag and resilient systems and they have a lot of good  
**[1:27:36-1:27:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:27:36):**  speakers on there, a lot of good videos.  The process for building this, there's a lot of people that have registered on that site.  I definitely suggest the center for regenerative ag and resilient systems at Chico, California.  Perfect.  Well, thanks for taking the time to chat today, David.  
**[1:27:54-1:27:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:27:54):**  I really appreciate it.  Well, thank you as well.  I wish everybody the best on this.  I hope it works for them.  Happy composting.  
**[1:28:29-1:28:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-03-DavidJohnson-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:28:29):**  Thank you.  