### In Search of Soil  (2021-00-28)
**[0:00:00-0:00:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:00:00):**  So we meet again.  Today we're talking trichoderma.  If that name doesn't ring a bell, if you don't recognize what trichoderma is, maybe you'd  recognize it by its commercial product name.  Root Shield and Root Shield Plus.  
**[0:00:34-0:00:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:00:34):**  Many of you as growers may have used that product before and the primary ingredient  in that product is trichoderma.  And today we're talking all about that beneficial fungus with someone who spent their life researching  it.  Dr. Gary Harmon of Cornell.  
**[0:00:52-0:00:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:00:52):**  Today he's going to be talking all about the benefits of trichoderma in both natural and  agricultural soils.  And I think by the end of this one, you're going to be saying, I want trichoderma in  my soil.  Let's get into it with Dr. Gary Harmon.  
**[0:01:08-0:01:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:01:08):**  This is In Search of Soil.  I want to thank you for taking the time to chat here today.  Let's start at the very beginning.  Trichoderma, what is it?  Trichoderma is a fungus.  
**[0:01:21-0:01:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:01:21):**  It's a green fungus.  My wife makes a joke that I made a career out of what everybody else wrote down at the  back of the refrigerator.  And I started working on trichoderma back in 1980, so it's been a long time.  And for people, they hear it's a fungus and they see it and I think they think it's a  
**[0:01:44-0:01:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:01:44):**  mold.  So mold versus...  It is a mold.  The fungus and the mold are the same thing.  So like in a basic definition level, fungus and mold, same thing?  
**[0:01:54-0:01:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:01:54):**  Same thing.  Okay.  So if it wasn't commercialized and looked at for agricultural uses into the 90s, let's  go back in time a little bit before that to the beginning of your career.  Started looking at this in the 1980s, but it wasn't for 10 to 15 years later that it  
**[0:02:12-0:02:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:02:12):**  became a product.  Can you talk about your early days in that initial discovery?  What brought that interest in this specific fungi?  Started at Colorado State with Edlin, Schott and Tex Baker and went to a meeting and they  were talking about protoplasm fusion.  
**[0:02:32-0:02:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:02:32):**  If you want to develop a new variety of plant, you use sexual hybridization.  But for a fungus, they don't have...  These are the strains we use, have no known sexual strain.  So there is a process whereby you can dissolve away the cell walls and fuse them.  And then it became a very interesting exercise.  
**[0:03:11-0:03:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:03:11):**  There were huge diversity introduced that way.  And we went through, I don't know, thousands of strains and we finally selected T22 because,  and this is a really important concept, it's rhizosphere-competent, which means it can  grow on the roots.  And not only can it grow on the roots, it grows in the roots, we found out later.  
**[0:03:38-0:03:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:03:38):**  And in the roots, then it persists and grows with the plant and lasts for the life of at  least an annual crop and on perennial crops like turf it lasts longer than that.  And it induces the plant then to reprogram itself genetically, which means that there  are a lot of genes that are upregulated and proteins that are upregulated to...  And then the effects become systemic throughout the plant.  
**[0:04:16-0:04:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:04:16):**  So even though they're on the roots, they can control things like powdery mildew on  the foliage.  And we also then have found that they can induce through this mediation through the  plant, they can induce increased photosynthesis, increased bile stress, and bile stresses,  diseases and pests.  
**[0:04:47-0:04:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:04:47):**  With these strains being isolated and then being used in agriculture, if you go out into  the wild and just soils in general, are you going to find trichoderma?  Most common fungus in soil is probably trichoderma.  But the really useful attributes are restricted on a strain basis.  So even though you can have trichoderma afrocarotia, you can have many, many, many, many, many,  
**[0:05:21-0:05:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:05:21):**  many strains.  Very few are useful in agriculture.  And in fact, the thousands and thousands of strains we've screened, there's only six that  we've recommended for commercialization.  And they either are commercialized or they will be when EPA registrations are obtained.  
**[0:05:46-0:05:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:05:46):**  So of all those strains out there in the wild, if everything in the soil has a fit, it plays  some role.  What is the role of trichoderma in the soil microbiome?  Well, there are several.  It's a very diverse species.  
**[0:06:05-0:06:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:06:05):**  In some cases, there are trichoderma strains that, for example, in cocoa, grow throughout  the plant, all over the plant, and induce systemic resistance and control diseases.  There are other strains that live on wood and are part of the decay process of wood  along with some other fungi.  So when they're recycling organic matter, they're very much involved.  
**[0:06:45-0:06:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:06:45):**  There are a few strains that are not good.  Trichoderma aggressiveum is a very important pathogen in mushrooms.  And when we first started with trichoderma, and we'll back up a little bit, a very important  corollary of all this is that when I started this, based on morphology,  there were nine species identified according to one treatise.  
**[0:07:28-0:07:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:07:28):**  Now based on molecular techniques, there's 258.  And this has really been very important because, for example, people when we first started  talking about what was then called trichoderma, now Afro-Hertzianum, it was not known to be  distinct from the mushroom pathogens, but with a new taxonomy that was able to distinguish  those.  
**[0:07:58-0:08:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:07:58):**  There are other strains of trichoderma that, especially in the division Longibrechia Adam,  that are reduced trichothecine toxins, and those are bad guys.  But that's restricted to that one group.  So with taxonomy, we can restrict and we can find the bad actors as opposed to the ones  that are providing useful characteristics.  
**[0:08:28-0:08:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:08:28):**  So if we go back to those disease suppressing soils that you saw, can you make the assumption  then that those had high levels of the strains that would be beneficial to agricultural crops  just naturally occurring in them?  Yes.  In one case, I had a colleague who wanted to control Phytophthora on apples, and we looked  
**[0:08:55-0:08:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:08:55):**  and looked and looked for strains that would work.  And the only place we could find any were in a suppressive soil that was oppressive  to an organism called Afanomyses, which causes P root rot.  And they used to be there.  There's a whole literature says that they were there, but we went and sampled fields  
**[0:09:19-0:09:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:09:19):**  in the Genesee River Valley.  They weren't there.  And I mean, the disease wasn't there.  So we went back and isolated it.  We got a strain, Trichoderma virans strain 41, that from that suppressive soil, it's  
**[0:09:35-0:09:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:09:35):**  we'll use quite widely now for control of Pythium and Phytophthora and a lot of these  diseases.  And so the suppressive soils are a very useful source for the good guys.  So even on a biological level, what makes Trichoderma dominant over disease producing  fungi and organisms?  
**[0:10:02-0:10:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:10:02):**  Why does that win when you have disease suppressing organisms and these Trichodermas in the same  soil?  So the answer, for the most part, not to, you can never say in every case, but for the  most part, it's because of this ability to colonize roots and to induce the plant to  become to control the diseases so that you can have disease on the foliage.  
**[0:10:45-0:10:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:10:45):**  And even though the Trichoderma is only in the roots, it controls that disease on the  foliage.  How does it do that?  So say powdery mildew is an example.  So you have Trichoderma in the roots, you have a plant growing, powdery mildew shows  
**[0:10:58-0:10:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:10:58):**  up on the foliage.  It doesn't show up, that's the point.  Trichoderma is there.  And so what happens is it's a Trichoderma, there's a complex interaction with the plant  cell membranes that induces the plant to produce active disease controlling properties.  
**[0:11:28-0:11:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:11:28):**  And these go systemically and they're transduced throughout the entire plant.  So when we started, we thought other things were going on.  For example, Trichoderma is very good at parasitizing other fungi, wraps around them.  And when we thought this had to be the mechanism, because we could see it on, for example, in  soil and on seeds, but it's not the primary mechanism.  
**[0:12:01-0:12:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:12:01):**  The primary mechanism in most cases is this induced systemic resistance.  And so the plant controls it, but this plant is told to produce it through by the activity  of the fungi.  So is it the plant producing antibiotics or something that disease-  Well, yeah, they're analogous to antibiotics.  
**[0:12:27-0:12:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:12:27):**  There are pretty well recognized pathways for what they're called induced systemic resistance  and systemic acquired resistance, and they're separate pathways, although there's crosstalk  between the two.  And these pathways are quite useful for controlling diseases and some of them through the same  mechanisms they also increase photosynthesis, they increase resistance to stresses like  
**[0:13:10-0:13:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:13:10):**  drought, salt, and this sort of thing.  They increase plant yield or they induce an increase in plant yield.  One of the really important things is that they increase root growth.  And so the roots grow deeper, bigger, stronger.  And of course, that's really good as another aspect to drought resistance.  
**[0:13:36-0:13:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:13:36):**  So they're multifunctional.  Right.  Well, inducing the plant to protect itself, is it more, and this is more on the plant  level, is the plant killing what's on it from these induced chemicals?  No, the killing is not what they do.  
**[0:13:55-0:13:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:13:55):**  They suppress it.  And this is one of the reasons there's an advantage to these biologicals over chemicals,  because if you have a chemical that's lethal, then it kills whatever organism it comes in  contact with.  But trichoderma and the induced resistance systems don't kill it, so the pathogen can  
**[0:14:18-0:14:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:14:18):**  still stick around, but it's controlled so that it doesn't cause disease.  And so because it's not lethal, there's not the selection for resistant types.  What's the evolutionary advantage of that?  Why have the pathogens stick around versus saying, go away?  Well, I don't know about the evolutionary advantage, but there's a big advantage to  
**[0:14:48-0:14:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:14:48):**  us because, as I say, resistance doesn't develop because they're still there.  So they're just controlled, suppressed, but they're not eliminated.  So the plant goes on growing, pathogens there, the pathogen can't do what it would want to  do.  Right.  
**[0:15:12-0:15:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:15:12):**  So it's going along in a very feeble sort of way, but it's still there.  Right.  And it's still there on life support per se.  Yeah.  And there's a fine line between pathogenicity and beneficial organisms.  
**[0:15:29-0:15:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:15:29):**  So they both infect the plant.  It's just what they do when they get into the plant that makes the difference.  If that's being done through chemical signals, gene expression, does that get transmitted  through seeds to the next...  That's an interesting question.  
**[0:15:48-0:15:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:15:48):**  One of the things that happens in this, there's a thing called gene priming.  And gene priming is something that's established when in response to the biocontrol agents,  among other things.  And they alter the upstream regulatory regions so that when a stress or a disease occurs,  either biological or abiotic, when stress occurs, the response is more rapid and more  
**[0:16:26-0:16:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:16:26):**  complete.  And so this is what's called gene priming and it has to do with the upstream regulation  of RNA.  Now that upstream regulation of RNA could conceivably be transmitted through seeds.  So there could be generational improvements.  
**[0:16:48-0:16:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:16:48):**  I have seen papers to that effect, but I don't have personal knowledge that this does occur.  What about in the Trigoderma itself?  Is it getting feedback from the plant?  So it is.  Yes.  
**[0:17:03-0:17:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:17:03):**  That is really important.  There's always the two-way dialogue between the plant and the organisms that infect it.  And so for sure, one of the things it gets is all the nutrition it needs, all the carbon,  all the nutrients, that's where it gets it.  And so the plant is, they're a co-equal partner.  
**[0:17:35-0:17:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:17:35):**  There's a really intriguing interaction with either mycorrhizae or rhizobium in the plant.  So if you have, and this is pretty much applicable to either one, you have a common symbiotic  pathway is what it's called.  If the rhizobium, for example, is in the seed or in the soil, and it is cued to grow and  infect by the plant, at the same time, the rhizobium sends signals to the plant that  
**[0:18:25-0:18:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:18:25):**  allows it to be infected.  Then once it's infected, there's a thing called an infection thread.  And the infection thread takes the rhizobium cells and it actually gives it a pathway to  the cells that the plant wants to have it infect.  And then the plant gets in there and infects those cells and you begin to have nodule formation.  
**[0:18:54-0:19:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:18:54):**  And then that's a whole complex interaction.  So that the rhizobium then changes its type from a free-living bacteria to a bacteroid,  it's called, which is a cell in the nodule.  The nodule is a combination of tissue from both the plant and the rhizobium.  But trichoderma would be different.  
**[0:19:32-0:19:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:19:32):**  That's not infecting the plant.  Yes, it is infecting the plant.  It is.  So do you have that same relationship where the trichoderma is actually inside plant cells?  Yes.  
**[0:19:44-0:19:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:19:44):**  Yes.  That's what I mean by the endophytic nature of it.  It's internal to the plant.  And one of the advantages to this system is if you had a free-living organism out in the  soil, it would be subject to all the issues of drought or unfavorable conditions that  
**[0:20:13-0:20:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:20:13):**  might not survive.  But if it's in the plant, if the plant survives, so does the trichoderma.  So the plant protects the trichoderma and the trichoderma causes benefit to the plant.  So it's a true symbiotic relationship.  Given that you have this two-way conversation between the plants and the trichoderma, let's  
**[0:20:34-0:20:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:20:34):**  say powdery mildew again affects the leaves, the plant starts doing things to suppress  it.  Does the trichoderma get feedback on like, well, okay, that's infecting you so it can  then evolve and iterate?  So it may be...  
**[0:20:47-0:20:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:20:47):**  No, I don't think so.  But it does though.  The trichoderma just induces the plant to produce the chemicals that control the fungus  or the pathogen.  And how does the trichoderma then, like mildew lands on leave, that puts some sort of chemical  
**[0:21:06-0:21:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:21:06):**  in the plant sap and then the trichoderma can identify that and say, whoa, we got an  invader here and then it's...  No, not quite.  The trichoderma, when it's infected the plant, it does this gene priming thing when in interaction  with membranes.  
**[0:21:27-0:21:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:21:27):**  And there's a whole lot of chemicals, the trichoderma or rhizobium or mycorrhizae,  producing they're not the same, that interact with the plant and then you get the signal  transduction and the plant takes it from there.  So the trichoderma doesn't know whether there's an infection or not, but it just makes it  possible for the plant to control the infection.  
**[0:21:58-0:22:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:21:58):**  On a disease suppression level and pathogen level, if you think of agricultural diseases  out there like the known ones, how effective is trichoderma at increasing plant resistance  to most known diseases?  Depends on the type of disease, but things like powdery mildew, it does.  But for things like rust, it doesn't because there are different type of pathogen.  
**[0:22:35-0:22:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:22:35):**  So it depends on the pathogen and the interaction.  But one of the things that even with the rust, the plant health has increased and so that  provides just an overall baseline of health that it really improves the situation.  I know this isn't your area of expertise, but I've talked to scientists in the past  that have worked with basil and powdery mildew resistance in basil as a trait that's passed  
**[0:23:03-0:23:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:23:03):**  on through there.  How does resistance through trait differ than resistance through this gene priming via trichoderma?  Well, it depends.  In the trait-based things, the plant traits, this is a plant property.  I mean the plant, it's part of the genetic framework of the plant.  
**[0:23:27-0:23:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:23:27):**  And with trichoderma, that genetic framework is altered, especially in the upstream regulatory  regions to accomplish the same thing.  So the end result is the same chemicals in the plant, but the means for by which it gets  there is different.  One common crop growing throughout the US that I think a lot of people have issues with  
**[0:23:54-0:23:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:23:54):**  disease of is tomatoes.  With powdery mildew, with blight, can trichoderma affect the diseases of tomato?  They can.  It depends on the diseases, but for example, late blight, I don't think it will do anything  for...  
**[0:24:13-0:24:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:24:13):**  Nothing much does anything for late blight except pulling out the plants.  And if somebody, I'm trying to think too, like a lot of people listening to this, they're  into, let's say, they're trying to encourage healthy soil microbiome through their practices.  How do you, let's say you didn't even add any trichoderma, but you wanted to encourage  what was there to have the best chance of thriving.  
**[0:24:42-0:24:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:24:42):**  What would you want to do in terms of agricultural practices to make sure that any wild trichoderma  can expand, take over as much as possible or grow so you have that in the soil?  Well, one of the things you want to do for healthy soils is you'll increase microbial  diversity and whatever that means.  And there are lots of studies and it's just a bewildering array of different organisms  
**[0:25:09-0:25:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:25:09):**  that are involved in this, but microbial diversity is a good thing.  And so anything you can do to increase microbial diversity is good.  The more roots you have, for example, the better off you are.  Volatiles can help them, biochar can help that.  And to go back to trichoderma, it increases root growth and increasing root growth is  
**[0:25:43-0:25:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:25:43):**  one of the ways you increase microbial diversity.  One of the things that was first found by Bernie Glick up in Guelph is that if you have  oil contaminated soils, you can remediate them through adding some bacteria that he  has and they don't themselves remediate the soil, but they increase the root growth and  the plant health so that the plant is more able to cope with stress, the stress of the  
**[0:26:17-0:26:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:26:17):**  oil.  And so then the plant survives mixed roots and then there are other microorganisms that  grow in the area that actually do the degradation of the oil.  And we have the same result in some work we did years ago with trichoderma.  We haven't published that.  
**[0:26:36-0:26:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:26:36):**  The whole concept of soil health, there are quite a few things you can do and cover crops  are really important for this.  Do you think for the average grower, and I know it's tough to say, again, you can't answer  in all cases, but if you had good growing practices, like you're using cover crops,  you're not doing a lot of tillage, you're doing everything you can to encourage a robust  
**[0:27:02-0:27:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:27:02):**  microbial community that just doing that is enough?  Or do you think that adding a cultured out trichoderma strain to the soils is going to  make things that much better?  Yes, it will make things that much better.  You can get there with cover cropping and composting and these kinds of things.  
**[0:27:28-0:27:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:27:28):**  But added microbial strains is a good thing.  For example, if you have legumes, you certainly want to add rhizobium.  Rhizobiac sometimes are not rhizobium species.  Also you can get nitrogen fixation and trichoderma can aid all of this as well.  One of the questions you have is how expensive is it to maintain a solid vegetation cover  
**[0:28:00-0:28:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:28:00):**  on your crops?  For example, corn in this climate, you can't hardly do that because by the time the corn  silage is too late to plant the cover crop and they won't grow, you know, freeze.  But it's a very good practice.  There are some issues with how you can do this.  
**[0:28:26-0:28:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:28:26):**  For example, cover cropping, as I just mentioned, and if you have to add compost or biochar,  there's a huge amount of material you have to add to the field.  I mean tons and tons and tons and tons and tons.  So that becomes really a logistical and a financial nightmare to do all that.  Doing some reading myself on trichoderma, I know that it, you know, it produces cellulase  
**[0:28:55-0:29:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:28:55):**  so it digests cellulose in some of them.  And it doesn't have that plant relationship.  Is that what it's doing?  It's breaking down that other organic matter in the soil?  Yes, that's one of its primary ecological niches is the degradation of organic waste  
**[0:29:17-0:29:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:29:17):**  and of course then recycling all that back.  Increasing organic matter in soil is a very, very good thing.  That increases soil health too.  It's hard to do though.  Right.  
**[0:29:30-0:29:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:29:30):**  You know, one other thing I was looking at is it can grow at an extremely fast rate on  some of those.  Yes, it's very fast.  So up to an inch a day, like what can some of the hyphae in trichoderma, if you were  in a good situation, like how vast could one quote organism be?  
**[0:29:47-0:29:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:29:47):**  Is this something that could stretch meters on its own?  No, not on its own.  But if it's colonizing the roots and it's moving with the roots, then it occupies an  entire soil environment.  Wherever the roots are, the trichoderma will be too.  
**[0:30:10-0:30:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:30:10):**  And so the fungus doesn't grow like that, really extensively, but it accomplishes the  same factor by the medium of the plant.  What do you think is explaining the increased root growth with the introduction of trichoderma?  Is it the trichoderma saying, you know, grow more, I'll help you out here.  If you get bigger, I can protect you.  
**[0:30:34-0:30:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:30:34):**  Just put down more roots and we'll get more of us.  Like why, what's inducing that growth response in roots?  Well, one of the really important things is photosynthesis because everything we're talking  about here, disease resistance, and we haven't talked about mineral nutrition, but that is  involved.  
**[0:30:54-0:31:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:30:54):**  Increased photosynthesis, increased plant growth, all these things require fixed carbon  and requires energy in the form of the fixed carbon.  And so without increasing photosynthesis, you can't do any of these things.  But if you do increase photosynthesis, that's one of the things that allows the plants to  grow bigger and better and stronger and have deeper roots.  
**[0:31:27-0:31:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:31:27):**  And it's an absolute requirement.  Do you see a difference in performance on C3 versus C4 plants?  I don't know.  I'm just thinking.  Well, we have good effects on corn and soybeans, so maybe that's your answer.  
**[0:31:47-0:31:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:31:47):**  Let's go back to that mineral nutrition.  How does that play into this picture?  It's important.  Mineral nutrition, their materials are in the soil, iron, phosphorus that are there,  but they're not soluble.  
**[0:32:10-0:32:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:32:10):**  The plant can't take them up.  And so the ability to take up those nutrients is very important.  And trachoderma can help solubilize those insoluble materials.  And so it can increase the uptake of phosphorus and potassium.  Well, potassium doesn't apply because it's readily available.  
**[0:32:34-0:32:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:32:34):**  But iron.  And one of the things, the reason for their existence in commercial agriculture for mycorrhizae  is that they are able to extend way out into the soil.  And they do have a very, very wide network of hyphae.  And they can even translocate nutrients from one plant to the next.  
**[0:33:01-0:33:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:33:01):**  But one of the things that they do is they solubilize phosphorus and they package it.  And then they go into, there's a low garbuscule inside the root.  So there's a great deal of surface area with the plant membrane.  And it transfers that phosphorus into the plant.  And the plant, of course, again, it's a symbiosis.  
**[0:33:27-0:33:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:33:27):**  The plant then provides all the nutrition that the mycorrhizae needs.  So this is a very beneficial interaction.  And in essence, the carbon is 42% of plants.  So it's the largest component of plants.  And with increased photosynthesis, which you can consider as a carbon as a nutrient, the  
**[0:34:04-0:34:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:34:04):**  increased photosynthesis then really improves plant growth because that's a required resource.  How much of an understanding do you think we have at this point of how that communication  between plant and microbe works?  Do we know what signals are actually being sent?  Yes, we do.  
**[0:34:27-0:34:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:34:27):**  Especially with mycorrhizae.  I mentioned the common synthetic pathway, common symbiotic pathway.  This one is worked out fairly well.  It's really very, very well known.  And it's really interesting because one of the keys, I think, to all these symbioses,  
**[0:34:52-0:35:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:34:52):**  was mycorrhizae, they evolved way before even plants were evolving into monocots and dicots.  Very early they became partners with plants, very primitive plants.  And this has been perpetuated out to now.  Mycorrhizae, that's a term, I'm hearing it, a lot of people are familiar with that.  Are trichoderma grouped into that category?  
**[0:35:31-0:35:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:35:31):**  No, they are not.  They're not mycorrhizae.  Mycorrhizae are a very separate group.  And one of the factors that makes them difficult to commercialize is that they can't live outside  the plant.  
**[0:35:47-0:35:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:35:47):**  They have to have the plant.  You can do it in plant tissue culture or something like that.  But to produce commercially mycorrhizae, you probably need to grow a plant and then harvest  the plant roots.  And so that means that it's expensive, it's difficult, and you can never have a pure culture.  
**[0:36:09-0:36:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:36:09):**  And what's more, unlike what we've been able to do with trichoderma, it's very difficult  because you can't put it in a petri dish and look at it.  It's very difficult to develop improvement except just through selection.  Can you have a root in the soil that's having interactions with trichoderma, mycorrhizae,  let's say it's a legume rhizobia, all at the same time at different parts?  
**[0:36:39-0:36:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:36:39):**  Yes, you can.  And you do, it happens.  What's unique about trichoderma then?  Because I've talked to other scientists who've looked at mycorrhizae and other microbes in  the soil.  
**[0:36:54-0:36:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:36:54):**  And just like you're saying, you can't isolate them in a lab.  They tend to function either with a living plant or they need that community around them  in the soil to actually function.  Why is trichoderma unique in the sense that you can put it in a petri dish, you can observe  it versus...  
**[0:37:12-0:37:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:37:12):**  Well, I don't know why, but it's certainly an advantage.  And it's certainly an advantage because you can manipulate it, you can select, you can  screen thousands and thousands of strains and you can save all the cultures back.  So you can have this very large collection of these strains that you can go back to if  you want to, and we have done that.  
**[0:37:43-0:37:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:37:43):**  And you can't do that with mycorrhizae.  Right.  If you were a grower and you wanted to add in application of this, could you do it at  the seed level?  Yes, that's one of the primary ways.  
**[0:38:00-0:38:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:38:00):**  That's for row crops, that's the only economical way to do it.  And there are many millions of dollars, I just have something back here, a letter from  Bard which I talked about.  The current net value of trichoderma to agriculture is $694 million.  And that is primarily through seed treatments.  
**[0:38:32-0:38:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:38:32):**  There are other ways, any way you can deliver the trichoderma to the roots works.  You can do a root dip, you can do it with transplants, you can do it in greenhouses,  you can add it to the soil, to the potting medium, it's not necessarily soil, and then  it will colonize and create the benefits that you want.  Is it somewhere you could dip a seed in it, let it dry out, and it would sit there until  
**[0:39:05-0:39:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:39:05):**  the seed is planted?  Yeah.  Now, I say yes very glibly, but we work for years and years and years getting techniques  and formulations that will permit you to do that, to have seed treatments that really  are effective.  
**[0:39:26-0:39:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:39:26):**  For large-scale commercial use, you need to have liquid formulations.  And liquid formulations are, if you put the spores in water, bad things are going to happen.  You're going to get mold contamination, things like that, so you have to develop formulations,  which we have done, so that you can have stable liquid formulations.  And these can be applied in large-scale seed treaters, and that's required for the seed  
**[0:39:57-0:39:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:39:57):**  treatment.  And one of the real advantages is because trichoderma are resistant to many, many fungicides,  so that you can apply them over the top of a fungicide-treated seed.  Is it something where, reading one of your papers here, you can add it as a seed treatment,  the best strains will colonize the root surface even when roots grow a meter or more, and  
**[0:40:25-0:40:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:40:25):**  they can persist in useful numbers up to 18 months after application.  So if you treated seed, say, for this season, the trichoderma grow with the roots in the  soil, and then next season, let's say I treat the next set of seeds.  Can I assume that now, since I already had a previous crop in there that had a good strain  of trichoderma associated with them, I now have a higher level in the soil because I  
**[0:40:51-0:40:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:40:51):**  had previous...  No, and this is a big advantage to commercialization, maybe not so much to other things, because  if the roots go away, the trichoderma drops below useful levels.  And so every year you have to re-inoculate.  In the past, when I've talked to proponents of biologicals, I've heard this quote, they're  
**[0:41:15-0:41:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:41:15):**  viewed by growers as inconsistent at best, snake oil at worst.  What do you think about that?  Yeah, that is the reputation.  And I can tell you that overall, for example, if you take plant yield, the overall effect  is to increase plant yield, but you can't guarantee that any particular grower in any  
**[0:41:45-0:41:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:41:45):**  particular field will have that increased yield.  And that's the same with any other input that you make, except maybe if the case of where  really nitrogen pours oils and you add nitrogen.  But it's a harder sell because that is...I think there was an article in Corn Farmer  that was talking about my work and the companies that I'm associated with.  
**[0:42:24-0:42:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:42:24):**  And they said trichoderma, something to this effect, and no part of it is exactly right.  The next boon for corn farmers or fufu dust.  And that pretty much expresses the opinion and what anybody wanting to sell trichoderma  or any other microbial inoculant has to deal with.  One other factor that limits the amount of trichoderma, for example, corn is a proprietary  
**[0:43:06-0:43:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:43:06):**  product.  And so you have a few large companies, very few, that control the entire corn market.  And they will not allow, if you open the bag and add anything to it, it voids the warranty.  And so people are not going to apply trichoderma if they're going to have their warranty weighted.  So that's a major limitation.  
**[0:43:39-0:43:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:43:39):**  A lot of people listening to this are growers of higher value crops.  They're not growing corn, they're growing things like lettuces that they carry a higher  market value.  And they're growing on smaller acreage.  Like they're probably 10 acres or less, most people listening to this.  
**[0:43:54-0:44:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:43:54):**  So at the application cost of three to, let's say it's even $10 an acre and you have 10  acres, is there any reason you wouldn't try it?  Yes, there is.  And that is because it's frequently not sold for those applications.  Because for example, if you do a seed treatment, how much trichoderma can you apply on a lettuce  
**[0:44:17-0:44:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:44:17):**  seed?  A very small amount.  So if the grower uses on lettuce seed, he won't spend $10, he will spend 10 cents.  And of course that's not economically feasible.  So for seed treatments it's not marketed for that, for those purposes for those small seeds.  
**[0:44:45-0:44:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:44:45):**  It's just a misfit between the amount that you can obtain and revenue versus the...  And so it's not worth doing.  But that's from the commercial side, but from the grower side, like if they could acquire  trichodermery and even put it through their drip irrigation system.  Yeah, that is a thing that has been done.  
**[0:45:21-0:45:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:45:21):**  There's a very interesting example.  One of my colleagues who is now the director, which is the highest official at the University  of Naples in Italy, University of Napoli, had a project with the South American company.  And they were growing a mixture of beneficial microbes, and I once knew what they were,  but I can't tell you.  
**[0:45:54-0:45:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:45:54):**  But they were growing them in a reactor and they were pumping that directly from their  reactor into the irrigation water.  And a great many of the cantaloupes that we buy were treated that way.  And they really suppressed disease.  Another way that things have been brought forward, I had a colleague in Costa Rica,  
**[0:46:23-0:46:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:46:23):**  and there's other people too, and they were for local distribution, they had a small production  facility and they grew the trichoderma on grain in whiskey bottles.  And then they took the trichoderma, they delivered it directly to the strawberry growers, and  the strawberry growers were using it and having no disease at all.  Could you apply it foliarly?  
**[0:46:56-0:46:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:46:56):**  You can.  We have done that.  It's not done commercially.  It could be, regulatory aspects, I'll come back to that, are what limit that.  But we do have some good results on turf, on other crops, and it's quite possible to  
**[0:47:21-0:47:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:47:21):**  do this.  And you can also integrate it with chemical applications, either in alternating sprays  or even in tank mixes, and that's effective too.  But it isn't done commercially.  And the reason for this is regulatory.  
**[0:47:35-0:47:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:47:35):**  To get a regulatory approval for, it's quite expensive to get regulatory approval for anything,  even soil applications, because you have to do toxicity, dermal toxicity.  There's a six pack, and I won't try to reel them up right now, but there's a six pack  that you have to do, and that can cost hundreds of thousands of dollars and does.  I'm not sure exactly the numbers.  
**[0:48:09-0:48:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:48:09):**  But then in addition to that, if you go to foliar application, now you have to do bee  studies.  You have to do quail feeding studies.  You have to do Drosophila if it's going to be used near waterways.  And all that really adds to the expense.  
**[0:48:29-0:48:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:48:29):**  Right.  Let's say this is just even in a lab setting.  If you applied it foliarly, would it coat the above ground portion of the plant like  it does the root?  Well, I can tell you some of our experience with grapes.  
**[0:48:46-0:48:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:48:46):**  We were looking at Botrytis, a gray mold on grapes.  We were applying it.  There were experiments going on in Chile and experiments going on in New York.  We were applying it to the foliage, and it was having long term effects on control of  Botrytis, even at low levels.  
**[0:49:06-0:49:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:49:06):**  So I'm assuming that this, even though it's applied foliarly, this is an induced resistance  phenomenon.  Do you think that Trichoderma is living on the leaf surface and getting a nutrient exchange  there?  I don't know.  
**[0:49:23-0:49:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:49:23):**  We haven't investigated that enough to know for certain.  It could be that you have this gene priming effect and once it's induced, it persists.  And the trichoderma just dies off and could be gone.  Could be gone because you got ultraviolet radiation and things like that, unless it's  internal into the plant.  
**[0:49:40-0:49:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:49:40):**  And there's an organism called Clonostachys that I've worked on.  And this does internally infect the plant and induce resistance.  And I don't know if Trichoderma does the same thing, but it internally induces resistance  to some pretty important pathogens like again, gray mold on various crops and also take off  or not take off head blight of corn.  
**[0:50:06-0:50:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:50:06):**  And that's very important because head blight causes major toxic problems.  And so that Clonostachys is systemic and persists in the above ground parts of the plant.  Is there any way that if you did apply it as a foliar application that it could make  its way through the plant to the roots?  I don't know.  
**[0:50:34-0:50:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:50:34):**  I don't know.  In a few cases, we know that that's the case.  For example, Trichoderma on cocoa, it goes throughout the plant.  It goes throughout the plant.  But if you take the same strains that go throughout the plant and cocoa and inoculate them onto  
**[0:50:53-0:50:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:50:53):**  pepper, it only colonizes the roots.  So it's a plant specific trait.  Why do you hypothesize that cocoa has this unique relationship, but most other...  I don't know.  It does, but I don't know why.  
**[0:51:10-0:51:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:51:10):**  There's some other tropical trees that have a whole lot of endophytic organisms in them  that really aid their ability to function and produce.  If we go back to root colonization and let's say you have Trichoderma at the root interface  and it does this gene priming, does it have any effect on insect pests?  Well, we've looked at that and not that I know of.  
**[0:51:41-0:51:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:51:41):**  Now, Metarhizum is an insect pathogen that also colonizes roots and induces disease resistance.  So in that way, there is.  Now, not insects, but nematodes, and again, this is a very strange specific phenomenon.  We have the ability to control nematode egg laying in corn and tomato.  We know this in field trials and in lab trials.  
**[0:52:16-0:52:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:52:16):**  And again, this is an induced response and it doesn't really reduce the amount of nematodes  in this first year, but there is almost no egg laying.  So the next year there won't be any nematodes.  And this is, and at the same time, we're getting growth promotion of the plant.  So this is a very useful thing.  
**[0:52:40-0:52:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:52:40):**  This is a trait that is, this is why we have to have EPA registration before you can make  pest control claims.  And I think that's probably pretty close to happening.  I know you're not an insect guy, but do you have any thoughts on this?  You apply trichoderma, you get a plant that is healthier and more resistant to disease.  
**[0:53:09-0:53:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:53:09):**  Therefore it's less prone to insect predation.  Well, it may be more tolerant of insects, insect infestations, just because there's  a greater health of the plant.  I wish that was the case with my ice trees that have all died from emerald ash borer.  There's some, say, worry unknown around applying biologicals across wide geographic regions  
**[0:53:43-0:53:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:53:43):**  in the ability of them to persist.  Like if you apply them in Geneva, Southern California, Portland, or Phoenix, Arizona,  what have you seen with trichoderma?  Is it pretty biome agnostic or does it need the right environment to really work?  As long as the plants are growing, then you're okay.  
**[0:54:11-0:54:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:54:11):**  Because they're inside the root.  So once they colonize the root, then they're good to go for the life of the crop.  As long as the plant can survive, the trichoderma survives.  On application, is it just a live root is what they would need in the soil?  If you're going to apply them as a soil drench or through a drip line or something like that,  
**[0:54:35-0:54:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:54:35):**  they just need to be able to find live roots versus heavy roots.  That's all they need.  Okay, so you don't need like a food in the soil for them to consume.  No.  No, we've looked at, we've looked in seed treatments with food bases and things like  
**[0:54:49-0:54:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:54:49):**  that because we thought, well, we could really make things grow well.  The problem is you also get other things growing well.  So the competition is more difficult.  So usually don't get any advantage by adding food bases.  Just get in the roots and to the roots in some fashion or other through a drench, through  
**[0:55:11-0:55:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:55:11):**  a drip, even granular formulations that are applied to the surface of the soil.  And then as the rain comes, then the forager works down to the roots.  One thing in regards to say marketing of these things, and you even see it in some pictures  online and studies is you'll see plant A and then you'll see plant B, which has had X done  to it.  
**[0:55:37-0:55:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:55:37):**  Yeah.  And plant B usually looks a lot better.  It's bigger, it's more vigorous, whatever, bigger fruit.  In your experience, when you do studies like this and when you see this, is there, are  they cherry picking the best one to show you or if there was a hundred?  
**[0:55:53-0:56:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:55:53):**  That's a real interesting thing because yes, there is some cherry picking, but it's also  real.  And so if it happens, it happens.  Now one of the things when we were talking about to commercial people, I say, well, you  showed all these beautiful pictures, but it's a one-off test.  
**[0:56:15-0:56:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:56:15):**  You've got to test it over thousands of acres and hundreds of years, well, not hundreds  of years, but many years before you can be sure.  And so commercially, that's pretty much coming to realization, but it's a big hell to climb  because there is always the feeling, well, you're just cherry picking, you've got this  one result, you can't reproduce it.  
**[0:56:45-0:56:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:56:45):**  And you have to find the factors that don't permit you to reproduce it.  In some cases, we know what those are.  For example, in corn, certain types of corn are indeterminate.  That means that they just grow and grow and grow.  There's usually varieties that are selected for silage, but others are selected just for  
**[0:57:08-0:57:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:57:08):**  grain and they're going to grow as big as they're going to grow and that's all.  So you don't see the big yield advantage or growth advantage on those determinate varieties,  but you can see it on the indeterminate ones.  And so you have to know something about your crop and where it's likely to be successful  and where it isn't.  
**[0:57:30-0:57:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:57:30):**  So you applied it to a determining corn plant, like that the trait of the plant is going  to affect its above ground growth.  Did you see a more vigorous, robust root system?  I don't know that for sure.  I'm just thinking back over the years, we frequently see more robust root systems.  
**[0:58:02-0:58:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:58:02):**  I'm thinking of an experiment we did in a field where we had corn and there was nitrogen  in huge quantities there.  So there was not going to be a yield advantage, but I've never had the nerve to do this again.  We took a backhoe in the field and we dug down through the soil, through the root zone  down to six feet depth.  
**[0:58:36-0:58:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:58:36):**  Then people had to go down in these trenches and we washed it with a power washer so that  you could see the roots on the wall of the trench.  We put map pins wherever there was a root and then we counted the map pins.  We did this in a replicated trials and it was considerably enhanced even though there  was no effect on yield and above ground plant growth.  
**[0:59:03-0:59:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:59:03):**  It's the only time we've ever done that.  So it's a single observation.  It's a lot of work, very difficult to do.  And that's the problem with soil and root growth.  You've got to be able to see the roots and soil is not very visible.  
**[0:59:23-0:59:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:59:23):**  You can't see through the roots.  So you've got to dig it up and then if you dig it up, you destroy the roots.  And so it's quite a difficult thing.  Trichotron in the wild, how is it reproducing?  Mostly asexually by spores.  
**[0:59:47-0:59:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:59:47):**  So there are many, many, many, millions of spores produced and high in high P2, but the  spores are the persistent structures.  So they're primarily living as these asexual spores.  Are all the spores underground or do some of those become airborne?  They become airborne.  
**[1:00:11-1:00:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:00:11):**  I can't give you chapter and verse on that, but especially in the ones that, and there  are species of trichoderma that are very good wood colonizers.  So they colonize decaying wood and they do have a sexual stage.  And these asexual spores are all over the surface and you can see them.  They're frequently read, fruiting structures, and you can easily see those.  
**[1:00:44-1:00:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:00:44):**  And certainly those are airborne.  I suspect the trichoderma canidii, if they're exposed to the air, will become airborne too.  But I don't really know.  I would never try to do that.  The reason I ask is because I've seen methods where people will use rice to try and wild  
**[1:01:06-1:01:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:01:06):**  harvest a mold, which I'm assuming in this case is some trichoderma.  They'll put rice in an area of the field and they'll cover it with a towel so insects aren't  getting it.  They'll leave it there.  A mold shows up and then you know it's a mold because when it goes green, it's sporulated.  
**[1:01:27-1:01:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:01:27):**  And then they'll then try to multiply that out using some sucrose source.  What are your thoughts on that?  Is that doing anything?  Is there anything there?  I don't know.  
**[1:01:41-1:01:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:01:41):**  I wasn't aware of that.  But it's reasonable that that would occur.  I assume that you get a lot of things other than trichoderma.  But I'm sure that that can happen.  I would assume you get penicillium and stuff like that.  
**[1:02:01-1:02:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:02:01):**  For somebody who is doing that, Korean natural farming is one philosophy of agriculture that  does this.  Is there a risk if you're trying to wild harvest molds like this that what you could be harvesting  is bad and reproducing that?  It's conceivable.  
**[1:02:23-1:02:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:02:23):**  For example, if you have corn residues on soil, especially grain, you can get proliferation  of toxigenic fusarium strains.  And those are definitely bad.  And so, but I think it depends on the situation and what's likely to happen in any particular  case.  
**[1:02:49-1:02:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:02:49):**  I worry a little bit about manure teas and things like that.  I would think that there is a possibility that you get toxic or deleterious microorganisms  if you do manure teas because it's an uncontrolled process and you don't know what's going to  grow.  So I would never advocate that.  
**[1:03:09-1:03:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:03:09):**  People do and they have good results with it.  But to me, it's risky.  Is there any way that you'd know of for somebody at home to culture out trichoderma in a way  that would actually be significant and meaningful?  No, because it's so strain specific, you have to have the right strains.  
**[1:03:35-1:03:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:03:35):**  You can culture trichoderma in unlimited numbers and quantities and types, but most of them  won't be particularly beneficial.  But it is possible to buy useful trichoderma preparations on the web.  Having worked in that sector, developed these preparations, what would you advise somebody  to look for if they are purchasing it to know that they're purchasing something, one that  
**[1:04:10-1:04:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:04:10):**  is going to be effective, it's the right strain?  What would you look for?  Well, I know of course, and I'm going to be buying root shield, probably root shield this  year from BioWorks.  It's one of my strains.  
**[1:04:28-1:04:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:04:28):**  I know that it works and there may be others as well, but root shield may be the most common  one that you can buy.  Our root shield plus has two strains and that one can be, you can buy it, I think it's about  $100 for a package, but if you take that and you use what you want, you put the rest in  the freezer, you can keep it for years and years and years and years and years.  
**[1:05:02-1:05:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:05:02):**  Well, literally freezer, not fridge.  Refrigerator is good, freezer is better.  Is that something where you're getting a powder essentially?  Yes, it is a powder.  That with water?  
**[1:05:17-1:05:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:05:17):**  Okay, okay.  So, what I'm going to do this spring or this late winter when I start my tomatoes and squash  and things like that, I'm going to just mix it with the planning medium.  I'm not close, it's done commercially in greenhouses.  So it's there in the planning medium, you put your seed in, is that, there's enough  
**[1:05:46-1:05:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:05:46):**  of a quick time sequence there that wants that seed?  Yeah, there is.  Okay, it's fascinating what it can do and some of these other things that I've seen  talked about it, one is, and you talked about this isn't why you think it suppressed disease,  unless I'm missing up terms, correct me if I'm wrong, but, antibiotics is one thing you'll  
**[1:06:12-1:06:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:06:12):**  see when trichoderma, you read something.  Trichoderma do make antibiotic materials.  The strain, I mentioned 41 of trichoderma virans produces gluotoxin and gluotoxin, their  modal zoospores of Pythium and Phytophthora and Afanolysis and it's incredibly lethal  to them.  
**[1:06:39-1:06:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:06:39):**  So that may be a factor in the control of those ovomycetes, they're not fungi, they're  filamentous but they're not fungi.  And so this may be involved, but induced resistance is also involved.  So there may be probably multiple mechanisms, but an anabiosis in general may not be so  useful.  
**[1:07:05-1:07:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:07:05):**  I had a friend, Charlie Howell at the Texas A&M and he published a long time on the ability  of one of the trichoderma strains, the species escapes me right now, to control seedling  diseases of cotton.  And he attributed this to an antibiotic that the trichoderma was producing.  But when he did experiments, he did mutations and he had some strains that were mycoparasitic,  
**[1:07:39-1:07:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:07:39):**  some strains that were antibiotic resistant and others that induced resistance.  And there was no effect, no correlation between anabiosis or mycoparasitism and the control  of the seedling disease, but there was a huge interaction, a perfect interaction between  their ability to induce resistance.  So clearly that induced resistance is the primary mechanism there.  
**[1:08:08-1:08:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:08:08):**  And this is something that has only come about relatively recently, since the 1990s, this  misunderstanding that mycoparasitism and anabiosis, although they occur, they do occur, they're  not probably in most cases the most important factor.  With that, again, going back to that induced resistance, is there essentially a memory  within trichoderma that expands over time?  
**[1:08:47-1:08:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:08:47):**  So you have your diseases that are obviously evolving.  How does trichoderma induce disease suppression?  If above ground you have the diseases evolving, the trichoderma has to be evolving as well  to keep up or is it just...  Well, it's not...  
**[1:09:06-1:09:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:09:06):**  The trichoderma doesn't have to evolve.  The trichoderma is going to do what the trichoderma is going to do, and it's going to induce disease  resistance.  And the disease resistance in the plant is dependent upon chemicals that the plant produces  that inhibit the growth of the pathogens.  
**[1:09:30-1:09:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:09:30):**  So where the evolution would have to occur, if indeed it's necessary, is in the plant's  mechanisms, the plant systems, because the trichoderma is going to induce whatever is  there.  And so it's got to be plant-based.  So the plant essentially has this deck of genes, expression.  
**[1:10:00-1:10:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:10:00):**  Deck of genes and chemicals and pathways.  And whatever is there is there.  So like late blight is when we go back to it.  It doesn't have that in its deck, so it can't play that card.  But it can't.  
**[1:10:13-1:10:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:10:13):**  Yeah, right.  Well, there are a few varieties of tomatoes that are blight tolerant, and I don't know  how successful those are.  I planted some in my garden, but I didn't have late blight that year, so I can't tell.  Yeah.  
**[1:10:27-1:10:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:10:27):**  What do you think agriculture would look like if you saw overnight a 100% uptake of trichoderma  use?  Yeah.  I can tell you what would happen to the companies.  They would become very profitable.  
**[1:10:47-1:10:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:10:47):**  But I would truly believe that you would probably increase overall plant yields.  Several percentage points, maybe 10%.  Because you have multiple mechanisms that are things that are going on.  There's disease resistance, there's drought tolerance, there's resistance to all kinds  of abiotic stresses, improved photosynthesis.  
**[1:11:15-1:11:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:11:15):**  All these things contribute.  Just knowing what I know about soil science, I would think that this could potentially  be an exponential effect of you have more roots, and they're going deeper.  You're putting more sugars in the soil, that's stimulating microbes.  So you build soil year one, year two, you're doing the same thing, and every year you're  
**[1:11:37-1:11:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:11:37):**  getting better and better and better.  I think that you're absolutely correct.  Where do you think, and related, trichoderma aren't mycorrhizae.  Do you see a stage where you think you could get mycorrhizae commercialized?  I know there's all the challenges.  
**[1:11:57-1:12:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:11:57):**  You talked about those challenges earlier, but those can be overcame.  I don't know how.  It's intrinsic in the mycorrhizae that they can't be cultured without the plant.  And so I don't see how you can overcome that basic biological fact.  There are commercial products with mycorrhizae.  
**[1:12:21-1:12:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:12:21):**  I don't know how effective they are, and I've never used them, but there are commercial  products.  But they're for home gardeners primarily.  I don't think there's any wide-scale adoption.  Now having said that, the best way to encourage mycorrhizae is to avoid soil destruction.  
**[1:12:43-1:12:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:12:43):**  Because when you have these very large networks, they go between plants, across plants, and  they can cover, I don't know, very large areas.  But if you disrupt the soil, then you destroy those networks.  And so the best thing you can do to encourage mycorrhizae is to avoid soil disturbance.  Is there any other lab-based, and I don't mean lab-based, microbes that could be cultured  
**[1:13:15-1:13:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:13:15):**  out in a lab that are also big players in the soil matrix that would be worth looking  at outside of trichoderma?  Yeah, there probably are.  I'm going to send you this paper that I just published, and they list some others that  I wasn't aware of until I was writing this paper, and one of the reviewers said, well,  
**[1:13:36-1:13:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:13:36):**  you need to cite these papers.  And so I, but there are other fungi that might be beneficial, and then it's brand new to  me, and I've only known about it for the last two weeks.  You've spent 40 years looking at trichoderma.  Where do you think we are on our knowledge level of trichoderma?  
**[1:14:00-1:14:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:14:00):**  You think we're mostly there, or you think there's just still tons we don't know?  Well, there's a lot we don't know, but we do know a great deal.  And so can you get more bang?  Possibly.  And certainly the studies need to continue, but eventually you reach a saturation point,  
**[1:14:31-1:14:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:14:31):**  and then you have to let it go at that.  One other thing that I think people worry about when adding a cultured biological to  the soil is you upset whatever balance is there.  Do you see any negative repercussions of interest?  No, that was when we first went to do EPA registrations.  
**[1:14:56-1:15:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:14:56):**  There was a very great concern that, for example, we would disrupt mycorrhizae.  And if you put in a petri dish, if you put mycorrhizae in trichoderma, you can grow mycorrhizae  for a little bit in a petri dish.  It doesn't go very far, but you can.  The trichoderma grew over and killed it.  
**[1:15:15-1:15:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:15:15):**  But there are some nice studies out of Oregon State where they inoculated soil with both  mycorrhizae and trichoderma.  And there was no negative effect on the mycorrhizae, number one.  There were other studies from the University of Florida where you have benefits, additive  benefits of trichoderma and mycorrhizae if you add them both to, I think it was tomatoes  
**[1:15:49-1:15:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:15:49):**  for disease resistance.  And so I don't know of any adverse effects.  And we've looked.  Hopefully we'd have some adverse effect on the pathogens, but that's okay.  Trichoderma colonizes a root and it tells the plant, okay, you got to reprogram yourself  
**[1:16:09-1:16:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:16:09):**  to be resistant to these things should they show up.  Why doesn't the plant already have that in it?  Why does it need the trichoderma to come tell it to do that?  Why isn't the plant evolved to the stage to say like, I need to prime myself for all these  things?  
**[1:16:26-1:16:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:16:26):**  Well, there is that, there is priming mechanisms, but it has to be induced by something.  And it can be induced by pathogens, which you don't want to have happen because it makes  the plant sick.  It can be induced by particular metals.  But they don't generally have this.  
**[1:16:47-1:16:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:16:47):**  And I don't know why that is.  It could be that this is not one of the things that's selected for in plant breeding.  And so they may have had that ability at one time.  So it's a moral answer.  She was associated with undesirable traits.  
**[1:17:06-1:17:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:17:06):**  So it's not there.  But I don't know that's the case.  Yeah, I think there was a study out of Washington state that talked about the breeding of plants  potentially reducing the efficacy of mycorrhizal relationships.  Yeah.  
**[1:17:25-1:17:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:17:25):**  Which is the more naturalized version of the plant.  Yeah, I think that's true.  And one of the things you have to consider is that for the most part, not entirely, but  for the most part, plants are selected for maximally under ideal growing conditions.  And so when you have the situation where there are less than ideal growing conditions, it's  
**[1:17:51-1:17:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:17:51):**  very difficult for the plant breeders to look at these because then the variability becomes  so great that they can't get any statistical valid results.  So they always use these very uniform ideal growing conditions.  Again, for the most part, if you're breeding for douse resistance, you obviously don't  do that.  
**[1:18:11-1:18:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:18:11):**  But so I think that by selecting for things that perform optimally under ideal conditions,  you may have lost these characteristics that may have been in wild ancestors.  I don't know that they were, but that's a possibility.  Yet when you introduce the fungi to them, they prime them.  It happens.  
**[1:18:37-1:18:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:18:37):**  It turns it back on, and they may have been an ancestral capability that was there, but  I could say it was lost.  Other organisms do the priming effect too.  There are mycorrhizae, there is rizobium, there's a fungus called piriformis fora that  does that, that does this too.  
**[1:19:02-1:19:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:19:02):**  And so trichoderma is not unique in this category.  Again, I'll send you that paper that just was accepted today, and you will see all that  information.  Is the fungi, I know it doesn't have a brain, but is it essentially just looking ahead saying,  I want to live as long as possible.  
**[1:19:22-1:19:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:19:22):**  I need you alive as long as possible so I can live as long as possible.  That's right.  Any organism that is the selection pressure, to being able to multiply and proliferate  is something that all organisms try to do.  This is inherent in the whole evolutionary process.  
**[1:19:49-1:19:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:19:49):**  If they don't proliferate, if they don't survive, then whatever it is, it's not passed on to  the next generation.  So somebody put your T22 strain into the soil.  It was on a plant, it's the end of the season, winter happens, levels go down of the T22,  so they're not really as effective, but some are still persisting in the soil.  
**[1:20:14-1:20:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:20:14):**  Do you think if you did that long enough, you'd get a locally adapted version in the  soil that would likely have...  I can't tell you that for sure.  I don't know, but I do know that, and we had to do studies like this for the EPA, we added  trichoderma to soybeans, I think, and we did them in plots.  
**[1:20:40-1:20:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:20:40):**  And then we removed the plants and the next year we replanted the soybeans.  And you could detect the T22, but it only became meaningful levels by the end of the  season.  And so that was too late to do any good.  And then the next year you had to start over again.  
**[1:21:01-1:21:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:21:01):**  So if we loop all the way back around to where we started, those disease suppressing soils  had trichoderma in them, why did trichoderma exist in those soils, do you think, for as  much as they did to cause a significant effect when nobody was adding them?  When you go to the lab side, culture it out, you put it in and you see, okay, they're not  at enough level to be effective.  
**[1:21:26-1:21:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:21:26):**  So why are there some soils out there where they are at a high enough level?  What do you think is unique about those soils?  Well, the soil, for example, in the Genesee River Valley, off and on it had been cropped  in peas since the latter part of the 1800s.  So for as long as people were there, white settlers, there was a selection pressure and  
**[1:21:58-1:22:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:21:58):**  advantage to the organism.  So it probably took the better part of a century to develop, but it did occur.  And that's about as far as it can go.  Was there anything special about the treatment of those soils?  Like did they, you know, were they more regeneratively managed?  
**[1:22:20-1:22:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:22:20):**  Like did they have more organic matter or they just treated like anything else?  They're treated like anything else.  The contributing factor was growing peas.  Right.  Right.  
**[1:22:30-1:22:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:22:30):**  Well, yeah, I think this has been enlightening.  And I really want to thank you for sharing your knowledge that you've picked up over  the course of a career with everybody.  If people, again, want to learn more about your work, search for Gary Harman trichoderma  mine.  
**[1:22:46-1:22:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:22:46):**  Yes, they can.  And they'll find a lot.  I'm just, I'm working on a web page on academia.  And I started to put some papers on there and I tried to download a bunch of them at  once and it was too big.  
**[1:23:03-1:23:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-15-GaryHarman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:23:03):**  So I will be, I will be adding those over time.  