### In Search of Soil  (2021-00-21)
**[0:00:00-0:00:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:00:00):**  So, we meet again.  Today it's all about the science of no-till and cover cropping based on real world experiences  with Gabe Kenney of the University of South Carolina.  In this episode of In Search of Soil, Gabe's going to share some of the results that he's  seen working with farmers trialing different methods of agriculture like no-till and cover  
**[0:00:39-0:00:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:00:39):**  cropping and how those results have affected the soil compared to control plots in those  farmers' fields.  He's also going to be touching on soil tests and the differences in soil tests and how  the soil tests that you're getting may not be a fit for what you're trying to actually  test for.  
**[0:00:58-0:01:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:00:58):**  More on that in this episode with Gabe Kenney.  This is In Search of Soil.  When you think about that direction that ag's moving in, that regenerative ag movement,  and you think about some gaps in knowledge, are there areas that you think are particularly  interesting and deserve a lot more research that maybe don't get talked about enough and  
**[0:01:23-0:01:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:01:23):**  that's where you maybe want to take your career, not just now, but over the next 10, 20, 30  years?  Yeah, for me, I think that, and maybe it's just my own personal timeline of experience  with this, but I feel like there's a lot more interest or change in direction with a lot  of farmers looking more at biological aspects of the soil ecosystem rather than seeing it  
**[0:01:49-0:01:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:01:49):**  just as a thing that plants grow in and you add your nutrients and water and that's what  makes it grow.  To start seeing that as this really complex microbiological community and all of the complex  interactions and results of that, I think is where I want to go.  I want to start really trying to understand the things we can't see in the biology.  
**[0:02:14-0:02:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:02:14):**  What is happening as far as say nitrogen cycling or nutrient cycling capabilities on a molecular  level?  How is that influenced by the way that we manage farmland from tilling and cover crops  to other synthetic versus more organic or natural soil amendments, things like that?  What do chemicals do to the actual microbes, the ones we know and the ones that we don't  
**[0:02:39-0:02:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:02:39):**  know?  What's happening to that ecosystem as a whole and how does that relate to the outcome that  farmers are looking for in their yield and their productivity and their bottom line?  It's easy for me being kind of a nerdy scientist in the lab to say, oh, I want to do all this  stuff but in reality, this is the farmer's livelihood and how they live, their bottom  
**[0:03:05-0:03:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:03:05):**  line, their entire life depends on all this stuff.  I can't just say, oh, let's try this without really having kind of evidence to show that  it can be a benefit.  That's really interesting to me and I want to go into it in a way where I can continue  to slowly start learning how this goes at a rate that makes people that want to get  
**[0:03:29-0:03:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:03:29):**  into it comfortable as well.  I don't want to go in and be like, oh, we need to do this to make this happen because  I feel like there's so much that we don't know yet that that's really hard to be able  to say any kind of claim like that.  I think there's still, well, maybe not still, but now two camps in agriculture.  
**[0:03:50-0:03:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:03:50):**  You do have that conventional school, which is more chemical tillage based and then you  have the regenerative side of things, which is no till cover crop, no more let nature  handle things.  I'm with you.  I think a lot of times you can't prescribe solutions without a lot of that data behind  
**[0:04:08-0:04:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:04:08):**  them, without a lot of knowing behind them because ultimately the people you need to  adapt these solutions who can make the big changes in agriculture, you're 100% right.  This is how they earn their livelihood and they're not going to literally bet the farm  on something that might be true and if it goes wrong, I mean, hearing it from someone  who's not a farmer, you know, I do not have a farm.  
**[0:04:30-0:04:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:04:30):**  I am not a farmer.  So that's a hurdle that I have to overcome every time I start doing work with anybody  here in South Carolina is I have to show them that while I have, this isn't what I do for  a living, I've learned enough about it and I'm kind of partnering with them on this and  hearing them and like, how do we together figure out how to have the outcome you want  
**[0:04:55-0:05:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:04:55):**  without any of the negative aspects that you've seen and you're trying to get rid of.  Is there maybe one view that really stands out that's like, say a traditional long held  view and ag that you have farmers question or have they stumble when they say, I don't  know if I want to try that when you're the scientist and then they're saying, hey, no,  this is going to work.  
**[0:05:20-0:05:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:05:20):**  This is going to work.  And they're like, it just, it's a paradigm shift for them.  It doesn't agree with how they've done things, but the regen ag movement starting to go in  that direction.  Is there something that really stands out as a tillage?  
**[0:05:31-0:05:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:05:31):**  Is it, you know, reducing chemical usage?  Is it removing fallowing?  Is there one of those that is just really deeply held?  I think, you know, everybody has different kind of resistances to those different things,  but the one that definitely stands out that I think it's the most pushback or that people  
**[0:05:49-0:05:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:05:49):**  kind of have more of a wall up against changing in my experience would definitely be tillage.  And I don't know if it's, you know, that's just the kind of the way that it's always  been the way that they they've always done it, their dad or their granddad always did  it.  And I think some of that experience comes from if you maybe for whatever reason, there  
**[0:06:12-0:06:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:06:12):**  was a season where they couldn't till because of weather conditions.  It was too wet or something like something happened that maybe they weren't able to,  or they didn't get to it.  And then they see other problems like weeds come up and things like that.  And so it kind of confirms that mindset that they have to do it or this other problem is  
**[0:06:31-0:06:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:06:31):**  going to happen.  But if you kind of go into the no till practice the proper way and with the proper expectations,  you'll kind of know what to expect over time and what to do to maybe stop from having the  weeds come up, you know, more than what you would have seen if you would have tilled it,  you know, or how to kind of reduce your weed pressure without having to go in and till  
**[0:06:58-0:06:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:06:58):**  it.  And I think that's the tillage in general is definitely the one that that even guys  that I feel like I've started to see their minds and the way their brains tick really  change in a lot of aspects will still kind of like talk about, oh, maybe I'll go in and  and discuss and that and it's it's just seems to be the hardest thing for some of them to  
**[0:07:19-0:07:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:07:19):**  really let go of.  I think the whole tapering expectations thing is huge.  I mean, we're just we're just getting into NFL football season starting and a lot of  fans and teams, you know, they put these unrealistic expectations on certain players or certain  teams that might not be that good, you know, to begin with.  
**[0:07:39-0:07:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:07:39):**  And they're just non realistic to begin with.  If you think about going no till, what are reasonable expectations that a farmer should  think about when starting that system, making that conversion from tillage to no till?  I don't really think there's a way you're going to be able to do it immediately without  seeing some weed pressure.  
**[0:08:04-0:08:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:08:04):**  But that's okay.  You know, like there are other ways that over time if you implement cover crops at the right  time and don't have a fallow period, and then the following season after a cover crop or  even after depending on what your cash crop is learning to leave some residue to kind  of shade out weeds start that competition is a big thing for me that it's kind of you  
**[0:08:26-0:08:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:08:26):**  can't just immediately go no till and then immediately have all the benefits of no till  that there's kind of a timeline that you've got to be aware of.  And it's definitely not a concrete timeline like oh, after your first season, you can  expect this or this.  It's totally variable depending on people's operations, but you really have to go in with  
**[0:08:52-0:08:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:08:52):**  a kind of a flexible mindset knowing that you're going to make a change.  And that's not the only change you're going to have to make.  Like when you make that change that other obstacles are going to come up, and they're  all solvable, but you just may have to kind of continue to think differently like okay,  this is a problem now like what is a way that I can solve weeds or whatever the other problem  
**[0:09:16-0:09:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:09:16):**  may be without disking everything up again.  You know, there are plenty of other people now and in the days of podcasts and social  media there are plenty of ways for people to get on and see what other folks have done  that have been successful and what hasn't been successful and you have to be a little  experimental on your own right when you're doing it.  
**[0:09:41-0:09:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:09:41):**  From where you sit, what's your view in terms of academia and science when it comes to no  tell?  I think there's you know peer reviewed, a farmer's going to see what his neighbor's  doing how well it's working for him and he's going to maybe make a decision based on that  and then some people are also going to be like well show me the science.  
**[0:10:01-0:10:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:10:01):**  It's one thing to say this is a good idea, it's one thing to suggest it and hypothetically  it makes sense on paper but is the science there?  From your vantage point when you think about no tell where do you think the science is  right now in terms of substantiating or failing to substantiate its benefits?  I guess there's kind of two sides to that.  
**[0:10:28-0:10:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:10:28):**  In kind of reading in my experience with the science there's plenty of experiments in science  that's been done in the short term that may not show the greatest benefits of it but when  you start to look at studies that are longer term and involve not just till and no till  but kind of coupling that with other more holistic or regenerative management practices  that's when you begin to see the real benefits from it.  
**[0:10:57-0:11:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:10:57):**  So if you go online and you find a research paper or an article or a magazine article  something that is just looking at a season or two of tilling versus no tilling without  any other kind of coupled variables in there, it's probably not going to look very good  for the no till side of things but if you start to look at the more holistic picture  of if you're starting with no till and kind of the next steps of using cover crops and  
**[0:11:30-0:11:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:11:30):**  paying more attention to fertilizer use and things like that over multiple seasons of  time that's when you're going to start to see the results showing more benefits from  not just the no till but the no till and the other practices that start to come along with  it once you start to kind of get your toes wet and the regenerative practices I think.  And as far as farmers, you know, you've got your kind of peer pressure, not peer pressure  
**[0:12:01-0:12:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:12:01):**  but kind of peer review like their neighbors and other farmers that they're seeing and  the ability for them to access things online as well.  I've definitely noticed that it tends to be the younger farmers that I work with that  are much more aware of resources available to them online.  And then there's some of the older guys that we work with that literally a reason that  
**[0:12:35-0:12:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:12:35):**  a couple guys would not cover crop a field that we were kind of suggesting that they  ought to is because it was right next to a church.  I don't know if it's a church they went to or not, but the people, the congregation at  this church would have kind of been, I don't want to say judgmental, but would have noticed  that their field wasn't fallow in the winter and kind of it would have kind of got people  
**[0:13:00-0:13:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:13:00):**  talking about them and they just didn't want to have that happen or have people kind of  judge the way that they're doing things or see that they're maybe doing things differently.  So they didn't, it didn't shift, maybe they have now, this is a few years ago, but they  didn't shift that field into cover crop use because of a kind of peer pressure issue.  And if we look at some of these views that people have where they're strongly held, like  
**[0:13:28-0:13:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:13:28):**  say they're anti-no till and they don't do cover cropping there, they follow that fallow  strategy and they till.  Maybe that's just because that's the way they've always done it.  That's the way the generation before them did it.  And like I said, maybe they're not looking outside of other resources, at other resources  
**[0:13:44-0:13:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:13:44):**  to do otherwise, but then also they're weighing the risk of trying something different.  If I do it, maybe it doesn't work.  Based on your research and stuff that you've seen in the field, do you think that the perceived  risk of going to a no till cover crop strategy in terms of field management versus a tillage  fallow strategy is as risky as perceived?  
**[0:14:16-0:14:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:14:16):**  Or do you think that it's potentially individuals perceiving it to be riskier than it is?  And if they were to make that conversion, we know enough now to say that results are  probably going to be pretty good over the longer term, thereby, I don't say negating,  but mitigating that perceived risk that you had upfront.  Yeah.  
**[0:14:40-0:14:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:14:40):**  It's like a long-term investment kind of thing or longer term investment and you have to  be conscious of that kind of scenario.  Yeah.  I mean, as a scientist, I can see that, but I'm not a farmer again, so I can definitely  see that they do see that risk.  
**[0:15:02-0:15:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:15:02):**  And sometimes I think when we say terms like regenerative agriculture, that when people  talk about making that switch, that it may be as a mindset of you have to, it's not just  trying one thing and adapting as you go, that you have to change all of these things at  once to go from conventional to regenerative and making kind of multiple changes, large  scale changes at once.  
**[0:15:28-0:15:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:15:28):**  It's scary.  It's scary for anybody, whether you're farming or not.  And so one way that we've, or one project that we have going on right now that's kind  of really seen success in overcoming that, it's called the Cover Five project.  And we've got, I think 10 or 11 farmers here in South Carolina throughout the state.  
**[0:15:47-0:15:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:15:47):**  And we basically got in contact with them because they had some level of interest in  either trying something different or were fed up with the way that they had been doing  things that weren't successful.  And so they let us come in and we basically were kind of like, give us up or show us up  to five acres of the poorest land that you have that you can't get anything to grow on.  
**[0:16:13-0:16:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:16:13):**  And we're going to help you manage that land and provide you cover crop seed for three  years.  With the equipment you have, there's no new equipment you need to get, nothing else.  Like we're going to work with you with what you have, we'll give you cover crop seed and  show you what kind of changes can happen over three years in this process.  
**[0:16:31-0:16:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:16:31):**  And the first time that we went out, so many of these people, you know, they were open  to it and letting us do it, but you could tell there was a lot of skepticism and trying  something different.  So we started it in November of 2017, I believe, with a cool season cover crop.  And I think it was like a six way mix.  
**[0:16:52-0:16:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:16:52):**  I can't remember exactly what it was, but these guys planted it and we gave them up  to five acres worth to put in their crappiest spot.  And we went back again a few months later in February or March and remet with them and  kind of got opinions.  And it was unbelievable with some of them, how just seeing something grow, even though  
**[0:17:13-0:17:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:17:13):**  it wasn't a cash crop, seeing something grow on land that they had struggled with for,  some of them have had that out of production for 10 years.  Like their perception totally changed.  They're like, Oh, I want to do this over in this other area too, and here and there.  So that was a big learning step for me too, in that just kind of nudging people with like  
**[0:17:33-0:17:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:17:33):**  little baby steps, like try this one or two things on this little part of your operation,  see what happens.  And then if you want to scale it up, you can scale it up.  You don't have to make the transition from conventional to regenerative all at once.  It's not a big step.  
**[0:17:49-0:17:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:17:49):**  You don't have to totally dive in.  Just like, you know, kind of dip your toes in first, see what's going to happen.  And it may not be the greatest thing.  It may not be what you expect, but it's probably going to be something, a new experience that  you can learn from one way or another.  
**[0:18:04-0:18:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:18:04):**  And then you move forward from that.  How many people ended up participating in that program?  We started out with nine and I think now it's up to 11.  We just had a few more that kind of hopped on later.  And that's really all that I think we, when we wrote the grant, it was an NRCS grant.  
**[0:18:24-0:18:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:18:24):**  It was for up to 12.  And so we were almost at kind of our limit.  And so that was a big part of kind of the field work aspect of my dissertation.  And I still, we're three years in.  We got an extension to get it through April of next year so we can have three full years  
**[0:18:46-0:18:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:18:46):**  of cool season and warm season cover crop data.  And all throughout this whole process, we've been taking soil samples and plant tissue  samples and showing these people all their data and trying to help them interpret that  data as well.  But still every time I go out and visit these guys, I learned something new too about their  
**[0:19:06-0:19:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:19:06):**  operations and about kind of their journey.  And it's just really interesting to see how in three years time people's perspectives  have changed dramatically.  And not everybody is as dramatic, but it seems like everybody that's involved is really on  board with continuing at least cover cropping in some of the practices that we've done.  
**[0:19:31-0:19:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:19:31):**  But it's really exciting to see guys doing their own research now and kind of calling  me up and being like, hey, I read this, should I try doing X, Y, or Z instead of just kind  of waiting for me to show up and being like, okay, what do I do next?  Were those nine, now 11 farmers?  Is it like, say somebody gave you five acres originally, has that same five acres been  
**[0:19:59-0:20:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:19:59):**  part of this program since 2017, assuming the farm got in early?  Or is it like five acres?  Okay.  So can you run through some examples of how you've seen, say, soils change on particular  blocks that have really shown tremendous change, like plant tissue analysis?  
**[0:20:15-0:20:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:20:15):**  What have you seen there?  How has this actually proved out when you look at the data?  The plant tissue, there wasn't anything that really stood out.  And I got to say, we've been relatively inconsistent on when we get tissue samples too from cover  crops, because some guys have gone all in after the first season and we're like, okay,  
**[0:20:38-0:20:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:20:38):**  I'm going to take this out of production and I'm just going to cover crop cool season and  warm season for all three years.  But other people were working with them and putting cover crop in during their normal  follow periods in their normal crop rotation.  So it's hard to compare all nine to each other.  
**[0:20:59-0:21:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:20:59):**  And even just a lot of seasonal variations and stuff trying to compare plant tissue tests  and hasn't really lended anything fantastic.  But there's a lot of interesting soil test information.  And we've looked at your standard six inch deep soil tests.  And then we also every year are doing soil samples at depth where we do standard soil  
**[0:21:23-0:21:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:21:23):**  tests here six inches and then we'll also go six to 12 and 12 to 24 inches just to demonstrate  that these nutrients are also farther down in the soil that you don't just look at kind  of that top six inch plow area.  And the biggest change that stands out in almost all these guys places is organic matter.  Some of them are still tilling a little bit.  
**[0:21:47-0:21:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:21:47):**  A lot of them have really cut it down or have even found their whole operation.  I'm like, oh, maybe I can go and only have to till when I need to or every three years  or so.  But they're all cover cropping.  We've got a lot of them in kind of rolling it down and planting into it.  
**[0:22:03-0:22:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:22:03):**  Some are planting in green.  But by using that cover crop and leaving it down and having that residue, we've seen soil  organic matter levels go way up for almost everybody.  Even in some of them are in like the upstate of South Carolina, which is kind of a loam  your soil and then probably a little over half the guys are in very sandy soil in the  
**[0:22:25-0:22:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:22:25):**  coastal plains of the state.  And it doesn't seem to matter what they're starting with.  Everybody is having their organic matter levels go up.  For people listening to this or watching this soil organic matter, I think people can understand  it near the surface.  
**[0:22:42-0:22:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:22:42):**  And you get a lot of residue on top that gets worked into the surface just through natural  processes.  But the deeper down soil organic matter, what's actually happening biologically below the  soil to increase soil matter at depth?  Is this just roots that are in the soil that have now the plants stop growing, the roots  
**[0:23:01-0:23:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:23:01):**  are left in the soil?  Is that how organic matter is being built in the soil?  Where is the rise in organic matter on the soil test coming from when you think about  what's actually happening in the soil?  Various ways that it's getting in the soil.  
**[0:23:16-0:23:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:23:16):**  The first one being in the one that I think is most related to cover cropping practices  and eliminating your fallow periods is that your plants have roots and those go to various  steps in the soil.  But there's a lot of plants need a lot of nutrients to grow and they don't have access  to a lot of those on their own.  
**[0:23:37-0:23:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:23:37):**  And so through photosynthesis, plants use sunlight, carbon dioxide to make sugars and  they use that for their own energy to grow.  But what they do is they send a lot of that sugar down into their roots and it's exuded  out at their roots to attract kind of, I don't want to say symbiotic, it's kind of a symbiotic  relationship that they attract these different microbes that they know are capable of breaking  
**[0:24:02-0:24:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:24:02):**  down and providing them with those kind of nutrients and the forms of nutrients that  they need.  And so as these roots are penetrating down in the soil, they're recruiting all of these  microbes and by pushing those sugars out, that's, you know, a sugar is an organic material  that's going out there.  
**[0:24:21-0:24:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:24:21):**  It's fostering the growth of bacteria and fungi.  When there's bacteria and fungi present, there's going to be other stuff that eats bacteria  and fungi present.  And it just is the start of this incredibly large ecosystem of living things that are  all organic in nature.  
**[0:24:38-0:24:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:24:38):**  So as those things live and die and eat and excrete things, like all of that is increasing  the organic components that are in your soils.  And so that's, you know, as far as like the, how does that get in deeper?  The plant roots is definitely a primary way, but you also have to look at when you roll  a cover crop down or bush hog it and you leave a residue on top.  
**[0:25:06-0:25:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:25:06):**  Over time that residue disappears and what's happening is that's breaking down.  It's being degraded by microbes on the surface and that is also going down into the soil  kind of through that microbial metabolism as well.  And some things run off, you know, rainwater, things like that.  I'm not saying that every ounce or piece of organic matter from a residue is going to  
**[0:25:30-0:25:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:25:30):**  go down into your soil, but a lot of it does.  Like if you have a healthy soil ecosystem, it's going to break stuff down faster and  it goes into the soil quicker.  So having cover crops kind of moves that sunlight energy and carbon dioxide in the form of sugars  into your soil and that is pushing and promoting organic matter in the soil.  
**[0:25:54-0:25:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:25:54):**  And then when you terminate that cover crop and leave the stuff on the surface, you're  also allowing all of that material, the opportunity to go back into the soil as an organic form  that can be kind of eaten and decomposed and used by all the living pieces in that soil.  Do you have a sense of organic matter contribution applied at surface versus at depth?  One thing I see come up a lot is people will suggest adding on a small scale compost, on  
**[0:26:25-0:26:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:26:25):**  a larger scale manures to the surface.  And sure, you're putting a lot of organic matter at the soil surface.  Do you know how much maybe that is increasing organic matter relative to how much organic  matter is being increased below the surface via root in microbial activity?  Is the underground portion one to one do you think would surface?  
**[0:26:49-0:26:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:26:49):**  Is it two to one?  Is it 10 to one?  Do you have any sense of where that ratio might be?  You know, I really don't.  I really haven't kind of looked at the comparison over time of kind of like surface to roots  
**[0:27:04-0:27:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:27:04):**  or even examining different crop or cover crop species, like how deep those roots go,  how deep should we look?  I really couldn't say what that would be.  But in adding, whether it be compost or manures to the surface, you know, there's some nutrient  value to that and organic matter in that.  
**[0:27:27-0:27:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:27:27):**  But a lot of the benefit from both of those things is also kind of inoculating your soils  with good or beneficial microbes.  And so if you put them on the surface with some amount of organic matter from that material,  it's going to promote their growth and then they'll be able to continue kind of migrating  down into the soil and become a part, you know, an active productive part of that ecosystem.  
**[0:27:54-0:28:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:27:54):**  So you're not, by adding compost in manures, you're not, or you shouldn't just look at  it as adding a nutrient supply or an organic matter supply.  You're also kind of inoculating that soil with other good microbes that can kind of  help keep that system productive and balanced and cycle those nutrients at various levels  in the soil profile.  
**[0:28:20-0:28:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:28:20):**  In knowing that we're building soil underground via the cover crop activity, how critical  is the no-till part of it?  On the plots that you've seen where farmers are still doing tillage, do you see a slower  increase in organic matter because the tillage is speeding up microbial activity, which is  volatilizing some of that organic matter, burning it off versus the no-till cover crop  
**[0:28:48-0:28:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:28:48):**  plots?  Are they increasing at a steadier rate because you're not seeing this buildup and then a  dip with tillage?  That's hard for me to say if we were looking at soil tests kind of before and after tillage  events and doing it more frequently throughout the year related to when those events were  
**[0:29:10-0:29:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:29:10):**  happening.  I would definitely see more of that fluctuation.  But we do with this project and a lot of the projects we do, we're basically doing annual  or biannual sampling on places.  The same time is typically around late October or November here and then again in March and  
**[0:29:28-0:29:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:29:28):**  April.  And I haven't seen anything stand out from that, but I do think that if we kind of had  a before and after sample, like a before planting and an after planting soil sample, or looking  at the biological aspect or the organic matter, that there would certainly be influences from  the physical disturbance of tillage, especially if it's following a cover crop where you've  
**[0:29:57-0:30:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:29:57):**  got this diverse cover crop and their root systems promoting a diverse ecosystem, you  go in and basically just kind of demolish that whole community, I think there's definitely  going to be a difference.  We just haven't done that frequent of a sampling event following tillage, like before and after  tillage.  
**[0:30:19-0:30:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:30:19):**  Knowing that thought or thinking along that thought process and knowing some of the research  that you've done, if I give you two choices, no till and fallow or cover crop with tillage,  which one do you think could build soil better over the long term?  In other words, is there a worse evil here?  Is tillage worse than fallow?  
**[0:30:53-0:30:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:30:53):**  Obviously you want them both.  You want the opposite of both.  You want no till and cover crops, but if somebody does have to pick or choose, which would you  rather have?  Tillage?  
**[0:31:04-0:31:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:31:04):**  That's tough.  I think if it was me and this is his opinion, like don't anybody listening say, oh, I'm  going to do this because Gabe said it.  I think I would go diverse cover crops and till and then maybe hope that I would have  the mindset of maybe minimizing that tillage or something along the lines and maybe not  
**[0:31:24-0:31:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:31:24):**  necessarily doing a super intense deep tilling that maybe I had been and maybe being able  to adjust that.  But I think going no till without cover crops can lead to some other issues that might not  be great that might deter somebody from wanting to stay in just that.  But I think if you have the cover crops, you're building that community, you're still putting  
**[0:31:53-0:31:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:31:53):**  stuff back in, you're just kind of ruining and rebuilding every time you till.  What would be your worry in a no till, no cover crop model?  What are some of those potential negatives that you might see crop up?  If you're no tilling, you're still going to be doing a lot of planting and amendments  to your soil.  
**[0:32:18-0:32:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:32:18):**  You're still running your tractors and equipment on your soil.  But if you don't have roots in there in the off seasons when it's normally fallow, I just  worry that that can kind of create more compaction issues if you don't have a diverse, even a  diverse cash crop rotation.  If somebody is doing corn and the corn cotton rotation or something that's kind of the same  
**[0:32:41-0:32:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:32:41):**  thing over and over again and leaving it fallow, I think that's going to cause a lot more downstream  compaction problems and infiltration issues versus if you have a cover crop in, those  roots are going to be able to kind of go down and penetrate and kind of be a tillage for  you to kind of help break up some of the compaction, create opportunity for pore space and better  soil structure so that you're not going to have those problems down the line.  
**[0:33:11-0:33:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:33:11):**  But then again, when that happens and then you go in and you till it, you ruin what was  already there.  So it's kind of a double edged sword.  But I do think that no till without anything else, without cover crop can potentially be  a tough one.  
**[0:33:28-0:33:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:33:28):**  I guess if you go back to those NRCS principles of five ones of soil health, I mean, if you're  not keeping the living root in the soil, you're not keeping a cover over the soil and you're  not having diversity in the soil.  So I mean, by going no till fallow, you're kind of removing three of those five right  there while only really observing one out of five.  
**[0:33:55-0:34:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:33:55):**  Oh no till because you're not creating that cover on the diversity.  Tying this into nutrient scavenging, nutrient recycling, I mean, you did an actual study  on this and you wrote about this.  It's not yet published, but you looked at some winter wheat plots that had four different  treatments, no till, no till with cover crops, tilled with cover crops, this study.  
**[0:34:20-0:34:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:34:20):**  And I realized it's a limited sample size.  It's over a small period of time.  But if you could extrapolate this and hypothesize and think about a practical example of a farmer  applying nitrogen in their fields based on what you saw in these four different types,  again, no till, no till with cover crops, tilled, tilled with cover crops, what could  
**[0:34:44-0:34:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:34:44):**  a farmer expect?  Is it something where if I'm putting nitrogen on a tilled field, I'm seeing less of it held,  scavenged and recycled for the crop that might follow it, meaning it's going through the  ground, ending up in the groundwater and the more regenerative systems are holding the  nitrogen?  
**[0:35:02-0:35:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:35:02):**  Is that what the data is starting to kind of tell you?  It's tough to say that here.  We didn't really use nitrogen or any type of fertilization as a variable in this.  It was the same throughout everything.  I believe there was just a pre-emerge nitrogen application and then one application during  
**[0:35:29-0:35:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:35:29):**  the crop, but it was even for all of them.  I can't even remember what that form was from 2017.  But I don't think, at least the data that we analyzed here can say much about that.  But aside from the study, just knowing what kind of tillage does to especially the surface  of that soil is you're creating more oxygen to the microbes in the surface.  
**[0:35:58-0:36:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:35:58):**  So I think you mentioned earlier when you talked about that kind of burst of metabolism  and breaking up organic matter.  So if you're applying nitrogen and tilling, you're going to have that burst of microbial  activity because you've got more microbes with access to pore space and oxygen at the  surface where you just tilled and they're going to chew everything up.  
**[0:36:18-0:36:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:36:18):**  If nitrogen tends to be a limiting reagent in microbial metabolism, so if you apply nitrogen  to that too, these guys are just going to consume and consume and consume and burn it  up.  It may get burned up, but I don't think that's going to affect the soil's ability to hold  it as far as runoff and stuff.  
**[0:36:38-0:36:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:36:38):**  I think you're just going to have more opportunity for microbial consumption of that material  before it's going to have a chance to really get into the soil and stay there and be something  that can provide to growing germinating seed.  So given that, if you think about the study and the results that you've got to date, are  there things that we can start to think about when we think about traditional practices  
**[0:37:09-0:37:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:37:09):**  versus more regenerative practices based upon some of the results that you've seen in this  study?  Just from a very basic standpoint, looking at this study and what I got out of it, it  just shows at a genetic level in your soil that it has the capability of providing nitrogen  or of cycling and recycling nitrogen, to some extent in every single one of those plots.  
**[0:37:42-0:37:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:37:42):**  So if you till, that tends to have kind of a, it didn't outperform anything else, but  these other levels of the regenerative practices in some ways, not necessarily every step of  the nitrogen cycling process, but in a handful of those processes outperformed the tilled  ones.  So by moving into these regenerative practices, you're giving your soil more of an opportunity  
**[0:38:09-0:38:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:38:09):**  to do the work itself and provide for your crop rather than you having to do the work  yourself by putting something synthetic down.  So if you're doing these regenerative practices, you're already, at least to some degree, thinking  about your soil health, I think.  And so this study can kind of show like, yes, this is happening.  
**[0:38:37-0:38:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:38:37):**  This is creating a genetic benefit in my soil.  It has more potential to do this thing.  Therefore maybe I can put less nitrogen down because it's being provided to the plant by  the ecosystem that I'm fostering through these practices.  It's interesting.  
**[0:38:59-0:39:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:38:59):**  And I've talked to a lot of people on the conventional side of ag and they are deeply  rooted in the, we're going to need to apply nitrogen chemicals and they're trying to reduce  application as best as they can, but they still think, hey, you're always going to have  to apply it.  Going out on a limb, looking at these studies, looking at what you know, not as a prescription,  
**[0:39:25-0:39:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:39:25):**  but this is you thinking, hypothesizing, do you think you could grow a lot of our common  cash crops in a regenerative system without adding nitrogen in the form of whether that's  an organic or inorganic additive.  So if it's a legume cover crop, fine, we're not going to count that, but you're not going  to put chicken manure on and you're not going to put a ammonium nitrate on the field.  
**[0:39:55-0:40:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:39:55):**  I think it can be done with the crops that we have.  I think kind of the scale and speed at which agriculture productivity wants to go now would  be slowed down.  I think we would maybe have to adjust density and there would definitely have to be differences  in rotations to increase diversity.  
**[0:40:21-0:40:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:40:21):**  But I think if you kept things the same, like only focusing on farmers, only a row cropper  is only growing kind of the big three, I think it's tough.  I think you have to change things up.  We have to think about other crops, other things we can grow and that are obviously  still going to be productive and go towards your bottom line.  
**[0:40:47-0:40:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:40:47):**  So that would be the harder part, implementing cover crops and then implementing other cash  crops and changing things up.  I think it's much more feasible in that scenario.  But if a row cropper that's just growing the big three wants to try and do that without  nitrogen supplementation, even regeneratively, I think is going to be really tough.  
**[0:41:10-0:41:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:41:10):**  I think you have to increase diversity beyond kind of the staple crops or whatever the term  was that you used.  So instead of just looking at this new bushel per acre record, which I think in corn the  corn they're predicting 181 bushels per acre in corn this year, and that'd be like a new  record, just keep looking to creep that up over time.  
**[0:41:35-0:41:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:41:35):**  You got to maybe look at different metrics, building soil, increasing soil microbiology,  increasing diversity, and maybe not getting that one huge corn yield of maybe you have  120 bushels, but you're also getting another second crop out of it.  So your cumulative yield is bigger than your single crop.  Exactly.  
**[0:41:54-0:42:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:41:54):**  And even looking at mixing things up like intercropping and kind of planting things  in row of other things kind of at the beginning and end of the season.  There are other ways that I think some fringe guys are just starting to get into that may  be a way that we can still keep our general annual productivity up without necessarily  focusing entirely on a super high corn yield or cotton yield or whatever it is.  
**[0:42:26-0:42:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:42:26):**  There's ways that you can incorporate other things where your operation on a whole from  an economic standpoint is still thriving and you're still producing while also still fostering  a diverse and healthy soil ecosystem.  Different systems, more crops, more carbon into the ground.  And that's been another big focus of yours is focusing on carbon sequestration through  
**[0:42:51-0:42:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:42:51):**  agriculture.  And I think that's one thing that a lot of people, I don't want to say they even take  it for granted, they're just not even thinking about it as a yield from a crop.  It's always measured by what I harvest.  You're not measuring really the residue that you leave on the ground or the carbon that  
**[0:43:09-0:43:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:43:09):**  you put in the ground.  But given the work that you've done in this, how do you view agriculture as a tool to sink  carbon into the ground?  I think it has such a massive potential.  And if you would have asked me that question four years ago, I probably wouldn't have really  
**[0:43:29-0:43:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:43:29):**  had much of an answer for you.  But shortly after I started on doing this work with Buzz, he kind of sat down and he's  like, we have these multiple years and hundreds of soil samples worth of data from all these  different projects that we kind of clumped together.  And we're like, what can we find from this?  
**[0:43:49-0:43:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:43:49):**  And one thing that stood out like a spotlight when we started looking at it was the organic  matter levels.  And so we have about 500 sites that we looked at that and started measuring soil, like standard  soil tests and organic matter from the point that these guys started implementing multi-species  cover crops on their land.  
**[0:44:14-0:44:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:44:14):**  And so we broke it down into sites that had been under cover crops for two years, another  group for three years and another group for four years.  So we could kind of see what that transition into cover cropping looks like.  And when we looked at the soil organic matter levels, even in sandy soils in South Carolina  where a lot of people think that you cannot build the organic matter, we saw like really  
**[0:44:40-0:44:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:44:40):**  significant increases across the board in soil organic matter just from using cover  crops.  Some of these sites were tilled, some were no-till.  The other management practices were highly variable, but they all had just started cover  cropping at the time that we started sampling.  
**[0:44:55-0:44:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:44:55):**  And so seeing those numbers all go up was really exciting.  And so in the paper I wrote about it, I very loosely kind of calculated that into what  does that mean as far as the amount of carbon that's coming, that those cover crops are  pulling out of the atmosphere and putting into the soil and kind of what does that look  like for the state of South Carolina.  
**[0:45:18-0:45:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:45:18):**  And we had numbers kind of a pounds per acre per year of organic matter change range from  730 pounds per acre per year to 2,700 pounds per acre per year in the four-year long study.  And that kind of calculates loosely to 400 to 1,500 pounds of carbon per acre per year  that were moved from the atmosphere and put back into the soil through those plant root  exudates and the plant material and the cover crop breaking down and going back into the  
**[0:45:53-0:45:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:45:53):**  soil.  And so based on the census data of 1.9 million acres of farmland in the state, I just kind  of used that vague number to calculate if all that farmland has started cover cropping,  how would the, and we used our kind of average numbers that we saw just from our 500 samples.  So it's definitely can't extrapolate that out accurately to the whole state, but if  
**[0:46:21-0:46:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:46:21):**  these numbers are loosely correct, we would be looking at an average farm size in South  Carolina is 197 acres.  We'll be looking at 50 to 156 tons of carbon per year moved from the atmosphere to the  soil tons and statewide that'd be half a million to one and a half million tons back into the  soil from the atmosphere just from putting cover crops in.  
**[0:46:45-0:46:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:46:45):**  It's pretty remarkable when you think about it as a, it's kind of a free lunch, right?  Cause you're getting all the benefits that you have.  Of the cover crop.  Yeah, exactly.  For the crop, the cash crops that you want to grow later on.  
**[0:46:59-0:47:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:46:59):**  If you think about that, is there a point where things start to slow down in terms of  banking that carbon?  In other words, can the soil only hold so much and isn't the whole point of putting  organic matter into the soil to use it to stimulate biology for the crops that you want  to grow?  
**[0:47:20-0:47:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:47:20):**  So in theory, I mean we can't grow organic matter infinitely in the soil.  So does it hit an upper limit?  Because at certain point like that you want to trade that organic matter that you're putting  in the soil for nutrients that the crops can use.  Whereas then it just caught in the cycle it's being used, but then it's being put right  
**[0:47:39-0:47:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:47:39):**  back into the ground.  So it's kind of trapped in that system.  And you can always have a goal of trying to put more in than you take out to foster that  biologically healthy soil and that cycling of nutrients.  But every soil type is going to have kind of its capability to hold what it can hold.  
**[0:48:01-0:48:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:48:01):**  Like you can't, you're not going to be able to necessarily change that type of soil or  change what it is.  You know, sandier soil is not going to be able to hold or have as much organic matter  content as something that's lonely.  It's just the kind of the physical nature of the soil is still going to limit what it  
**[0:48:20-0:48:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:48:20):**  can be.  Or that's going to kind of, I don't want to say define what it is, but really kind of  limit what you can do.  But there's, at least from my opinion, like I don't think there's any wrong you can do  by constantly trying to improve those organic matter levels.  
**[0:48:39-0:48:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:48:39):**  Especially if you're cropping or grazing, you've got to remember that you are constantly  taking out every single year as well.  And that's what we've done for decades is just take and take and take and take.  So maybe we've got decades of work to do to put it back in and put it back in and put  it back in.  
**[0:48:55-0:48:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:48:55):**  Like in these four or five years that we've been doing this, we haven't seen that limit  happen.  We've seen things stop improving.  And granted, if you're looking at the soil organic matter tests where these improved  from say 2% to 2.2%, which is still a 10% increase, overall increase in your organic  
**[0:49:17-0:49:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:49:17):**  matter content.  So that's hugely significant, but we're not jumping from like 1% to 5%.  But all these, because it's in a percent, it seems like it's such a small increase.  You've only increased by 0.2, but that's 400 pounds an acre of carbon.  It is like a 10% increase if you do go from 2 to 2.2.  
**[0:49:44-0:49:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:49:44):**  Is that significant in terms of biological activity?  Is that significant in terms of how plants are going to perform in that soil to give  people some perspective?  Because like you said, you could say, it's only 0.2 up.  Does that even matter?  
**[0:49:58-0:50:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:49:58):**  If you look at it as far as that organic matter is microbe food.  And so that is, in this study, 700 to 2,700 pounds per acre per year.  So an additional 2,700 pounds an acre of good, like kind of healthy food for your soil microbes,  then how much more are they going to be able to perform those, say those nitrogen cycle  functions that we were talking about earlier?  
**[0:50:29-0:50:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:50:29):**  Like if you're able to foster a bigger and healthier community by just having more food  for them, you have potential for a lot of other beneficial outcomes.  Because we kind of put all these different studies together to do this organic matter  measure, I can't tell you what the yield or production outcomes of all of these were.  So I didn't relate this directly to kind of conventional yield outcomes.  
**[0:51:04-0:51:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:51:04):**  But I think it's a fair assumption to say that if we're providing healthy food for microbes,  on top of the fact that you're providing the cover crops for them, that's creating the  environment for them as well, that you're going to see beneficial outcomes, maybe not  immediately in your yield outcomes, but you're going to see your soil structure start to  improve.  
**[0:51:26-0:51:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:51:26):**  You're going to start to see your infiltration rates improve and other kind of soil aspects  like that, maybe not directly in a couple years into your crop, but you're going to  be hugely benefiting your soil.  And that over time is going to lead to production benefits.  I know this isn't your area of expertise, but what are your thoughts on this?  
**[0:51:51-0:51:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:51:51):**  If you look at conventional ag, that's closer to a sterile soil than a robust soil in terms  of the microbial community.  There's obviously microbes in the soil, but they're not performing at the highest level  and maybe there isn't a wide diversity of them.  Do you find or do you think that if you provide the conditions for microbes to thrive, that  
**[0:52:14-0:52:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:52:14):**  microbes will come back, microbes will show up, microbes will populate the soil, microbes  will build that community, or do you have to go the extra step of doing different things  to try and put microbes back into the soil?  I think that you will have success in doing the measures and they will kind of come back  on their own.  
**[0:52:39-0:52:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:52:39):**  An example of how that can happen is that every different plant kind of knows or has  its own microbes, soil microbes that it knows are going to be able to provide it with the  nutrients that it needs and the form that it needs.  So those roots will secrete and exude a particular type of sugar or carbon source that it knows  that that bacteria or fungi is going to like.  
**[0:53:10-0:53:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:53:10):**  So it's trying to attract those particular things and they come back.  In an entire soil ecosystem, kind of the way microbes work is if their food source or their  kind of healthy, happy ecosystem starts to go away, they basically kind of make spores  or kind of preserve versions of themselves that stay in the soil and will last for a  long time.  
**[0:53:33-0:53:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:53:33):**  And when the conditions are right for that thing to grow and be happy again, they'll  come back.  And they grow and reproduce so much more rapidly than humans and other things do.  So those changes in bacterial and fungal populations occur much more rapid than things that we  see on the surface.  
**[0:53:54-0:54:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:53:54):**  And so by creating conditions that are favorable to these various types of beneficial microbes  is all we need, inoculating them through compost and renewers is absolutely beneficial.  But that good, complex, diverse environment can come back on its own if you are increasing  the diversity on the end that we can control.  By increasing your crop diversity, by increasing cover crops, by not destroying those ecosystems  
**[0:54:27-0:54:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:54:27):**  with tillage, you're going to allow the opportunity for them to come back in a way that's going  to benefit your crops.  Yeah, that's great to hear because it makes things a little easier for anybody taking  on these practices.  You can easily put cover crops in the ground.  
**[0:54:46-0:54:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:54:46):**  It's a lot harder to get all those microbial species into the ground.  So if you can plant the cover crops, know that, hey, they're dormant, they're there,  they'll show up however they show up, that's great.  Now, if you do all these things to improve your soil, eventually at some point you're  probably going to be measuring the soil and what's in that soil.  
**[0:55:07-0:55:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:55:07):**  And one thing I found really interesting was the paper that you wrote comparing soil test  methods.  And I found it fascinating because I didn't even realize there was different methods of  testing the soil.  So can you talk about that paper, why you thought that was important to compare two  
**[0:55:24-0:55:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:55:24):**  different soil testing methods and really outline the differences between those two  methods and why one might be superior to another?  Absolutely.  There are lots of different tests and ways that you can use to measure your soil.  A lot of them that are commonly used are pretty strictly chemical or physical in nature by  
**[0:55:49-0:55:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:55:49):**  looking at your infiltration or your soil structure, looking at the physical properties  and also to standard soil tests that use different types of harsh acids to extract nutrients  and look strictly at the chemical component of your soil.  Like what is the phosphorus, potassium, magnesium levels in the soil and experiments for decades  had been done to determine based on these soil test rates and plant uptake rates, that's  
**[0:56:18-0:56:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:56:18):**  what's used to determine fertilizer rates that people get recommended by all sorts of  land grant universities and industrial ag places like that.  So there's lots of different ways and there are different extractants that are used on  different soil types.  The Malick 1 extractant is used commonly here in South Carolina.  
**[0:56:40-0:56:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:56:40):**  And that's what I used in this paper that I'm working on.  And that's what we use all the time.  Our land grant university here uses that.  That's where we send our samples to get soil tested.  That's the way that we look at things almost every single time.  
**[0:56:56-0:57:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:56:56):**  But what's lacking in those is really any aspect of what is happening biologically in  soil.  You can look at soil in a microscope and there are certain things that are big enough that  you can tell what they are.  But when it comes down to bacteria, they're so small that it's hard for most advanced  
**[0:57:20-0:57:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:57:20):**  microscopists to be able to tell what these things are or exactly calculate what they're  doing or what their function is.  And so there are these other kind of soil health tests or biological soil tests that  can measure other things that act as a proxy for soil biology.  One of them being like the Solvita CO2 burst test measures 24 hour or four day carbon dioxide,  
**[0:57:47-0:57:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:57:47):**  which is used to kind of determine the microbial activity in your soil.  You dry soil and then you re-wet it to stimulate microbial activity and you measure how much  carbon dioxide those microbes have respired.  Because just like us, most of them need oxygen and then we breathe out carbon dioxide.  So do they.  
**[0:58:07-0:58:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:58:07):**  You quantify how much carbon dioxide is in there.  It's kind of something that you can use comparatively over time.  You can see if your microbial activity is increasing or decreasing.  And that CO2 burst test is part of the Haney soil health test, which uses a different combination  of weak acids that are meant to mimic acids that plant roots use to kind of make nutrients  
**[0:58:38-0:58:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:58:38):**  available.  And it also looks at the water extractable nutrient content of the soil, which is more  representative of what's available to microbes.  Because there's nutrients that are locked up in organic matter that are locked up in  you know, parent material like rocks and stuff that can be broken down and exposed with harsh  
**[0:58:59-0:59:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:58:59):**  acids, but they're not in that actual soil ecosystem aren't really available for anything  to use.  So part of looking at this test and comparing these two testing methods was to see what's  the better way for us to look at it.  Like, are we measuring the right thing by looking at chemicals?  
**[0:59:20-0:59:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:59:20):**  Are we measuring the right thing by looking just at the biology?  And so looking at the various aspects of these two tests over three years here and six crop  rotations, we kind of used not only those soil tests, but also the fertilizer recommendations  that came from both of those soil tests to see how much fertilizer was really necessary  in these systems.  
**[0:59:43-0:59:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:59:43):**  And then which of those recommendations were more accurate at predicting a real observable  yield that we could actually get in the sandy soils that we were in?  That makes sense.  So if you take a more traditional, how do I say traditional, I don't know the right  word and you can maybe correct me, but you do a soil test that's based on this chemical  
**[1:00:11-1:00:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:00:11):**  analysis where we're just going to really test the nitrogen, the phosphorus, the potassium,  et cetera, all the little minerals that are in our soil.  And we have a regenerative soil, like where we're trying no-till, we're trying cover cropping.  Are we potentially getting an inaccurate picture of what's in the soil or what our soil needs?  I would definitely say yes, it's potentially inaccurate, but at the same time, I don't  
**[1:00:38-1:00:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:00:38):**  really know what's accurate.  And that was kind of part of comparing these two.  Like I compared the Haney test that is aimed at a more biological aspect and compared that  to the standard one that's focused on chemistry.  And they tell me different things, but in looking at these and correlating all of these  
**[1:00:57-1:01:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:00:57):**  soil test numbers from both soil tests to the yields we got, there was certain times  where one test was maybe more accurate in determining fertilizer rates than the other,  but the other was better at different yields.  They both are telling us different things, but it almost led to more questions because  neither one was like a magic bullet that is telling us, oh, this is what I need.  
**[1:01:28-1:01:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:01:28):**  There's useful information from both for sure, but it really kind of continues to make me  question like, is the way that we're looking at soils or trying to quantify these things  in the soil, like are we really looking at it the right way?  And at the same time, that's also why I got onto the metagenomics study to start looking  directly at the biology to see if that's a better way.  
**[1:01:50-1:01:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:01:50):**  And that's going to take some more time and further down the line for me to really better  understand that and link that to your conventional, sorry, not conventional, but our typical production  outcomes and the things that farmers are interested in.  But there's just so many different ways we can look at what's in the soil.  And it's all useful to some extent, but we can't always do every single soil test and  
**[1:02:20-1:02:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:02:20):**  pull it all together.  So it's really an experiment of like, what's going to tell us the most information?  What's going to be the most useful?  And it's hard for me to say this was better than this based on the information I got because  somewhere the Haney test was accurate at kind of these more feasible yield outcomes that  
**[1:02:40-1:02:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:02:40):**  we see in the coastal plains of South Carolina.  But the land grant university that we got the standard soil test from, like the chemistry  based one was way more accurate at fertilizer recommendations and actual yield outcomes  for people who are trying to get that higher end yield.  So if you compare, if you take the two soil tests that you compare and they're part of  
**[1:03:04-1:03:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:03:04):**  a soil testing toolkit, how many other potential tests are in that toolkit for looking at these  types of values around soil?  So you look to, are there more in that toolkit?  Yeah, there's a lot more and we're actually hoping to get funding on a project that's  a couple of years, two or three years long, I think Buzz and I in the soil lab to test  
**[1:03:27-1:03:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:03:27):**  more of those on the same lands to not only test them, but also to see, to use various  soil testing methods during the process of transitioning from conventional to regenerative.  So not only like in a conventional system, which tests are telling us the most useful  information, but also in a regenerative or as you're making that transition, like in  a conventional system where it's more focused on tillage and fertilizer inputs, maybe the  
**[1:04:00-1:04:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:04:00):**  chemistry based test is going to give you information that's more useful to that system.  But if you're trying to go regenerative, maybe a different test is going to give you more  useful information since you're not looking just at chemistry, you're looking at biology.  So hopefully that the ball gets rolling on that project and we can really start to see  looking at more than just two, what's the best thing to look at on a whole scale of  
**[1:04:30-1:04:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:04:30):**  management practices.  So for somebody who's trying to grow regeneratively, they're getting soil tests, they could potentially,  not definitely, but potentially be getting a soil test that's a misfit for their farming  management system.  I think so, yes.  
**[1:04:51-1:04:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:04:51):**  You could get a soil test that says you have this much or you don't have this much of nutrients,  say phosphorus in your soil.  But if you have a healthy biological system and in lots of hyphen networks that are able  to go deeper and beyond your plant roots, they have the capability of pulling that nutrient  from other places and giving it to those plant roots.  
**[1:05:18-1:05:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:05:18):**  Versus a conventional system may not have that and you may have to supplement it more  because you don't have that kind of scavenging and that partnership that a healthier biological  ecosystem would.  So I'm thinking if I'm a regenerative grower and I'm practicing no-till, I have cover crop  problems and we assume that a lot of these things that we've talked about in this interview  
**[1:05:39-1:05:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:05:39):**  are happening.  You're getting nutrients scavenging, you're getting nutrient recycling to some degree  in this system because the biology is working.  You're adding organic matter which is stimulating that biology which is helping us in a lot  of ways.  
**[1:05:54-1:05:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:05:54):**  It's freeing up nutrients that are locked up in the soil, parent matter, the organic  matter, all that type of stuff.  Can I make the argument and just say a soil test is just a waste of time and energy?  If I can't really tell if the information is accurate, like it might be useful, it might  not be useful.  
**[1:06:11-1:06:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:06:11):**  What about this scenario?  You're saying we can't quantify what that is but if you continue to get your soil tests  regularly as you are doing these things anyway, you're doing these regenerative practices,  that's providing you with the data.  So you can see over time, maybe you can see your farm or your productivity increasing,  
**[1:06:41-1:06:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:06:41):**  you can visibly see your soil getting healthier.  If the soil test that you're getting is showing no change, then you can probably conclude  like yep, this soil test is not telling me anything worthwhile and maybe try a different  one.  I think that if you're in that system and you look at the more biological soil tests  
**[1:07:00-1:07:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:07:00):**  that might be more of interest to you, it's looking at water extractable nutrients, more  like bioavailable nutrients, I think we don't know exactly what is the best part of that  to use for fertilizer recommendations and stuff like that.  That's something that I'm still questioning.  But if you're doing it, I think there's still a huge benefit in getting those soil tests  
**[1:07:23-1:07:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:07:23):**  and just looking at that data your own over time.  And then you can do that for five years and you go back and you look at five years of  soil test data, maybe you completely ignored all of the fertilizer or whatever recommendations  that came with that, that's fine.  But if you go back, you know how your productivity was or wasn't over that time and you go back  
**[1:07:42-1:07:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:07:42):**  and look at that soil test, you can probably see what's happening, like what is indicating  what you saw or what was a good indicator, what's not.  So I think that by doing soil tests, at least annually, if not more, that creates an opportunity  for you to quantify what's happening on your system.  I think that's a great point.  
**[1:08:04-1:08:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:08:04):**  Yeah, no, that makes a ton of sense.  So I guess if you're going to get a soil test, one, try and make sure the soil test matches  up with the system that you're going with and then know what soil test you're actually  getting.  Where I think a lot of times, I mean, I've done soil tests on just a garden level where  
**[1:08:19-1:08:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:08:19):**  you send it away and I really don't know what exact testing method they're getting.  I'm just getting that result.  So know what they're getting.  And then, I mean, even within the biological geared soil testing, are there a few options  and would it be worth, maybe you get a couple of those done and you get a couple of those  
**[1:08:37-1:08:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:08:37):**  done each time.  So now you're essentially plotting those and you can say, okay, well, if this one's high,  this one's low, well, here's where the mean ends up.  This is probably where I'm at.  Yeah.  
**[1:08:49-1:08:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:08:49):**  So you can start to be a little more like nerdy scientists like me and get multiple  tests and compare them.  Unfortunately, biological tests are more expensive than the chemical tests.  And there are a few nots.  For people listening, if they want to get biological soil tests, just to repeat that,  
**[1:09:07-1:09:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:09:07):**  what should they be looking at if they're going to a lab?  The Haney soil health test is what I used in this paper.  We also very frequently do PLFA tests, which is an acronym for phospholipid fatty acids.  And that basically measures a particular cell membrane protein that's in microbes.  And it's a cell membrane protein that kind of degrades relatively quick compared to other  
**[1:09:31-1:09:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:09:31):**  ones that may linger in the soil as it kind of turn into another form of organic matter.  And so what that indicates is when you're measuring those, you can differentiate between  like bacteria and fungi and protists, but because they degrade relatively quickly, you  kind of get close to a snapshot of what type, what the microbial profile in your soil was.  So the living microbial part, not stuff that died three months ago and is still, you know,  
**[1:09:58-1:10:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:09:58):**  just kind of a dead shell of a cell in your soil.  Like what was at that time, most likely a living productive part of that soil.  So that was Haney test, PLFA.  There are new tests now and I haven't done any of these, but it's one that I think we're  going to include if we get this new project rolling is looking at different soil enzymes.  
**[1:10:22-1:10:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:10:22):**  I don't know much about that.  The details of that, like I want to look more into it and kind of get some of that data  and play with it.  But I think for now, a lot of what people are doing is the Haney test and PLFA.  PLFA has been around for a while, but I think it's kind of potential usefulness in agriculture  
**[1:10:42-1:10:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:10:42):**  is becoming a little more common or at least a little more common to me.  So.  I imagine a lot of these tests are really like from hearing you describe this, we're  kind of applying a patchwork solution to this.  Like we just don't understand enough about the complexity of the soil and all the connections  
**[1:11:01-1:11:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:11:01):**  under there.  Like it's so complex that you're trying to come up with a test to measure it, but you  don't really understand what you're even trying to measure in the first place.  As we know more about the soil, we can build a better test.  Yeah.  
**[1:11:14-1:11:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:11:14):**  Like you can't, it's just too complex to be able to try and pick like where in this complex  web, like where are we going to measure this?  And you can measure it, like we can measure stuff, but how that, like what does that tell  us in a system that's so complex?  If it was as easy as maybe like a hydroponic system where you have water and you have to  
**[1:11:36-1:11:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:11:36):**  have these things to make plants grow in it, like that's easier, but you have a soil ecosystem  where there's all this other stuff happening there that's just way beyond what we can understand.  We can't see most of it visibly, so that makes it harder to understand.  And there's so much influence day to day on weather conditions and temperature and climate  and just your basic starting soil type.  
**[1:12:04-1:12:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-14-GabeKenne-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:12:04):**  I could find a perfect answer maybe for what's the most important in a sandy coastal plain  soil in South Carolina.  And that same thing could be useless in a different soil where the complexity of that  is different based on what it's physically starting at.  It's okay.  