### In Search of Soil  (2021-00-04)
**[0:00:00-0:00:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:00:00):**  So, we meet again.  Adding live microbes to the soil, does it actually make sense?  Intuitively, we might think yes, but what are you actually adding to the soil?  It's a question that you need to know the answer to.  Because while you might be adding something beneficial to the soil, there's also a pretty  
**[0:00:39-0:00:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:00:39):**  good chance that you might be adding something worthless to the soil, or even worse, something  that's harmful to the soil.  Today I'm talking to Dr. Jane Fyfe from 3 Bar Biologics about microbials and soils.  She's going to answer questions like, does it make sense to add live microbes to the  soil?  
**[0:00:59-0:01:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:00:59):**  What's the best way to deliver those microbes?  And what type of expectations should you have if you're adding these microbes to the soil?  Let's get those questions answered and many more with Dr. Jane Fyfe of 3 Bar Biologics.  If you look at the, I'll call it the old school approach or a lower tech approach, if it's  you had any biological product, anything out there.  
**[0:01:25-0:01:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:01:25):**  In the past, they would just be, you'd have to either apply it as a seed coat and then  plant the seed with it already on it, or you'd have to plant it and then spray the soil surface  and let it percolate through and hope it makes contact.  Looking at both those options, a seed coat and say a soil surface spray, when it comes  to biologicals, what are the limitations of those application methods?  
**[0:01:51-0:01:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:01:51):**  Sure.  And when I talk about biologicals, recognize there's a huge umbrella of biological products.  And what I'm talking about really is the microbial biologicals.  So these are living, they include either bacteria or fungi.  In some of the challenges there with say for seed treatment is, you know, for treatments  
**[0:02:18-0:02:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:02:18):**  that are done way by manufacturers way up in the supply chain, right, that's, you know,  months in advance that the microbes are applied to the seed.  And that can be challenging to maintain viability of those microbes on the seed for, you know,  many months potentially.  So that's one challenge.  
**[0:02:38-0:02:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:02:38):**  And it's a limitation because it limits the types of microbes that are being put on as  seed treatments.  Basically it limits it to, in the case of bacteria, bacteria that form spores.  So these are bacillus strains, which are most commonly found as seed treatments.  But there's a whole wide range of different bacteria that don't form spores.  
**[0:03:00-0:03:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:03:00):**  And it really limits their ability to be applied as a seed treatment back at the manufacturer,  right.  In terms of the farmer, you know, with seed treatments, you have a lot of chemistry on  there as well.  So, you know, whatever the seed package is, you know, you're kind of stuck with what that  
**[0:03:21-0:03:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:03:21):**  is.  So the ability to apply a biological later, potentially closer to time of use, can widen  the range of microbes that are possible to put on the seed.  You do have to be mindful of the chemistry that's on the seed to make sure that there's  compatibility that it's not going to harm the microbes.  
**[0:03:45-0:03:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:03:45):**  But it gives the farmer a lot more flexibility if they're applied closer to time of use versus  being treated far in advance.  The other, like I had talked about, in-furrow delivery, it gives the farmer a lot of flexibility.  So they're not having to make decisions on seed treating well in advance.  They can make decisions, you know, as they go out that day, right.  
**[0:04:11-0:04:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:04:11):**  What are they going to put in their tank mix and gives them flexibility on biologicals  as well as, you know, insecticides, fungicides.  So there's kind of, you have to understand both the impact on the microbes, but then  also the flexibility to the farmer for using these types of products.  When you look at plant growth enhancing microbes or beneficial microbes that are either, maybe  
**[0:04:36-0:04:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:04:36):**  they help reduce disease pressure, maybe they help actually stimulate growth.  How much does that spectrum open up when you can go to a just-in-time application approach  versus a spore seed coat approach?  It opens up tremendously.  And this is where, you know, you look at decades of research, decades of research in finding  
**[0:05:04-0:05:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:05:04):**  these plant growth promoting bacteria and fungi, but very limited commercialization.  And part of that reason comes back to the stability of the living microbe and by, you  know, being able to use them, you know, closer to the farm gate where they haven't been put  on as a seed coat.  That can open up the number of bacteria.  
**[0:05:32-0:05:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:05:32):**  And a lot of the discovery work that happens, and this is at universities, at, you know,  companies big and small, there's a tremendous amount of discovery work going on right now.  And roughly three quarters of the bacteria just kind of through discovery work are what's  called gram-negative bacteria.  So if you go into the research literature and you look, nearly three quarters are, you  
**[0:05:59-0:06:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:05:59):**  know, these non-spore forming bacteria.  And the reason is they're so ubiquitous in the soil.  They're everywhere.  They associate with the plants readily.  So when you're doing, you know, you're looking at the soil and the plant and the bacteria  
**[0:06:13-0:06:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:06:13):**  that's associated with it, what you find is a lot of these bacteria that are hard to get  into a product form.  And so, you know, that's one of the reasons the company that I work with, 3 Bar Biologics,  we wanted to find a way to better deliver these microbes so that more of them that were  discovered in research could be made into product because they're just so hard to get  
**[0:06:38-0:06:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:06:38):**  into a stable product form.  But we're seeing more and more of these microbes being discovered.  And so how do you work on getting them into a product form?  And that's really kind of the Achilles heel of the industry right now in an area we're  working in.  
**[0:06:52-0:06:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:06:52):**  In 3 Bar, the company you work for, 3 Bar Biologics, that came out of OSU and a lot  of the research that was being done there.  Can you talk about some of the research that was taking place at Ohio State and how that  led to the company?  Yeah, sure.  
**[0:07:08-0:07:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:07:08):**  You know, and so, like I said, this discovery research, you know, it usually starts with,  you know, soil samples, samples from plants, and you start to look at, you know, what's  associated with it.  And then you screen out microbes that can really provide a good benefit to the plant,  right?  
**[0:07:25-0:07:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:07:25):**  And through this work at Ohio State, and there's, you know, many, many land-grant universities  in the United States and all over the world that are doing this kind of research, and  several researchers at Ohio State had found, you know, a number of strains that could provide  benefit to plant health.  They were all gram-negative, non-spore-forming bacteria, like I had said, these bacteria  
**[0:07:49-0:07:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:07:49):**  that are really hard to get into to stabilize.  And so it was through that kind of realization of, you know, all this great research is being  done, but, you know, products aren't being developed.  You know, we're not getting these great potential from the microbes into the hands of farmers.  And so that was really kind of why the company was founded, was on the premise of, you know,  
**[0:08:14-0:08:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:08:14):**  there's got to be a better way to get these microbes into a product, into the hands of  farmers.  And so we developed the technology to do that.  We call it our live microbe technology, but it was really out of that realization that,  you know, here's these great microbes, but to get them to the farmer, we're going to  
**[0:08:36-0:08:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:08:36):**  have to do this a different way.  How challenging is it to just multiply out those microbes?  So you know they exist in the soil, they're beneficial.  And even if we forgot commercialization and we just said, hey, I want to, I have a lab  here or I have the most basic equipment that any farmer would have possible.  
**[0:08:54-0:09:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:08:54):**  How easy is it to take those and multiply out the ones you want and then just get them  into a large enough quantity that you can then go apply them on the field?  Even if we take out like, hey, we're not trying to sell it, we're not trying to commercialize  it, what I'm getting at is I think a lot of farmers would love to do that.  How complex actually is that?  
**[0:09:13-0:09:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:09:13):**  Yeah, so it sounds easy.  You can grow a lot of microbes, but maybe not the ones you necessarily want.  So you know one of the challenges in, you know, growing microbes is making sure that  you're doing it in a, what we call aseptic manner.  So you're doing it in a way that you're starting with everything sterile, you're adding the  
**[0:09:36-0:09:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:09:36):**  microbes that you want and growing them.  And in the lab, that's, you know, fairly straightforward to do.  Those trained in microbiology do it quite well.  But for a novice or somebody that's not familiar with the art, it can be more challenging because  you can contaminate something so easily.  
**[0:09:56-0:10:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:09:56):**  And so in general, it can be done pretty straightforward in a lab environment, but you get out on the  farm, you're in an open system, you know, it becomes more challenging to maintain, you  know, to maintain a pure culture, if you will.  You know, so you don't really know what you're getting.  You're probably multiplying something, what that is, right?  
**[0:10:17-0:10:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:10:17):**  It could be pathogens, right?  So you don't want to multiply pathogens.  So yeah.  One microbial product that I think a lot of farmers have had access to in the past, it's  like a powder, you know, whether it's mico something usually is in the name, and there's  
**[0:10:31-0:10:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:10:31):**  a powder there.  Are those the non gram negative bacteria?  Are those the spore forming bacteria?  That's what would be in those powders?  In some cases, yes.  
**[0:10:43-0:10:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:10:43):**  And thank you for bringing up the dry formulation.  Because the microbes will survive, they basically get put into a dormant state.  So when they're dry like that, that you kind of put them to sleep.  And so both the spore form as well as the non spore forming bacteria can be made into  a dry formulation and be fine at room temperature for a period of time.  
**[0:11:12-0:11:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:11:12):**  So that's actually a really good strategy for formulation and developing a product.  But it's really, it can be very expensive.  Anytime you're doing further processing beyond just growing the microbes, from a manufacturing  standpoint it can be really, it can get more and more expensive.  And so as a finished product, you know, those products, if they're not using kind of lower  
**[0:11:36-0:11:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:11:36):**  tech technology to create the dry formulation, they can be kind of priced out of the market,  if you will.  What about efficacy in the field of a liquid applied product versus a dry formulated product?  Do you think there's a difference there?  Well, back to, you know, the microbes are in a dormant state when they're formulated  
**[0:11:59-0:12:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:11:59):**  dry.  Some of those products are wettable powders, so they'll be brought back into a liquid and  then applied.  So there can be some kind of coming out of that dormancy, some lag there.  But in general, they should work similarly, particularly if they're both delivered as  
**[0:12:18-0:12:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:12:18):**  a liquid, if it's a wettable powder and brought back into a liquid and delivered as a liquid.  But one of the things to keep in mind, you know, the extra handling involved with a,  you know, with a dry formulation sometimes is an ideal.  There's usually like having a liquid, they can just add it to their tank mix, it's a  little bit more readily usable.  
**[0:12:40-0:12:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:12:40):**  But in general, they both work just fine.  I know from just looking at what 3 Bar's been doing, a lot of these microbes originated,  you said, right out of an Ohio field, and they were isolated out of there.  One concern that I know people have, and this has came up in episodes and other people,  have various thoughts on this about local efficacy of microbes.  
**[0:13:07-0:13:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:13:07):**  So you get a microbe out of Ohio, and I want to use it here in California, or I want to  use it in Florida, I want to use it in Maine.  Is it going to work the same in all conditions?  Or are they that specific where in Ohio, microbe out of that field is going to work best in  that field in Ohio?  
**[0:13:26-0:13:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:13:26):**  There is some regionality.  And it really comes back to, I think, understanding that not every microbe is meant to be a silver  bullet where it works everywhere all the time.  Some that are coming out of conditions that say are cooler, wetter, will probably do better  going into conditions that are cooler and wetter, and vice versa, strains that are isolated  
**[0:13:52-0:14:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:13:52):**  out of places that are more arid, maybe have less drier conditions, probably do better  in those types of conditions.  So there is some dependency there.  But microbes, they can work across.  So I think trying at least at a regional level to make sure that they work across some different  
**[0:14:18-0:14:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:14:18):**  climates is important.  And also the function that they give.  Every microbe, it's not going to solve all of the problems in the field, but in targeted  ways they can help, say for instance, help with nutrient availability or help the plant  through certain abiotic stress.  
**[0:14:38-0:14:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:14:38):**  You have to kind of understand where you're applying it and why, and know that it's not  going to be something that's going to solve all of the problems in your field, but it  could help under certain conditions to improve your yield in certain areas under certain  conditions.  That's a good point that you brought up there, because I think some people expect a dramatic  
**[0:14:59-0:15:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:14:59):**  transformation like this weak, staggering plant.  You apply it and boom, you have a redwood growing all of a sudden there.  When it comes to realistic expectations, what should someone think about if they're considering  applying a beneficial growth microbe?  Yeah, so certainly under more controlled environments, you can set up experiments where you can see  
**[0:15:23-0:15:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:15:23):**  kind of a half-dead plant and one that had microbes applied to it is growing quite well.  But out in a field under conditions, varying conditions, you may not see that same kind  of direct response.  But one of the things that we see with a microbe we've been using that was discovered at Ohio  State, it works really well under conditions where if you want to go out and plant earlier,  
**[0:15:54-0:15:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:15:54):**  it's helping that plant through kind of that early abiotic stress when it's cooler and  wetter.  So in that environment, this microbe really works well and you can see some of that immediate  early season kind of vigor when the bacteria are used versus when they're not.  So there's a case where certain conditions, this microbe can help the plant through that  
**[0:16:15-0:16:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:16:15):**  kind of stress and you can see it in the early vigor.  Will that translate to a huge increase in yield at the end of the season?  It depends on the season, but you can at least say I saw an early vigor response, it helped  the plant through some of that early stress.  And so you have to think about, understand how these products work, that they can help  
**[0:16:41-0:16:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:16:41):**  under certain conditions, but not expect that they're going to give you a 50% bump up in  yield.  It doesn't quite work out that way, but using them can help in general.  We like to think of it kind of as a insurance policy that if the conditions are more detrimental  whether that's some early season flooding or some conditions that were harder to get  
**[0:17:11-0:17:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:17:11):**  the stand up, they can help the plant through those conditions.  So it's kind of like a de-risking, if you will.  Sure.  But if you look at all the factors that affect a crop, a really dry year, a really wet year,  conditions, yield increase, is there one area that you say, okay, this is really a sweet  
**[0:17:35-0:17:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:17:35):**  spot for microbes?  Like if you look at all the research, microbes can definitely really help here.  And then once you start getting out into other areas of yield increases, drought tolerance,  whatever it is, they have less of an effect.  Where's the sweet spot for microbes at this point, do you think?  
**[0:17:53-0:17:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:17:53):**  Yeah.  So the ones that have been isolated, we call them kind of the wild types, the naturally  derived, right?  So they came out of the soil or from plant material and those microbes, they do, you  kind of have for plant, as a plant growth promoting microbe, kind of the laundry list  
**[0:18:22-0:18:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:18:22):**  of things that they can do, are fairly consistent if they're plant beneficial microbes.  So they help with, you think of these microbes, they're little chemistry factories, if you  will.  So as they associate with the plant and are fed by the plant, that's the relationship  that forms, they're basically producing a wide range of different chemistry.  
**[0:18:56-0:19:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:18:56):**  So these metabolites that they're producing, and these could be plant hormones, they can  be different organic acids.  And so it triggers this response in the plant as well.  And so that's where that association happens that can help the plant through the abiotic  stress, whether that's not enough water, too much water through some flooding event, too  
**[0:19:23-0:19:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:19:23):**  hot, too cold, and so forth.  And also, they can be antagonistic to pathogens, right?  So they can help with some of the biotic stress as well.  But all of this kind of general help these microbes provide, but it does depend a little  bit on the strain, a lot on the strain in terms of what genes it has.  
**[0:19:51-0:19:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:19:51):**  So it's genetic makeup and what maybe it produces more organic acids.  So it really can help in this case with maybe solubilizing phosphorus or it produces certain  enzymes that help with say nitrogen fixation.  So what research, what's happening in research is trying to screen out and find kind of your  super performers that have those genes that are producing certain enzymes or certain plant  
**[0:20:20-0:20:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:20:20):**  hormones or so forth to have better microbes.  So that's what we're seeing kind of in the pipeline are better microbes.  But these are all naturally derived.  So when you hear, I know one of the big complaints about using living microbe products is the  variability.  
**[0:20:42-0:20:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:20:42):**  You put them into the field and depending on there's such a wide variety of variability  in the field that the microbes, they have certain triggers where they're producing certain  chemistry and so that variability kind of compounds on itself.  So in some cases they may not be triggered to produce a certain chemistry.  So those are the challenges and kind of how those challenges are being overcome is through,  
**[0:21:11-0:21:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:21:11):**  really through some of the biotechnology that is, we've seen some of it in plant systems.  We're now seeing that with microbial systems where you can do genetic engineering to make  sure that the function that the microbe's supposed to be providing, it's going to provide  that no matter what conditions it experiences when it's put in the field.  So that's kind of the next generation of products.  
**[0:21:38-0:21:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:21:38):**  We're starting to see some of them.  Certainly they're being researched, but that's where we're going to have better and better  microbes because of that.  Do you think, if we go to the question, somebody's going to say, why do we even need these?  Like if they're already there, shouldn't they already be proliferating in the system?  
**[0:22:00-0:22:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:22:00):**  How much do you think agricultural methods and management practices affect these field  microbes?  For instance, if you go back into research, is there a difference between say no till  and till?  Is there a difference between continued coverage where you have a cash crop and a cover crop  
**[0:22:17-0:22:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:22:17):**  versus where you're having fields just sit fallow where there are more favorable conditions  to have these microbes just proliferate in the soil.  So sure you can add them as more of an insurance, but you're not starting from such a depleted  state given some methods.  Is there a tie in between management practice and what they're seeing in the field?  
**[0:22:39-0:22:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:22:39):**  Yeah, absolutely.  But you have to understand kind of the context of adding them into the field as a precision  application, which we kind of talked about there at the beginning versus really kind  of improving your soil health.  And that's what's getting a lot of attention and for good reason.  
**[0:23:00-0:23:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:23:00):**  You know, in soil health, the idea is that we're getting the biology back into the field.  So increasing the soil organic matter, making sure that you have a very diverse and active  biology microorganisms as well as macroorganisms like worms, things like that.  So you have very active biology.  So that's the goal.  
**[0:23:25-0:23:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:23:25):**  In a smaller system, it's very achievable.  In more conventional, larger, broadacre agriculture, it's achievable.  It just takes a lot more.  There is a good bit of management behind it.  So the practices, you know, you touched on tillage, right?  
**[0:23:45-0:23:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:23:45):**  In conventional practice, we've disrupted the soil a good bit.  So tillage is one thing, adding, you know, fertilizers, synthetic fertilizers and pesticides.  It all disrupts that soil environment.  But you want to be able to, you know, get a certain amount of biology back and continue  to work on improving your soil organic matter.  
**[0:24:13-0:24:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:24:13):**  And in broadacres, like I said, it's just, you know, there's strategies to do that.  Certainly practices that are getting more attention, which is great.  The whole area of regenerative agriculture, which is kind of the buzzword around this  right now.  And so some of those strategies involve, you know, either no till or, you know, strip till,  
**[0:24:37-0:24:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:24:37):**  you know, much reduced tillage than what has conventionally been practiced.  So cover crops.  So you know, the goal is if you're going to have the biology getting put back, you're  going to have an active root system there all the time, which is where cover crops can  really provide benefit.  
**[0:24:54-0:24:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:24:54):**  And then, you know, adding different microbiology sources.  So you know, manures, you know, a great source of very diverse microbiota.  So you know, how do you get more of that into the soil, I think is the challenge, especially  on a broadacre.  With microbial products, or any biological product, but microbial products, the idea,  
**[0:25:19-0:25:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:25:19):**  you know, you could try to more broadcast them, but you have such a limited amount that  you're trying to get into the soil that the precision application is where these products  are more fit better in terms of existing practices, so that you're just putting it with the plant  so they can provide that direct benefit to the plant.  If you went with a microbial product, and let's say you had no constraints on application,  
**[0:25:44-0:25:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:25:44):**  like you could full access to the crop from seeding to harvest, and there was no, we're  throwing economics out.  Do you think that if you looked at the whole suite of microbial products that, let's say  it was corn, that there could be X amount of applications of microbial throughout the  corn's life to get a significantly better yielding crop if you didn't have those constraints?  
**[0:26:13-0:26:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:26:13):**  Yeah, no, that's a great question.  Certainly depending on, you know, the function that the microbes trying to provide, so you  know, with corn, nitrogen's a big focus, and there are nitrogen-fixing microbes that can  certainly help that, and can they provide the nitrogen throughout the growth cycle of  the plant at an amount that you're not having to bring in, you know, nitrogen through, you  
**[0:26:48-0:26:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:26:48):**  know, foliar application or whatever, which is traditionally done during, through the  season.  You could apply other microbes to provide other functions at certain times.  I don't think I can fully answer that question.  I think it raises a good point, but there's certainly the ability to reduce some of the  
**[0:27:10-0:27:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:27:10):**  synthetic chemistries we're applying with the biological products and do it in a way  where you're providing at different time points benefit to the plant to help kind of, you  know, the goal with this is step change, right, that we're able to have a step change in yield,  reduce inputs to be more sustainable, and you know, biological products, you know, have  gotten a lot of interest and excitement over the last few years because they're seen to  
**[0:27:39-0:27:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:27:39):**  be able to potentially provide that step change.  But how they're delivered, when they're delivered, you know, the research, it's just there's  not a lot of research to get to the reduction to practice, and a lot of times that's, you  know, the discovery works important, right?  We need to discover in the interactions with the plant and the discovery that's going on  
**[0:28:05-0:28:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:28:05):**  there, that's critical, but then also reducing it to practice in a way that you can start  to see some of these changes is, you know, I think equally as important to make these  products work better.  When it comes to precision application, if you look at something like foliar feeding,  how effective is that at delivering a microbial product to a plant?  
**[0:28:28-0:28:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:28:28):**  When a plant absorbs microbes through its leaves, or it gets microbes on the surface  of its leaves, I guess, how effective is that in doing that?  Is it, if you apply 100, 100 are taking, is it, you apply 110 take, where is it on the  scale of being effective?  Yes, again, it depends on what you're trying to achieve.  
**[0:28:54-0:28:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:28:54):**  There are some, a couple foliar applied products that I'm aware of that are very effective  or can be effective.  Some produce hormones, plant hormones, and so they associate with the plant, they kind  of, they can get in, grow into the plant, they're called endophytes, so they associate  with the plant and get into the plant tissue, and then they can produce things like auxin,  
**[0:29:22-0:29:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:29:22):**  which can really help with plant, stimulate plant growth.  There's some other microbes that do different things, but that's one that's common.  And that can be very effective at certain growth stages if you're trying to accomplish,  you know, stimulate that growth.  Biopesticides, we haven't really talked about that, but biopesticides, you know, depending  
**[0:29:43-0:29:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:29:43):**  on where the pest is, they may need to be delivered fully, you know, onto the foliar  tissue or potentially into a bud or somewhere where that pest might be, and so they can  be very effective.  The challenge with anything kind of, you know, foliar or above ground is you then have, you  know, UV, the sunlight, so you do have to be mindful of how you're delivering the formulation  
**[0:30:11-0:30:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:30:11):**  to make sure that the microbes are protected a little bit so that they're not being killed  by UV.  But some of that has already, you know, been worked on through additives you can include  in your tank mix and so forth in the formulation, but there are products out there, certainly  that work, that are effective, that aren't just applied with the seed.  
**[0:30:33-0:30:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:30:33):**  I don't know if you've came across this in the precision ag space, but is there enough  knowledge out there now on foliar feeding?  So let's say we're going, moving away from biologicals for a quick sec, and I just want  to apply nutrients to a plant.  Uptake of nutrients through leaves versus uptake of nutrients through roots, is there  
**[0:30:55-0:30:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:30:55):**  a difference there?  And when you do precision ag, if you have to apply to foliage, are you going to get  the same benefit as if you were injecting it to the roots or drenching the soil?  Do you know that?  You know, that's a little bit outside of my expertise.  
**[0:31:13-0:31:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:31:13):**  You know, I know again back to corn, you know, farmers will go out and apply foliar nitrogen  to, you know, get it, that boost of nitrogen at certain growth phase.  So I don't know the efficiency necessarily, but when you think about delivery, spraying,  anytime you spray a liquid, it's one of the most inefficient processes.  You lose a lot through, you know, just off-target movement.  
**[0:31:40-0:31:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:31:40):**  So from an efficiency standpoint, the more precise your delivery to versus a, you know,  more spraying can get better, you know, further coverage potentially, but you can lose a lot  too.  So you got to think about, you know, how you're delivering it, you know, feeding it.  You know, it's challenging in broad acres because you have a lot of ground to cover,  
**[0:32:03-0:32:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:32:03):**  right?  So spraying is pretty typical with liquid material.  When you're going in furrow, you have a little bit more control, right?  You can control it right into that furrow, but a good bit's wasted in furrow too unless  you're, you know, there are some new technologies that are turning on and off between the seeds.  
**[0:32:21-0:32:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:32:21):**  So you don't waste, if you're just laying down liquid between the seed, you're wasting  a good bit of material.  So there are new equipment coming out to help kind of be less wasteful.  Well, with a lot of biologicals, is the waste truly waste?  If you put it in an area in between seeds, I think, okay, there's microbes in the soil.  
**[0:32:46-0:32:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:32:46):**  They'll just either go dormant in the soil or they'll just wait for the roots to eventually  make their way over there.  How much of that is actually wasted when you think about a microbial product?  Do you need it right up on the root?  Yeah.  
**[0:33:01-0:33:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:33:01):**  So, great question.  You know, the microbiology that's in the soil, you know, if you have good biology happening  in your soil, you probably have a decent amount of root, you know, the food for the microbes  is there.  With, you know, with root systems, it's the carbon and the exudates from the plant roots  
**[0:33:27-0:33:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:33:27):**  that are feeding the microbes.  There's other material in the soil too, other carbon in the soil that can help feed the  microbes, but they're going to, you know, there's a population dynamics.  So when there are roots around, they increase and then they eventually tail off once those,  maybe those roots aren't there.  
**[0:33:49-0:33:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:33:49):**  So to maintain it, you know, when we apply a biological product, maintaining, you know,  most of those microbes will maintain with the root system, but then, you know, when  you harvest the plant, they kind of go away.  So you're not changing the soil microbiome with what you added.  If you added them to say the entire field, right, not just with the plant, you're adding  
**[0:34:14-0:34:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:34:14):**  such a small amount and then they're competing with what's there that they're probably not  making a big impact either.  And so that's where, you know, you really have to, you know, to improve your soil organic  matter, improve the diversity of the microbes.  You know, it takes time.  
**[0:34:34-0:34:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:34:34):**  It doesn't happen overnight, right?  It takes repeated applications, whether that's manure, putting cover crops in, which cover  crops, you know, those seeds will introduce some microbes and then you're establishing  a population, you're helping what is there continue to maintain and increase.  So it does take a good bit of management and effort over time to make that community come  
**[0:34:58-0:35:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:34:58):**  back, right?  Is part of the idea behind some microbial products not reproducing in the soil that  they need a specific point in a plant's life to actually exist and once that point passes,  like that's their window, it's over?  I think this is where a lot of people get hung up.  
**[0:35:19-0:35:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:35:19):**  They think, well, I put this in, I have a live plant growing there.  Let's say it's a cash crop.  I follow that up with a cover crop.  I still have a living root in the soil.  Why do those microbes suddenly die off?  
**[0:35:32-0:35:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:35:32):**  Why don't they proliferate and why aren't they multiplying?  If they're originally soil born, they're not modified to just, you know, die after 90 days,  why don't they stay in place and why can't they naturalize and breed out?  Yeah, no, that's, it is, it's a great question.  And kind of the way I think about it and I kind of segment it is, you know, you have,  
**[0:35:55-0:35:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:35:55):**  you know, what's there in a broad, you know, in the bulk soil, right?  And there is microbiology there, even, you know, conventional fields that have been,  you know, used fertilizer, chemical fertilizers for years, that diversity and kind of level  of microbes in that more conventional field that's, you know, used tillage and synthetic  fertilizers is going to be reduced.  
**[0:36:21-0:36:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:36:21):**  You're not going to have the same diversity.  You're not going to have the same level of microbes than one that is, you know, really  working on improving the soil organic matter, improving the soil health.  And what happens when you add, you know, whether it's multiple microorganisms, there's products  that are, we call them consortia, but they contain, you know, multiple different species.  
**[0:36:48-0:36:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:36:48):**  You could apply a product like that.  You could apply a single species.  When you're introducing that, the level that you would need to introduce in a bulk soil  to really make a difference would be very high.  And that would be something that's pretty expensive to do.  
**[0:37:04-0:37:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:37:04):**  And like I was saying, you know, ways that you could introduce more roots in the ground  with things like cover crops, you know, that can help improve, especially if you have a  diversity of those cover plant species.  That helps too, because they're bringing in with their roots some microbes.  And each plant, you know, there's dynamics that happen with different plant species with  
**[0:37:32-0:37:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:37:32):**  different microbes.  And it's very complex.  And so the idea is, you know, you're trying to build up that diversity over time and not  have just single either plant species or microbe species.  You really need that diversity to be effective.  
**[0:37:54-0:37:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:37:54):**  When you introduce a product with a plant, the idea is you're just helping that plant  to have better quality, better yield.  You're not trying to change the whole field.  Changing the whole field takes a lot of management and a lot.  You got to do a lot of different things, right?  
**[0:38:09-0:38:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:38:09):**  Is this a fair analogy?  I get sick.  I take penicillin.  Suddenly my body has all this penicillin in it from the tablet that I'm taking.  But when I stopped taking the penicillin, that penicillin is not now reproducing itself  
**[0:38:26-0:38:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:38:26):**  in my body at those high levels.  Maybe there's some that lingers there.  I don't know.  But like when I take the overload away in the form of a pill, maybe there's some residual,  but it's not set up to live in me the way it would in that tablet.  
**[0:38:43-0:38:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:38:43):**  Well and it's a good analogy in the sense of our bodies are healthiest, right?  When we have a diversity of bacteria in our system, right?  Our probiotics.  When we try to introduce probiotics, it can help improve your health for sure, but it's  really that natural diversity and through health and healthy habits that you can maintain  
**[0:39:12-0:39:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:39:12):**  it, right?  When you try to have to introduce more, it can help locally, but it's really that diversity  that maintains that health.  The same thing carries over to soil and plants as it does in our bodies.  Probiotics certainly can help target and if you have a pathogen, introducing an antibiotic  
**[0:39:38-0:39:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:39:38):**  certainly can help with that pathogen, but it really is maintaining that healthy system.  That's really where the whole regenerative agriculture, soil health is headed is we want  to get that system back, right?  That we've taken away over time with some of our practices.  I guess in a fair way, we don't want bad bacteria to be overloaded in the soil.  
**[0:40:07-0:40:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:40:07):**  If you think about it, sure, we would love to have as many of these growth enhancing  bacteria in the soil as possible, but how much can the natural balance actually support?  The system can go out of whack either way and it can only support one base level.  If we circle all the way back and we look at the research that was done at OSU when  3-bar came out or some of the specific bacteria and organisms in the soil that proved to be  
**[0:40:37-0:40:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:40:37):**  interesting and said, wow, okay, there's something here, this needs to be worked on more.  And then those were identified and hence 3-bar was born.  Yeah.  So most of that early work, and mind you, the folks that are doing the discovery work,  this is sometimes decades worth of their research, right?  
**[0:40:57-0:41:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:40:57):**  To find certain strains or groups of strains.  And so that work had been going on for a good 10 years by the time 3-bar came along.  Largely in that work, there's a grouping of beneficial bacteria from the genus Pseudomonas.  And if you go into the research literature, many, many Pseudomonas species have been identified  as being good growth promoters.  
**[0:41:28-0:41:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:41:28):**  And part of the reason is because they take a lot of different food sources, so they're  not real picky.  They're rapid growers, so we call them good root colonizers.  So when the plant root system's coming out, they grow really well and they're not so picky  about the plant species as well.  
**[0:41:52-0:41:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:41:52):**  So they're good generalists in that sense.  And they're found everywhere, in the soil in particular.  And so that's the environment they know.  So they're good candidates, but they don't form spores.  And so that's where, just like Ohio State discovered this range of Pseudomonas species,  
**[0:42:13-0:42:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:42:13):**  many other examples of that from both university and industry, very few products have made  it to market because they just don't do well when you try to scale up, manufacture, and  then eventually get them distributed.  They just don't do well.  So most companies don't put any effort into it because they just, it's going to be too  
**[0:42:37-0:42:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:42:37):**  hard, right?  So that's where we decided, okay, let's figure out a way to do this.  And so that was where the technology that we developed, which is where the microbes  are actually grown at the point of use versus having to go through.  So it basically allows you to get around the issues of being in the supply chain.  
**[0:43:02-0:43:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:43:02):**  So they're fresh.  What the farmer gets is a fresh population, just like what the researcher was doing in  their lab, a fresh population.  It's kind of the way that we've approached this, which is very different from kind of  the traditional way to manufacture these types of products.  
**[0:43:19-0:43:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:43:19):**  Right.  And that's your live microbe technology.  You walk people through what that would look like if they had that on their farm, they  can go to the website and check out what it actually looked like, but to visualize for  them, describe what it is.  
**[0:43:35-0:43:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:43:35):**  Yeah.  So basically we talked about microbes when they're in a dry form, they kind of go dormant  and they stay fairly stable for a period of time.  So that's what we start with.  We start with the bacteria, but we only need a small amount.  
**[0:43:53-0:44:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:43:53):**  That is what we put in our cap system as part of this kind of live microbe technology.  Then the other part of the system is liquid and nutrients.  So we keep them in two separate chambers and it's actually, you know, when you're ready  to use the product, you activate it, which means you, we've made it simple to use.  So it's basically push of a button, but then it allows the dry formulation, which has been  
**[0:44:21-0:44:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:44:21):**  stabilized to combine with the liquid and nutrients.  And so when that happens, basically that's when the fermentation starts because the nutrients  kind of come back out of that dormancy and they start to grow because they now have nutrients  and liquid.  And so what that looks like is it's basically a bag and box.  
**[0:44:41-0:44:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:44:41):**  So it's very easy for the grower to use, push of a button.  But then you can pour it once the microbes have grown, which takes about 24 hours to  go through a fermentation cycle.  Then they're ready to use.  It's all contained.  
**[0:44:57-0:45:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:44:57):**  So there's no, you know, we've produced it so that there's no contaminants.  It's contaminant free.  You're growing.  You push the button.  The microbes over 24 hours grow and then it's ready to use.  
**[0:45:07-0:45:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:45:07):**  So you take that liquid and then you can apply it.  You can, depending on your system and how you plan to apply it, you can deliver it as  a liquid.  So it's very easy to use.  The microbes are, you know, 100% viable to start.  
**[0:45:24-0:45:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:45:24):**  They haven't been produced way upstream and gone through viability loss over time.  So you know you're starting with, you know, a very fresh population.  So for these gram-negative microbes like Ohio State had discovered, this is a big deal because  otherwise trying to get them into, you know, to be viable by the time the farmer's using  the product is a very big challenge.  
**[0:45:48-0:45:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:45:48):**  So this is kind of a way to do that with our system.  Because otherwise you're shipping them a jug, probably with dry ice or something, right,  to keep it cooler.  Well, one workaround.  So the technology that we developed is a workaround for this, right, where you're growing them  
**[0:46:06-0:46:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:46:06):**  as close to the point of use as possible.  Another workaround is refrigeration, right.  So yes, you can produce them and then keep them refrigerated and then ship them under  refrigerated conditions.  That's very expensive, not necessarily easy.  
**[0:46:24-0:46:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:46:24):**  But it does prolong their life to be longer than at room temperature or worse if you get  under elevated temperature conditions.  And the main product that 3-Bar has is biostimulant.  Can you talk about what that product is and what's in it, what it would be used for?  Yeah, so these plant growth promoting bacteria that we've been talking about, they can fall  
**[0:46:52-0:46:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:46:52):**  under what's called biostimulants or bio fertilizers in some cases.  In our case with Bio Yield, which is the first product that we commercialized from the strain  we were working with with Ohio State, we know that these bacteria, they produce, like I  said, they produce a range of metabolites.  So these chemistries, some of them help kind of the plant through this range of antibiotic  
**[0:47:17-0:47:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:47:17):**  stresses.  In particular, we see, you know, this cooler, wetter soil can really help boost growth of  the plant through the early stages of growth in those conditions.  It also produces organic acids, which can help with phosphorus solubilization.  So that's one area, any nutrient solubilization in the soil, it can help with the phosphorus  
**[0:47:43-0:47:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:47:43):**  in particular.  Is it primarily then pseudomonas based, I guess?  Yeah, it's a pseudomonas species, yep.  Got it.  And the liquid that you're using to breed it out, is that something just like a sugar  
**[0:47:55-0:47:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:47:55):**  water?  I mean, simplified down, but that's a carbon source?  Yeah, it's a carbon, definitely microbes need carbon and nitrogen, and then a range of salts.  Most growth media that you use in the lab, you know, you can, different microbes grow  best on different media.  
**[0:48:17-0:48:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:48:17):**  We can optimize that in our system, but a good nutrient rich media that you would use  in the lab.  When looking at this, there could be a variety of farmers, somebody who grows corn, somebody  who grows lettuce, somebody who grows strawberries, somebody who grows tomatoes.  Could any of those growers look at this product and say, how could this help me?  
**[0:48:45-0:48:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:48:45):**  Or is it really targeted towards a specific crop?  We definitely have started to collect more data on different crops.  The bacteria, these type, what I call kind of, I hate to call them generalists, but these,  the bacteria that are known, like pseudomonas that are known for associating with plants,  you know, they can provide a range of benefits that are kind of general, the abiotic stress  
**[0:49:15-0:49:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:49:15):**  helping with nutrient uptake, and that, these pseudomonas are very, like I said, they're  not picky about their carbon necessarily, so they do associate with a wide range of  different plant species.  That's not always the case, but in some cases, like with some of these pseudomonas it is,  and so you could use them on, and we have been collecting data, strawberries, we have  
**[0:49:43-0:49:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:49:43):**  some data, other specialty crops, tomatoes, so we continue to work it out with different  plants.  But we started, we started with corn and soybeans because that was kind of where Ohio State  started, so that was kind of where we first went commercially.  In right now, what's the optimum application point?  
**[0:50:04-0:50:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:50:04):**  Is it at, is it in-furrow when you're planting?  Is that where you see the best use of this product?  You know, that's a great question, and that's something, where we have started is applying  it with the seed at planting, so that as that seed germinates and the early root system  forms, the bacteria are right there to grow with it, right?  
**[0:50:28-0:50:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:50:28):**  When you're adding the bacteria to an established root system, that's something that we're actually  investigating right now to see how that looks compared to when you're applying it with the  seed.  The thing to remember, you know, with the precision application with the seed, you know  you've got a lot of microbes right around that seed, so as the root system comes out,  
**[0:50:52-0:50:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:50:52):**  you can, the bacteria can heavily colonize it.  When you're doing like, you know, drip, drip irrigation, things like that where you may  have a point source or even like a soil drench, you may not be getting the microbes close  to the root system, they might be a couple inches away.  With a soil drench, if you're spraying down or doing something like that, now you're diluting  
**[0:51:17-0:51:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:51:17):**  a lot of the bacteria across a wider area, so you may not have as many to start with  that the roots will interact with.  So things to think about around delivery to help these products work better.  I mean, ideally, you know, they're made to, if you're putting them in the soil, they're  made to interact with the plant in the root zone, right?  
**[0:51:38-0:51:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:51:38):**  So you want to have the bacteria at a high concentration in that root zone, regardless.  Right.  For crops that are transplanted, if you look at lettuce and broccoli and stuff like we  have out here in California, other crops like that, would it make sense to apply this in  a nursery setting where you can be hyper focused, you can either apply it when the seed goes  
**[0:51:57-0:52:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:51:57):**  down or just on each little cube of soil that you have right there?  Yeah, no.  I mean, I think the earlier, you know, especially for crops that are kind of vertical and they're  going to go through a cycle, applying them probably multiple times, but early either  with the transplant at a young stage, during transplant, it just depends on, you know,  
**[0:52:26-0:52:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:52:26):**  growers don't want extra steps added.  So it has to fit into existing practices, right?  So if there is, you know, in plugs, you can certainly drench it in, it's right there,  it's a small volume that can work really effectively.  You just have to make sure that as the plant goes along, if you're going to repeat applications  
**[0:52:49-0:52:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:52:49):**  that it needs to be near that root system and not, you know, otherwise you might be  wasting material.  Sure.  With so many microbial products out there and so many people thinking of the upside  and yet worrying about the downside and the cost benefit trade-off, what are questions  
**[0:53:11-0:53:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:53:11):**  you think people should really ask or information they should look for before they seek out  a microbial?  Yeah, you know, and it comes back to what do you really need?  You know, I think for some of the growers in California, you know, there's, those needs  are different than, you know, row crop farmers in the Midwest, right?  
**[0:53:39-0:53:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:53:39):**  So look for products that can kind of meet those needs.  You know, for instance, you know, if drought's an issue or trying to reduce water, there  are microbes that are coming along and I think some on the market that can help, you know,  help the plant through that abiotic stress.  If waterings intermittent, you know, they can help maybe reduce the amount of water  
**[0:54:09-0:54:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:54:09):**  needed.  There's bacteria that can, you know, help the plant through some of those conditions.  That's a need, right?  You know, nutrient, kind of the area where there is a lot of focus right now is in nutrients,  right?  
**[0:54:24-0:54:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:54:24):**  Reducing particularly nitrogen and phosphorus so that we don't have the runoff and contamination  issues from fields.  So there's a lot of research going on around nitrogen being able to fix nitrogen from the  atmosphere.  There's bacteria in nature that do that, but the ability to kind of amplify that and make  
**[0:54:47-0:54:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:54:47):**  it work.  So there's a lot of new microbes coming out, companies spending a good bit to develop better  microbes to do that.  I think one of the things I would caution, you know, there are, you know, there's products  out there that have microbes in them.  
**[0:55:07-0:55:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:55:07):**  And mostly have, you know, they've been produced and have metabolites in them probably that  the microbes produced during their fermentation.  Those products, whether the microbes are alive or not, they contain a lot of metabolites  that can provide benefits.  So these are bioactive compounds that the microbes produce.  
**[0:55:26-0:55:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:55:26):**  And you can see benefit, but, you know, for a living micro product, you do want the micro  to provide kind of extended benefit over time if that micro is added to your system, not  just the chemistry that it produced.  You know, make sure you understand, you know, are the microbes, you know, what level are  they at.  
**[0:55:49-0:55:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:55:49):**  The regulatory framework for these products is coming in the US.  It's a little bit behind some, Europe and some other places around the world, but we  don't monitor the quality of products yet.  So there are micro products that are supposed to have living microbes in them, but they  don't, or they have, you know, contaminants in there or other species that are in there  
**[0:56:12-0:56:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:56:12):**  that shouldn't be.  So the regulatory framework for that's coming, but just be mindful of, you know, what, try  to understand what's in your jug, right?  That it may not be completely living.  One of the tests is if it stinks really bad, you probably have microbes that are on their  
**[0:56:33-0:56:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:56:33):**  way out because they're, you know, they're dying.  So it shouldn't be a bad smelling product if it's fresh and viable.  So just some things to be mindful of when you're using these products.  It seems like a buzzword for a lot of products and it seems like a way that is for people  to sell a lot of product.  
**[0:57:04-0:57:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:57:04):**  And you know, I like what you said about, you know, know what you're actually getting.  Is it living?  Is it the byproducts of those microbes?  Do you have any sense of how many bad players are out there?  Not necessarily intentional, but given that there isn't a framework to say, here's what  
**[0:57:24-0:57:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:57:24):**  it has to be.  And we can say they're in there and there could be one or there could be one billion,  but one is still in there.  Do you, working in this, do you feel like there is a lot of latitude around what these  microbial products are, where people could find themselves in danger of buying something  
**[0:57:45-0:57:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:57:45):**  that's more or less just junk?  Yeah.  And honestly, that's been the issue with this industry is the perception of snake oil, right?  You know, people don't really know what's in the jug and that's a problem.  But what I can say is I think where we are now, and there's a lot of science behind the  
**[0:58:06-0:58:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:58:06):**  products that are, you know, newly on the market, that have been on the market more  recently that, you know, as the frame, as a regulatory framework comes along, that's  going to be the standard, right?  I know some of this, there's been a couple of studies that have looked at product quality.  You know, the Department of Agriculture in Oregon, I think has taken a big lead in monitoring  
**[0:58:33-0:58:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:58:33):**  products in their state.  And some of the data that they have coming out of that work is it's less than, I think  it's less than 40% of products had, you know, were meeting their label in terms of numbers  of the viability numbers, as well as, you know, you said you were going to have these  species in here and you don't, right?  
**[0:58:59-0:59:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:58:59):**  So quality does come down to, you know, meeting your label limits of having so many viable  cells in there, as well as making sure that you have only what you say you have in there,  right?  You don't have contaminants, which is as you scale up manufacturing processes, that becomes  more and more difficult, right, to maintain not having contaminants in there.  
**[0:59:24-0:59:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:59:24):**  And so right now the data doesn't look good.  As an industry, it doesn't look good for us, right?  But what I can say is there's many, many companies out there that are working to, you know, we're  working on innovation and technologies to do way better than kind of what the data says  right now.  
**[0:59:44-0:59:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:59:44):**  So say I go to 3bar and I end up going with your tech, I get it on the farm, I apply it.  Realistically, how should I focus my lens so I have appropriate expectations?  So I think two things right out of the gate is, you know, what you're applying is fresh,  viable, because you just grew it.  So you have that at least, you know what's in your jug, right, from that standpoint.  
**[1:00:22-1:00:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:00:22):**  And then being realistic about what it's meant to do.  And so, you know, certainly our label, the early vigor and, you know, with the microbe  we're using right now and helping with nutrient availability and uptake.  So don't expect, I think, more than what the product's supposed to do and make sure it  aligns with what you need, I think are two ways to kind of level that expectation.  
**[1:00:49-1:00:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:00:49):**  And then try it.  And I think that's been our biggest thing with, at least where we've kind of done some  of our proof of concept work with corn farmers in the Midwest.  We've had some farmers that have found a fit on some of their acres and continue to buy  it year over year, and some that haven't really seen probably the level of benefit.  
**[1:01:10-1:01:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:01:10):**  And it comes back to is it really meeting a need you have, right?  So that's kind of where we start with our growers is making sure there's a right fit,  have them try it, and usually try it for a couple years because of the variability you  get year to year with climate and so forth.  If somebody did have a question about fit usage, do you have people that they can call  
**[1:01:36-1:01:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:01:36):**  up and talk to and say, hey, here's what I'm trying to do, here's what I have?  One other thing is along that line of farmer observation, is that a big key to really advancing  this industry of you need some farmers who are willing to kind of go out on a limb, take  a chance, and do their own split testing so they can see does this work, does this not  work?  
**[1:02:06-1:02:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:02:06):**  I'm going to compare it against, I'm applying it on plot A, plot B is very similar in terms  of soil structure and everything else, and I'm going to look at A versus B and just see  what happens here.  I feel like anybody doing any amendment of significance that offers some sort of benefit  like this, the only way you're going to convince yourself at the end of the day is by looking  
**[1:02:29-1:02:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:02:29):**  at, okay, I control and then applied, do I notice a difference, do I see a difference,  do I taste a difference, whatever that variable is.  Yeah, for sure.  And that's where I think the farmers that are doing that by, they're trying different  things, they're kind of pushing, looking at new technologies.  
**[1:02:52-1:02:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:02:52):**  I think right now where we are with biologicals, that's mainly the farmers that are kind of  using them and experimenting with them.  And it's going to take, we're at the early stages of technology adoption, right?  So it's going to take some of that experiment on the farm to see where it fits, how it fits.  One of the struggles I have is we're not going to have a market unless farmers are buying  
**[1:03:21-1:03:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:03:21):**  these products, right?  And so there's farmers trying them, some early adopters, but the research, what we haven't  seen necessarily with, there are some university researchers, agronomists working with these  products, but not a lot.  Education has historically kind of been where some of these new technologies get vetted  
**[1:03:51-1:03:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:03:51):**  out.  And just kind of the nature of funding and there's not a lot of research going on.  There's more coming down the pipeline within universities, but not a lot.  But I think farmers rely on that research too.  So I think more of that in the US is needed, more funding for the universities to do that  
**[1:04:17-1:04:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:04:17):**  I think will help strengthen the industry at large and give farmers maybe a little bit  more confidence in some of these products.  But otherwise it really is the farmers trying things, but then also the industry carrying  a lot of the load of industry, both companies and distributors doing a lot of this testing.  Right.  
**[1:04:40-1:04:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:04:40):**  Just looking at your crystal ball here, if you looked ahead 10 years, seeing how everything's  advancing on the day to day, what do you think the biological microbial space and ag is going  to look like?  Yeah, I think I'm just amazed at technology is moving fast right now because we have these  tools to utilize, right?  
**[1:05:06-1:05:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:05:06):**  Technology tools, things that have evolved very rapidly over the last 5, 10, 15 years.  So the ability to discover and the speed of that is quickening.  I have an example I use and I've used in a presentation before looking at kind of over  the last 20 years, it took the screening processes of naturally occurring microbes, isolating  them, work that like Ohio State did and other universities have done, screening out, figuring  
**[1:05:42-1:05:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:05:42):**  out ones that work, timelines of kind of 15, 20 plus years to get a product to market.  And what we're seeing now with some of the industry players and applying some of these  biotechnology tools and genetic engineering tools, that timeline is shrinking to like  less than 10 years to do that foundational work, get a candidate, test it out and get  it to market.  
**[1:06:11-1:06:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:06:11):**  So I think we're going to see, continue to see the acceleration of technology in this  area, biotechnology tools being used.  And then the big one that I think may be the step changes that we're hoping for is when  you start to bring the plant and the microbe together more intentionally to provide that  bigger advantage.  
**[1:06:36-1:06:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:06:36):**  So you're basically doing the biotechnology work both with the plant and the microbe or  microbes, multiple strains to really create a system.  I think that's where the next 10 years, we'll be talking about it more holistically as a  system.  And that research is underway in quite a few places.  
**[1:07:01-1:07:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:07:01):**  Interesting stuff.  And for somebody who likes what you're talking about here and likes what you guys have to  offer, what's about the rough cost per acre of application at this point?  Yeah, it varies.  It depends and it varies.  
**[1:07:14-1:07:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:07:14):**  One of the things we have always strived for is return on investment for the farmer.  And so we've focused on keeping costs, trying to keep costs down.  And so for at least what we're doing with our product with a precision application,  right?  So it's going with the seed at planting.  
**[1:07:37-1:07:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:07:37):**  It's roughly between $4 to $5 an acre.  So it's fairly low cost input for a row crop farmer.  But products certainly can get into the $20 to $30 per acre range as well.  Got it.  And if people want to learn more about everything that you guys are doing, where's the best  
**[1:08:01-1:08:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:08:01):**  place that they can go?  Yeah.  I mean, our website is a great place, which is www.3barbiologics.com.  If you're just interested in these microbial types of products and what they are, biologics  in general, we do have a great industry association that has a good bit of educational information.  
**[1:08:30-1:08:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:08:30):**  And that's Biological Products Industry Association, so BPIA.  You can find that out on the internet.  And just lots of great resources beyond that.  So websites and whatnot that are some universities that have some educational material out as  well.  
**[1:08:49-1:08:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:08:49):**  So it's an area that's definitely, like I said, kind of at the beginning of more utilizing  technology.  And these products are going to get better and better as time goes on.  And we're just really starting to understand how to better use these products, how to better  deliver them to make a difference.  
**[1:09:10-1:09:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-16-JaneFife-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:09:10):**  So if you are interested, certainly start to do some research and think about the importance.  Don't forget the importance of how you're delivering it because you do want to make  sure that what you're putting in the field is going to be effective.  Thank you.  