### In Search of Soil  (2021-00-18)
**[0:00:00-0:00:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:00:00):**  So we meet again.  Biochar.  Is it worth the hype?  That's what we're talking about in this episode of In Search of Soil with Dr. Kurt Spokas  of the USDA.  
**[0:00:30-0:00:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:00:30):**  In this episode, we're going to be talking about the knowns of biochar because Dr. Spokas  has looked at a lot of these studies out there on biochar.  And today we're going to try and aggregate all of his knowledge and what he's seen in  those studies together to figure out what do we actually know about biochar?  Is it a net positive or is it just a big waste of time?  
**[0:00:55-0:01:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:00:55):**  If you were ever on the fence about biochar in the past, I think this episode will help  get you off the fence and firmly planted either in the side of I'm interested in that or I'll  wait till we know more.  So let's get into it.  Biochar, the scientific knowns with Dr. Kurt Spokas.  
**[0:01:15-0:01:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:01:15):**  This is In Search of Soil.  I was looking at some of your past presentations that you did about 10 years ago on biochar.  How has your knowledge in thinking about biochar changed based upon research and findings over  the last decade or has it not changed?  Well, it really hasn't changed that much.  
**[0:01:39-0:01:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:01:39):**  Despite the fact that we've added now 10 more years of research to our collective knowledge,  there are still more questions than there are definitive answers.  One particular comes down to the mechanisms behind what we see as the biochar effects.  What are some of the big questions out there right now that still remain around biochar?  Well, the biggest questions are fundamentally how it's working.  
**[0:02:07-0:02:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:02:07):**  When we see positive yield responses, when we see increases in soil fertility factors,  what are the true mechanisms behind these positive effects that we've been seeing that  are still the fundamental missing piece that we've been searching for?  What's the challenge at this point to answering that question?  Is it our understanding of soil microbiology?  
**[0:02:36-0:02:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:02:36):**  Is it just there's a lot of variables at play here and it's hard to isolate them down?  Why can't we answer that question?  The biggest challenge is the soil itself, ignoring for biochar additions right now,  soil itself is a very complex system.  It has so many other factors that come to play to make the productive soil besides the  
**[0:03:00-0:03:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:03:00):**  chemistry, biology, the plant physiology, the climate.  We have a difficult time figuring out where biochar fits into this whole picture because  we don't know what mechanisms are at play.  So we really don't know how to come up with a guidance yet based on a deficiency of the  soil per se.  
**[0:03:23-0:03:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:03:23):**  We're getting closer to some of these things.  We do know some of the positive attributes of soil moisture content.  There's some physical changes to the structure, the packing of the soil, following additions.  We've seen some alterations in the soil microbial relations, but putting all of those factors  together in a predictive tool to say what will be after a particular biochar addition  
**[0:03:54-0:03:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:03:54):**  to a particular soil.  We're still a ways from that.  Is it something that you'd say right now we could view it as more of a positive than a  negative even though we can't quantify how positive?  Is it a plus or is it a minus or is it a neutral?  
**[0:04:17-0:04:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:04:17):**  It really boils down, if we look at the whole history of our biochar research that exists  in the literature.  We have about 50% of these studies show a positive effect, about 30% show no effect,  and 20% are negative.  So it really boils down to right now it's a kind of 50-50 statistical basis if we use  
**[0:04:41-0:04:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:04:41):**  the entire suite of literature available.  There are things that alter that, of course.  If we know that the soil is deficient or if we're adding biochar to a highly acidic soil,  we tend to see more positive effects for agricultural productivity.  But those are isolated instances and we can't take that result and extrapolate it to all  
**[0:05:04-0:05:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:05:04):**  agricultural soils.  One thing I try and, or one way I try and think about biochar is this.  At worst, you're sequestering carbon that is a byproduct from something, tree pruning,  lumber scraps, the nut industry, and you're sequestering that carbon in the soil.  And that inherently, like you mentioned, is going to change the tilth.  
**[0:05:35-0:05:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:05:35):**  There's going to be some moisture holding capacity to it.  And if it only did that, that's your win.  And I look at the negative of being, well, what did you have to put in to generate that?  Meaning there's some time involved, there's some equipment involved, there's some costs  involved.  
**[0:05:55-0:06:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:05:55):**  And if you can do that in a simple way, I see it as more positive than negative.  Are there any negatives that I'm leaving out here that I'm missing, like ways that this  could potentially hurt growth?  There's the difficulty, there's been some isolated studies in literature that show that  the biochar is created at an extremely low temperature, and you have a high amount of  
**[0:06:25-0:06:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:06:25):**  absorbed volatile organics from the paralysis, that that addition of that char has negative  impacts.  But we do know those aspects of the negative char and the absorbed organics on there causing  these negative impacts.  The more puzzling feature is what it's doing with the whole nutrient availability.  
**[0:06:49-0:06:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:06:49):**  There's still a lot of questions in terms of the long-term impact that this char could  have on nutrient availability.  It's been positive in some certain circumstances, but we've only measured it over a short-term  duration.  And if this char material is lasting in the soil for a longer term, we really need to  
**[0:07:12-0:07:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:07:12):**  understand the mechanisms in order to forecast what is the true impact of this addition in  the soils.  I know that's one of the things you were looking at was the nitrogen cycle in biochar.  Can you talk a little bit about the research that you've done in that area?  So that was one of the things that got me started in this whole biochar research area,  
**[0:07:35-0:07:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:07:35):**  was the impact that scientists started seeing on the nitrous oxide production.  The part to me that is so fascinating still to this day about biochar is that it is, in  some circumstances, a better suppressor of nitrous oxide production than some of our  known chemical inhibitors.  Meaning that when we add biochar to soil, we get a greater decrease in production of  
**[0:08:01-0:08:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:08:01):**  nitrous oxide than we do when we actually add chemical inhibitors for known enzymatic  processes for the N2O production.  This to me has always been the fascinating aspect of biochar.  How could it actually be more effective than some of our chemical inhibitors that are inhibiting  chemical transformation processes?  
**[0:08:25-0:08:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:08:25):**  So that to me indicates that biochar is doing more than just one aspect of this whole puzzle.  That there has to be multiple facets to its interaction in the soil.  Given that promise that it's showing around nitrous oxide reductions, do you think you  could see it becoming a part of a chemical fertilization program where NRCS, somebody  is encouraging the use of biochar to mitigate some of those emissions?  
**[0:09:03-0:09:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:09:03):**  Potentially.  That's outside of my realm a little bit in terms of the policy and setting regulatory  directions.  In terms of the science, we need to understand that predictably so then that information  gets fed into the policymakers.  
**[0:09:23-0:09:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:09:23):**  And right now that's the piece of the puzzle that's a little bit convoluted.  We don't exactly know precisely what the char that we are needing to create that suppression.  And then we don't know how long that suppression is going to last long term.  So still a lot of unknowns.  And let's step back, zoom out a little bit.  
**[0:09:47-0:09:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:09:47):**  One of the things that I know you've looked at from going through some of the research  you've did is different forms of biochar.  So all biochar is not created equal.  You could use different feed materials, you can create them at different temperatures.  Can you talk about the variability of biochar and how all biochar is an equal?  
**[0:10:08-0:10:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:10:08):**  And if you say biochar, it's kind of like saying food when food is meat, it's dairy,  and it's fruit.  So the best analogy that I use when I'm talking to people about biochar is it's very similar  to receiving a recipe and an ingredients for baking a cake.  Everyone would have the exact same ingredients.  
**[0:10:30-0:10:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:10:30):**  They're following the directions exactly of the mixing time, the time it takes to bake  at a certain temperature.  But everyone's cake wouldn't taste the same.  There's just little nuances involved in the cooking process that results and magnifies  itself in different tastes and different textures of the final cooked or baked product.  
**[0:10:52-0:10:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:10:52):**  This is very similar and analogous to biochar.  Even though we have biochars that are created under the exact same conditions, there are  other factors that go into the final product, just like in the baking analogy.  So even though you might have a laboratory creating a biochar at 500 degrees Celsius,  if we take that exact same apparatus now out of the lab into a field setting, it's still  
**[0:11:19-0:11:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:11:19):**  set to create the char at 500 degrees.  But we've seen different chemical sorption capacities, different nutrient availabilities  in those chars as a function of the different environments that those chars were created  in.  You know, the difference is enough to make it hard to really interpret results.  
**[0:11:41-0:11:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:11:41):**  So it's one thing to say, well, it's slightly more absorptive or it has a slightly higher  cation exchange capacity.  Or is there a big difference between some of these?  Some of them, it's so variable that there's no universal guidance.  There are some that are very small, non-significant differences.  
**[0:12:01-0:12:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:12:01):**  There are some that are statistically significant, but they have very low true value difference.  By that, I mean if they're within the same order of magnitude, it's really not going  to have a different response in the soil.  But there are those examples out there.  Again, it's not the vast majority.  
**[0:12:19-0:12:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:12:19):**  It's the small portion of chars that do act very strangely, even though that they were  created under the conditions of chars that we understood their behavior or we thought  we could predict their behavior.  Is this one of the reasons why it's really hard to get a handle on the efficacy of biochar?  Is it because you do have all these different types of char functioning somewhat differently?  
**[0:12:48-0:12:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:12:48):**  So you try and have somebody replicate a study, but if their definition of the biochar they're  using is different than what the original study used, they may see these different results.  So you end up with non-correlating studies.  That's what confounds science is the irreproducibility of this.  The fact that I can conduct a...  
**[0:13:14-0:13:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:13:14):**  What I do a lot with the biochars, put them in soil incubations and look at the alteration  in greenhouse gas production potentials.  And it basically is mixing a little bit of biochar with soil, sealing them in a serum  vial and looking at the gas production with time.  The fact that that simple laboratory study depends on if I started them in the winter  
**[0:13:37-0:13:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:13:37):**  or the summer here in Minnesota, that has a corresponding effect on the gas production  potentials I measure.  I don't fully understand what's causing those differences.  If it's just relative humidity, whether it's the age of the char from the time it was produced,  the time the study was run, those are all the missing bits we're still lacking in this.  
**[0:14:03-0:14:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:14:03):**  One thing I've heard some people talk about around biochar is it can age over time and  oxidize.  Do you see that?  You have biochar you just produced and then that sits on a shelf for 12 months or longer.  You use it in the same study and you see potentially different results?  
**[0:14:21-0:14:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:14:21):**  Yes.  And that's been one of the most frustrating parts of this is that the char itself oxidizes,  whether we have it in soil or if it's sitting up on a shelf in a sealed container, if that  container has oxygen present, these reactions do occur at different rates, depending on  the temperature, depending on the storage conditions of that char.  
**[0:14:48-0:14:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:14:48):**  We still are lacking whether, how do we keep a char for three months or for a year to be  the exact same material that we had on day zero.  These are all factors that are confounding the scientific part of it.  Granted, some of these differences are non-significant, but we've known through time some of the initial  studies on carbon sorption showed four or five orders of magnitude change in the sorption  
**[0:15:18-0:15:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:15:18):**  capability of the material just to nitrogen over a period of one year.  So these are all facets that we don't understand yet how to subdivide or segregate the important  shape to the state.  I have a piece of biochar right here, and it's sitting on a shelf and time goes by.  I think I'd look at it and say, hey, that's just a piece of carbon with some other materials  
**[0:15:49-0:15:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:15:49):**  in it.  How is it changing?  Like what's changing on it just sitting there when it's oxidizing or other things are happening  to it, just being exposed to the air chemically, physically, what's the difference?  So these things are happening on the microscopic scale where appearance wise, it's going to  
**[0:16:10-0:16:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:16:10):**  look fairly identical over a period of the year.  There are certain chars that if they are produced at around 550 to 600 degrees C, and if you  keep them in a humid environment, they will break down physically just due to the interaction  with water vapor as well.  So this goes back to some of the old charcoal studies where you saw char that turns into  
**[0:16:36-0:16:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:16:36):**  power with time.  And these are all physical changes.  The chemical changes are more difficult to quantify because our eyes don't pick up on  a lot of them.  And some of them are just structural opening and closing of pores that lead to different  
**[0:16:57-0:17:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:16:57):**  surfaces being exposed during studies.  So it's one of the facets, I still don't have a table that I can say this percentage is  due to oxygen, this percentage is due to relative humidity, this percentage is just due to time  and chemical evaporation.  Those are things that are still lacking in terms of overall guidance.  
**[0:17:21-0:17:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:17:21):**  Do you think maybe science has got a little cart before the horse here where we're trying  to use it in agricultural plant-based studies to see what it does when it affects plant  growth is looking a little past what we know since you can't quantify how it ages, you  can't really determine what the best material is at the best time of year until those are  more knowns?  
**[0:17:48-0:17:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:17:48):**  Seems to me like why even research it's interactions with plant growth until you know more about  what the input itself is and how it behaves?  Things we hope to advance with science is through multiple studies we begin to come  to that unified idea like you're saying before, are these factors truly driving factors or  not?  
**[0:18:15-0:18:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:18:15):**  Are they more cosmetic and just of scientific importance but the practical importance would  be lower?  Those are the fundamental questions that we're still trying to search for.  The complication is when we compile data we have different types of chars produced, different  parolicizers, different laboratories and without having the fundamental estimates of their  
**[0:18:47-0:18:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:18:47):**  differences it's hard to then take that and assemble and say well here is a mechanism  that's occurring on char A compared to char B. So it's one of the biggest hurdles yet  is understanding this reproducible and predictability of the biochar response.  Which is probably even tough in and of itself over time because if you're making biochar  ideally locally, if you're making it in Minnesota, I'm making it in San Diego, somebody else  
**[0:19:21-0:19:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:19:21):**  is making it in Florida, you probably have all different available waste feedstock to  use, we're all going to end up with something different even if we use the same equipment  to make it and we're all in different climates so now you have kind of this study where nothing's  the same even though it all set out to be the same.  Correct and even if we look at a species of wood, if we say well everyone use maple or  
**[0:19:49-0:19:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:19:49):**  oak at their particular location because those trees were grown in different soils under  different climates their mineral content is different and whether or not that is a fundamental  factor in all this is still open for debate.  What about this, if we look at the litany of materials out there we could make this  from manure to macadamia nut hulls to sawdust up through lumber, can you go out on a limb  
**[0:20:24-0:20:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:20:24):**  and say if we're looking at this for agricultural purposes is there a sweet spot of materials  where we don't know for sure what's probably going to make the best biochar agriculturally  but it's going to be more this over this?  The only problem with that is it depends on what the soil is deficient in.  If we're looking at a soil that's deficient in nutrients then the manure based biochars  
**[0:20:57-0:20:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:20:57):**  are going to be better.  If we're looking for a char that is extraordinarily strong that we're trying to change the soil  physical properties for water holding or for tillage and non-compacting then some of the  feedstocks that have more rigid lignin, the hardwood or even some of the swine manure  based biochars have been shown to be higher physical properties than those that are created  
**[0:21:25-0:21:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:21:25):**  from straight biomass sources.  And then if we're looking at increasing silica content in a soil then it would be a grass  based biochar.  So that's one of the biggest difficulties in this arena is there isn't going to be a  single type that's going to be universal across all soils.  
**[0:21:49-0:21:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:21:49):**  It's going to be dependent on the soil deficiencies in that area and if we can target or design  a biochar to relieve those deficiencies that's the ones they see having the biggest positive  economic impact.  Just side stepping a little bit, silica deficient soils making biochar out of grass, where would  you see soils like that and why would you need to up the silica content?  
**[0:22:21-0:22:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:22:21):**  Well silica is one of the good natural absorbers of soil moisture and so then that would be  the corresponding formula for those soils.  That would increase the silica content, would also increase the water holding capacity on  a chemical surface effect.  So that's the reason why those would be targeted.  
**[0:22:45-0:22:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:22:45):**  SEG grew grass and I was going to harvest that and make biochar to dry it out, make  the biochar and I did that and I applied that to the soil and then I did alternative B which  is I grew that grass and I just tilled that grass in, would that same silica be entering  the soil the same way or would you see a difference?  It would be the same, there would be slight total content differences because you might  
**[0:23:12-0:23:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:23:12):**  lose a little bit with pyrolysis on a per mass basis but overall it'd still be the silicon  oxide that you're adding.  If you look at all these different materials out there and really what we know about biochar,  if I had a bucket of knowns, are there knowns agriculturally that we can say okay we can  generally say these are in the known bucket, like it'll help increase moisture holding  
**[0:23:44-0:23:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:23:44):**  capacity in the soil, it'll help aerate soils and it's going to sequester carbon even though  we don't understand everything and there is all this variability and it can change, would  you say all three of those are knowns, it's just the specificity of those knowns might  vary?  I'd probably say the degree to which we're absolutely certain in them vary.  
**[0:24:08-0:24:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:24:08):**  The fact that it sequesters carbon is almost undisputed.  We do create a more stabilized carbon form that is positive for sequestering carbon.  The more of the arguments on that topic is whether or not that carbon behaves like soil  organic carbon which is typically viewed as available to microbes to undergo transformation.  The data so far indicates that no it's more structural carbon where that carbon really  
**[0:24:42-0:24:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:24:42):**  doesn't participate in the biogeochemical cycle which is the primary motive for sequestering  carbon by that mechanism to chemically alter it so that it's not available to microbes.  So that side of it is pretty much undisputed that we do create more stabilized carbon.  The alteration in water holding, we see that I would say maybe 75 to 80 percent of the  time of the studies.  
**[0:25:12-0:25:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:25:12):**  There are the few that when it's added there is no or a negative impact and that's really  what I've been kind of focused on trying to figure out well why do we see that negative  impact with those charts.  So it actually makes like a hydrophobic effect in the soil?  Not necessarily hydrophobic it's just that it reduces the water availability even though  
**[0:25:36-0:25:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:25:36):**  the water is still there it's just not as available to plants as we think it should  be based on that soil texture.  So thinking of those three knowns that have that different degree is there anything else  you'd put in the known bucket of biochar has a degree of known around this that's above  50 percent?  
**[0:26:01-0:26:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:26:01):**  For the agricultural uses I'd say that's probably it.  There's more sound scientific evidence now for the construction and as a material addition  for concrete for fiber boards those results are appearing to be more positive because  they are more reproducible that leads to our ability to predict what its behavior will  be but for the soils are just because the three knowns that you mentioned.  
**[0:26:37-0:26:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:26:37):**  If people look at a piece of charcoal they hold in their hand and they look at it and  squish it up it wants to break and it looks somewhat similar feels somewhat similar to  say something like perlite.  Could you see it is a substitute in a potting mix to perform similar functions or in is  if you did do that again we go back to the negative side are you are you potentially  
**[0:27:01-0:27:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:27:01):**  risking something by putting it in there?  There is a another research group within the agricultural research service in Peoria Illinois  and that actually is one of the items that they are investigating is it says substitute  for two vermiculites in potting mixes and their results so far have been very positive  and I don't have further knowledge on that unfortunately but I do believe that they're  
**[0:27:30-0:27:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:27:30):**  finding that it is a substitute for vermiculite in the potting soil mixes.  When you look at studies that you've done and other people have done how much does rate  of application play into things from applying I mean here is the challenge of big ag you  have a thousand acres you want to put biochar on it well if you are doing a heavy dose that  is a lot of biochar and a lot of time to spread it all.  
**[0:28:01-0:28:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:28:01):**  Ideally we would like to use just a little bit and see some effect is it something where  you think you need to use a lot to see a significant effect or can a small amount make a significant  effect based on what you know?  Based on our knowledge right now is it appears like all the studies have been targeting between  0.5 and 1.5 percent by volume biochar additions that's still a fairly substantial addition  
**[0:28:39-0:28:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:28:39):**  but in order for the studies to see significant effects that has been the application rate  that most people have been targeting.  Once we understand the mechanism of action we'll be able to optimize the production and  that's when we'll be able to bring down the application rates.  So people often say well why do you worry about a mechanism for biochar why don't we  
**[0:29:06-0:29:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:29:06):**  just apply it and off we go with sequestering carbon.  It comes down to that very issue whereas if we don't understand how it's working there's  no way to fundamentally optimize it and we get it down to the absolute minimum amendment  size so we can make it profitable and economical for application.  Does it fall into the category of more might be better more pizza is better than less pizza  
**[0:29:37-0:29:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:29:37):**  more compost is better than less compost more biochar is better than less biochar?  Not always a lot of times the response decreases with application rate and again we don't fully  understand the mechanisms behind that and for each char the optimal amendment rate appears  to be different so those are still I'd say outstanding scientific questions.  One of the things I hear people often say is when you first make it after pyrolysis  
**[0:30:14-0:30:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:30:14):**  it's just char and you need to add the bio to it so it needs to be have biology introduced  to it in some way.  What have been your impressions that you've seen in studies of I take char straight out  of a pyrolysis kiln and I apply it to the soil versus I do something to that I soak  it in a manure tea I run into compost pile I inoculate it with biology is that something  
**[0:30:46-0:30:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:30:46):**  you view as that's an important step and there is a difference between an activated or living  biochar versus one straight out of the kiln?  If we're just talking about taking a char and adding it to soil for plant effects then  I would definitely say the preconditioning whether it be in the compost tea the nutrient  solutions those studies have led to more positive effects than the studies that just take the  
**[0:31:17-0:31:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:31:17):**  straight char and apply it to soil without the preconditioning or preloading effect.  The downside is we fundamentally don't understand the mechanisms yet by which that enrichment  occurs we can't say that while it's making nitrogen twice as available or it's going  to last for 10 years at that increased availability load those are still the questions that we're  trying to answer as to what's occurring during these preconditioning phases.  
**[0:31:53-0:32:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:31:53):**  If you have a piece of biochar here sitting here and I do say introduce it to a nutrient  solution what are the properties unique to the char that make nutrients want to attach  to it how can it actually absorb the nutrients and this kind of lends into why we may want  to use it in agricultural soils?  The mechanisms are primarily due to surface chemical absorption due to anion exchange  
**[0:32:25-0:32:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:32:25):**  where you have the nitrate nitrite be attracted to the negative side of the positive side  of the char being attracted to the negative species.  For ammonia it's the cation exchange capacity would control the sorption capacity.  For phosphorus it appears from the literature to date to correlate with the calcium content  present in the char relates to how much phosphorus that char can absorb so it really boils down  
**[0:32:57-0:33:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:32:57):**  to the surface chemistry of the char that controls the amount of nutrients absorption.  There's some out there that feel that the char absorbs pore water so like if you put  it in an enriched nitrogen solution that water permeates into the char then that nitrate  that's uncaptured with that water is then available.  All of these mechanisms are at play we still don't have the flow chart to divide up saying  
**[0:33:27-0:33:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:33:27):**  well this one is 10% capture 20% surface chemistry 80% precipitation or whatever it turns out  to be.  One of the common thoughts around that line is biochar it absorbs the stuff it has a massive  surface area but organic matter in the soil itself has a lot of surface area.  Do you have a sense of regular organic matter not pyrolyzed and then char of is there a  
**[0:34:00-0:34:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:34:00):**  significant surface area difference between the two and is there a different anion cation  exchange capacity between the two?  Because it's a lot easier to add organic matter to the soil if we can get the same pore space  the same tilth the same water holding capacity from organic matter why go through the trouble  of making biochar if we put aside well this carbon is more recalcitrant it's going to  
**[0:34:24-0:34:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:34:24):**  sit there longer so if we just throw that argument out if we just look at it from water  holding capacity pore space nutrient holding capacity biochar versus organic matter is  there a difference?  The fundamental difference in that comparison would boil down to the longevity of how long  that material would survive in the soil.  
**[0:34:46-0:34:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:34:46):**  By adding just straight organic matter we'd be looking at zero to maybe five six years  with biochar we're hoping to extend those effects for decades to centuries to millennia.  And that's one thing I didn't realize until I started looking at some of your presentations  is there's actually a wide band of how long people think this biochar can be available  in the soil.  
**[0:35:14-0:35:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:35:14):**  I think there's one slide you had that showed a lot of studies of a hundred years up through  ten thousand years.  What's your current opinion in terms of where it is and what affects how long that carbon  could sit in the soil?  From the research to date it definitely has a residency time that exceeds ten to fifty  
**[0:35:38-0:35:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:35:38):**  years after that it gets into more of a modeling predictability and how well do we feel that  we've captured the degradable portion of that char has it fully degraded everything that  it's going to and it's plateaued.  Those are where we're left with these arguments over if it's been a hundred years or if it's  a thousand or millennia.  
**[0:36:03-0:36:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:36:03):**  It's really a difficult question to answer because we don't have the data set that we'd  really like to substantiate those projections but based on what we know in terms of organic  carbon cycling and modeling in the soil system we have a fairly confident interval that we  know that's lasting hundreds of years at the minimum.  Just as part of the carbon cycle what is it about the carbon and biochar that makes it  
**[0:36:33-0:36:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:36:33):**  unique so you have you have fungi decomposer fungi that go in and they'll break down cellulose  they'll break down lignans with enzymes that they secrete and then you get lower order  fungi that'll come through and then maybe the lower order sugars that those fungi have  produced.  Why can they not go at char and break that down?  
**[0:36:55-0:37:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:36:55):**  What don't they like about that or what makes that carbon difficult compared to un-pyrrolyzed  piece of wood?  So the primary difference is the chemical makeup.  So in sugars, carbohydrates, hemicellulose, lignan you have carbon that is partially aromatized  meaning that it's the double bonds are almost fully conjugated but they're not completely  
**[0:37:20-0:37:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:37:20):**  conjugated systems.  When you pyrolyze those organic starting materials through the process of pyrolysis due to the  fact that you're adding energy you end up creating a more stabilized carbon structure  which is a conjugated aromatic carbon backbone where it's almost just pure carbon.  There's not any substituted groups on the benzene rings.  
**[0:37:50-0:37:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:37:50):**  They all end up getting condensed down to just the carbon graphitic hexagonal structure.  That then leads to the higher energy requirement for the enzymes to break down or to destroy  those carbon bonds require a higher energy input from the enzyme and as long as there's  another carbon source available there would be no reason why the enzyme would go after  that higher energy output than it would need to get the same carbon that it gets from the  
**[0:38:25-0:38:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:38:25):**  less aromatic materials.  I don't know if you know the answer to this but if that sits in the soil for a very very  long time hundreds thousands of years based on the modeling is it like a stone on a beach  shore the waves just batter it over time and eventually all that battering slowly breaks  down that rock is that's what's happening to that char like in a moment of time the  
**[0:38:55-0:39:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:38:55):**  enzymes from the fungi are going to say there's easier sources I'm not going to go for this  but that charge is going to come in contact with some enzymes they phase it you know a  tiny bit and then the next one phases a little bit more and then you add up all those little  phases over a very very long period of time and eventually it is now broken down.  Correct but the rate of that degradation is so long that that's why we consider it sequestered  
**[0:39:21-0:39:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:39:21):**  carbon because the carbon is removed from the biogeochemical cycle that occurs under  very fast time periods to this longer time period where it's just a very slow transition  there's no material that is resistance to break down and degradation in the environment  everything breaks down with time it's just the rate at which it's breaking down for bio  char is significantly slower than it is for any other organic material.  
**[0:39:57-0:40:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:39:57):**  So in a perfect agricultural world you're adding this and fresh organic material to  a soil to keep those soils productive so it's kind of like I'm saying I'm paying some now  I'm paying some down the line I keep long-term carbon in the soil for generations ahead but  I'm also feeding myself today.  Correct and that trade-off is really the balance of how much carbon we want to sequester in  
**[0:40:30-0:40:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:40:30):**  the soil in the system over just adding organic materials we'd have to keep adding more and  more organic materials to keep ahead of that degradation but it's kind of a self-perpetuating  cycle the more material we add the higher the microbial population becomes the faster  the rate of degradation with char we hope to intersect that feedback loop where we could  add more stabilized carbon but the rate of mineralization of that carbon will still remain  
**[0:41:03-0:41:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:41:03):**  very low.  We know that if we add organic material to the soil like you just said that that will  stimulate microbial growth are there any studies out there that you're aware of that show a  corresponding relationship between adding biochar in some microbial group like when  you add biochar to the soil they've seen a tick up in some microbial group that makes  
**[0:41:29-0:41:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:41:29):**  up the soil microbiology?  There I mean there's been studies that have shown differences in select groups of micro  but that's not a universal of predictability yet or we can say that the pseudomonas bacteria  is increased by biochar there are select groups that are more adept at degrading aromatic  carbon that we do see their stimulation when we add char to soils but the magnitude of  
**[0:42:03-0:42:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:42:03):**  the increase depends on the remainder of the population or what the original soil's activity  was before we added the char.  One of the things that drew me and likely a lot of people into biochar are articles  about the Amazonian dark soils terra preta and you have these pictures descriptions some  of it feels like hyperbole, puffery that these deep black soils supported a big population  
**[0:42:35-0:42:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:42:35):**  in the Amazon due to this char being in the soil how much credibility does terra preta  and those Amazonian soils deserve for the publicity that they've received like is there  something really significant there from biochar and did those people know something about  char that we don't or does it just happen that there's a lot of char in those soils?  So it's a lot of the interpretation of the scientific evidence right now the Amazon forest  
**[0:43:15-0:43:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:43:15):**  does have these rich deposits of the terra preta earth or these black earth that have  higher charcoal content than neighboring soils several of these deposits are also located  where we found archaeological evidence of old tribal settlements there was the first  connection with the terra preta that these were intentionally produced regions for agricultural  productivity that the Amazonian natives purposely added biochar to the soil to increase its  
**[0:43:51-0:44:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:43:51):**  productivity it's a conclusion that is supported by the evidence we do find pottery fragments  there are evidence of settlement near these terra preta sites however there are other  terra preta sites that are devoid of any anthropogenic evidence so that all of a sudden leads to  a potential conflict that maybe these terra preta soils have a different origin pathway  than solely anthropogenic inputs I often say to people when they mention the Amazonian  
**[0:44:30-0:44:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:44:30):**  soils is that we have to remember how these areas were settled we didn't have large mechanistic  clearing of forests so as these Amazonian tribes were moving they would settle in areas  that were already clear-cut by a natural process such as the fire in the Amazonian forest that  would be a natural deforestation that would allow them to have their settlement and to  grow their crop without having to cut and harvest trees in order to make agricultural  
**[0:45:02-0:45:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:45:02):**  land clearings so all of these facets it's impossible for us to conclude what the true  mechanism of the soil formation was but there is the hypothesis that the Amazonians intentionally  added it based on the evidence of how thick these deposits are some of them are over three  meters approaching 12 feet to have this uniform mixing and the lack of the stratification  that we would anticipate with time really lends to me to other potential natural phenomena  
**[0:45:40-0:45:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:45:40):**  that have created some of these locations I'm not discounting that the Amazonian natives  utilize these areas or that they were rich in agricultural productivity it's just the  overall hypothesis that it was solely the char addition that led to the increase in  productivity is the case that we're truly missing so somebody using that as site one  evidence of this is why we should add this to agriculture there may be selectively interpreting  
**[0:46:16-0:46:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:46:16):**  the data for what they want it to be versus seeing a more holistic picture on what those  soils actually were that's kind of what I'm hearing it could correct I mean it's more  if get back to my first comments about we don't really know why those charcoal fragments  were added to the soil if we had some evidence that they were added purposely that would  have contributed to the scientific basis for the argument saying that yep these did in  
**[0:46:47-0:46:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:46:47):**  fact increase agricultural productivity but we're lacking that evidence in terms of the  archaeological records so that's the missing piece in all this we have inferred their addition  because we found that there are co-located on these sites but we just don't really know  the true answer yet if that was the intentional purpose or if it was more of a side effect  that oh there was a natural clearing event then the amazonians settled in that area and  
**[0:47:19-0:47:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:47:19):**  they used that land which was then found to be productive so we don't know what they did  then but we can look at that now from our own lens do you know if people gone and looked  at that soil and said okay well here's all this char in the soil we don't know how it  got here but it's here and then look at that soil and then conclude this soil given the  presence of char is more would be more agriculturally beneficial than this soil minus the char like  
**[0:47:56-0:48:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:47:56):**  can we look at it today and say that char regardless of how it got there makes that  soil better from an agricultural standpoint.  But we do know that that soil is more productive from an agricultural standpoint today.  The disadvantages soil formation is a process that involves multiple variables from not  only the soil mineralogy to the char addition but also the plant the climate the overall  
**[0:48:29-0:48:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:48:29):**  vegetative input the soil microbial population in those soils all of that leads to a trajectory  of the soil formation process.  The char addition causes multiple changes it's not just solely adding char alone it  is fundamentally altering those other pathways and how those pathways interact and end up  forming the terra preta soil that we see today is something that is missing in terms of the  
**[0:49:04-0:49:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:49:04):**  actual procedural mechanistic understanding of it.  Can we look at that soil and say hmm like there's something unique about this because  given that char has been there for so long it's one thing we can do today when we look  at it and just say like something normally this wouldn't be right if this char wasn't  here like we're seeing higher levels of this that we could isolate down due to the char  
**[0:49:32-0:49:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:49:32):**  being present or again is that just hard because you have all these other variables acting  on the soil.  I haven't had the opportunity to investigate a lot of the different terra preta soils I've  only had the opportunity to look at about five different terra preta soils in my laboratory.  The part that's to me was fascinating about them is that they have higher total microbial  
**[0:49:57-0:50:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:49:57):**  populations but the overall rate of carbon turnover is lower in the soil so they have  more microbes but they turn the carbon over to a slower rate than what you would anticipate  for that population.  Fundamentally I don't have an answer as to why this is occurring but that's one of the  other mysteries of these terra preta soils is that they have higher microbial populations  
**[0:50:30-0:50:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:50:30):**  but their carbon turnover is lower.  Now if that's due to the char we don't fully understand exactly the mechanisms of how that's  interacting with the soil microbial populations.  So if we just take that fact there more carbon or higher microbial population but slower  turnover of that carbon in the soil like in theory that sounds great like we're getting  
**[0:50:58-0:51:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:50:58):**  all this micro activity we're retaining all this carbon perfect but if you think about  that in an agricultural sense how does that relate to plant growth?  Higher microbes but less carbon being turned over I'm thinking ultimately carbons there  is a food source for microbes so if you can get more microbes and keep that carbon there  it's the microbes that are helping the plants not the carbon so in that situation that's  
**[0:51:28-0:51:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:51:28):**  a positive for ag?  It could be.  It could be a positive for certain periods and then due to the fact that it would be  a slower rate of turnover there could be a period of time when the plant wouldn't have  the needed nutrients in that situation so it all boils down to the rates of what that  
**[0:51:52-0:51:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:51:52):**  the cycle that we need to keep the nutrient availability for plant growth to be going  in the soil to know whether or not the slowdown if it is truly a slowdown in the activity  or the functionality that's still an open area of understanding how and why that's occurring.  Do you know what segment of microbes are showing a higher population is it everything is it  bacteria fungi molds geese everything in the soil is higher or is there one section out  
**[0:52:25-0:52:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:52:25):**  of that that is really high?  That's a little bit outside my area so I really don't have the true knowledge to comment on  that it looked from the historical perspective it looks like the char addition helps fungi  populations.  But it's difficult because once you bring the soil back to the laboratory the fungi  
**[0:52:49-0:52:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:52:49):**  are the most affected by that sampling process so there is a lot of loose ends to that whole  picture yet.  So if we start to put all this together let's say I had a thousand acres in the Midwest  and I had an unlimited budget and I was going to go out and apply that one one and a half  by volume biochar to the soils and I came up and said Kurt you know I want to do this  
**[0:53:21-0:53:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:53:21):**  would you be like yeah go for it or would there be some hesitancy to say you might it  sounds good but but I'd be wary of these might be the negative effects of doing this.  The biggest complication I face is that I don't have enough scientific basis to say  it's going to be positive or negative so it's I'm in a very difficult position when people  ask well how much biochar should I add to my soils and they want to add the char because  
**[0:53:56-0:54:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:53:56):**  they've seen all the positive things on the web the fact that it does increase all productivity  so in their mind they've already convinced that yep it is a positive thing to add.  We just don't have the true science to base a prediction for all the soils and the soil  types.  Is there any big downside to doing that like like we don't know if that really if it's  
**[0:54:23-0:54:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:54:23):**  positive but can you see like a it's one thing to say okay we have some yield loss and maybe  that's 10% and I know margins are thin in corn and soy that could make a huge difference  or it could be a catastrophic yield loss you know it goes from 300 bushels per acre now  you're down to 100.  There really isn't evidence in the literature of catastrophic events like that it's primarily  
**[0:54:53-0:55:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:54:53):**  10 15 20% type reductions but the cautionary statement I have on it is since we don't understand  the full interactions and the mechanisms we really can't say with confidence what it's  going to do in five years or 10 years or 15 years.  Granted it does look like from if you look at this entire assembly of all the literature  out there we have over a 50% chance of having a positive impact.  
**[0:55:27-0:55:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:55:27):**  That would be great except with there are those individual isolated cases of having  a lot of volatiles on the chart of having a poor paralysis process that we do know create  the negatives but there's other negative aspects created that we don't fully understand their  mechanisms.  Is there if we could go into the knowledge ether and we could pull out one key piece  
**[0:55:56-0:56:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:55:56):**  of known when it relates to biochar is there something you if like if you knew this one  thing it would make these types of recommendations much more definitive and quantifiable.  So from my standpoint in my research it would primarily be the reproducibility of the char.  Once we would fully be able to understand all of the factors going into creating a char  as long as every time that we would then use that process to create it we would get the  
**[0:56:41-0:56:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:56:41):**  same char would be a tremendous step forward in the scientific understanding.  There are some companies and industry partners that I've dealt with that are very close to  that but there's still those one in ten one in twenty chars that are different and understanding  what those properties are would be key.  For if we look at industrial use for people using activated carbon for things like water  
**[0:57:17-0:57:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:57:17):**  filtration do they know that like can they produce the same carbon product each and every  time?  They have so a lot of the large activated carbon industry know the recipe and their  activation agents a lot of that is protected under patents it is not in the open literature.  They understand to get a highly producible product sector but it does cost a considerable  
**[0:57:54-0:57:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:57:54):**  amount of money to achieve that uniform product.  Do they potentially have a key to this problem like if they all open their books and suddenly  like hey here's how we're doing this do you end up with okay well we could do it but now  it's just an expensive process with sophisticated equipment?  I don't think they would have the full answers yet for all of the agriculture questions.  
**[0:58:29-0:58:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:58:29):**  For individual chemicals option yes by all means Calgon, Midwest, Faco they are the next  area.  Actually take a step back and look then as what we are trying to do with the char it's  not really that the emphasis is not on creating an absolute pure product yet so that's where  it's been this kind of battle between having a product that is inexpensive simple to produce  
**[0:59:05-0:59:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:59:05):**  or do we have a is extraordinarily old everything is within very tight margins to end up with  the predictable product.  That's where I'm still at a quandary over what is going to be the pathway for biochar.  Is it going to be more of the homemade type systems cost or is it going to be the high  end control?  
**[0:59:34-0:59:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:59:34):**  So where do agriculture and science and the citizen scientists go from here?  It sounds like there's just there's a lot of unknowns at a scientific level it's very  complex to try and figure out some of these knowns and you have farmers who you said they've  already decided in their brain like I want to do this.  Do you just keep making it how you can try and use it and then make your own assessment  
**[1:00:03-1:00:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:00:03):**  based upon what you see in the fields whether it's working or not working and is that a  way to push it forward because if you just pause and wait for science to figure out we  might be a long ways out so how do you how do we make progress and use this tool if you  like the general concept of it and still advance this?  So what I've been going to accomplish in my research is to utilize the citizen science  
**[1:00:35-1:00:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:00:35):**  component to this since the book is so aided about biochar I've been willing to participate  in some of the research programs I've come up with.  The one I completed was sending chars out to volunteers that they could bury in their  soil and then they're back to me after three and six months so that I could gain an entire  library of different soil different climate using the same char kind of again to unlock  
**[1:01:08-1:01:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:01:08):**  this mystery of the char aging.  That research I've gotten the char samples back and I'm still waiting to the laboratory  full time to get all those analysis.  For people that do want to produce it at home there's a lot of simple ways to do it through  things like cone kilns and other simple metal kilns.  
**[1:01:33-1:01:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:01:33):**  Having investigated a lot of chars with different materials is there kind of a sweet spot you'd  say I'd look here and again given that this is a home user let's say their soils are reasonably  productive already because they're doing composting and things like that they just want to they're  an biochar enthusiast they want to add more is there a feedstock material you think that  they should really focus on and is there a temperature range that you should really try  
**[1:01:57-1:02:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:01:57):**  and shoot for when producing that char to make the best I'll call it the all around  you know just general use biochar for home scale.  I really wish I had that answer it's been the most difficult part of my 10 years in  the biochar now has been the lack of those answers and it's something that I just I don't  have a good answer for.  
**[1:02:31-1:02:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:02:31):**  What about just temperature so say you are there some general understandings of biochar  produced at temperature x versus biochar produced at temperature greater than x that that could  help people think about the char that they want to produce.  So it kind of boils down to what you're hoping for that char the low temp they are act more  because there's more surface chemistry on them than their temperature char for removing  
**[1:03:13-1:03:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:03:13):**  agro chemicals from the soil system.  So the fun guidance goes back to what you're really trying to do for your soil you're trying  to get a material that stimulate a little microbial then the lower temperatures appear  to be the better choice for getting the option of some chemical then the temperature chars  would be the better choice for that scenario.  
**[1:03:51-1:03:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:03:51):**  One concern I have heard some people voice and be curious to get your thoughts on the  validity of this is trees are long lived and they're always absorbing stuff out of the  air out of the soil is there a risk of creating biochar from woody biomass that has potentially  sequestered heavy metals toxins into the wood itself and now you burn it it remains in the  char now you're concentrating that in an agricultural system?  
**[1:04:32-1:04:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:04:32):**  In my opinion so far it would be very difficult to get to that level from a biomass source  if you were utilizing a contaminated waste stream either destruction debris something  that was treated with heavy metals that's where that would become more of a concern  in my opinion right now a lot of it boils down to if the tree was growing it would be  very difficult to accumulate enough heavy metals in that tree to cause harm further  
**[1:05:12-1:05:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:05:12):**  on.  Now that's caveat there are different species that accumulate heavy metals preferentially  than other species but in general that would be my comment on it that the fact that you're  just paralyzing a living biomass already it would have had to have contents of heavy metals  that were low enough to allow growth so I don't see that allowing that cycle then to  
**[1:05:39-1:05:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:05:39):**  build up if you were taking waste from a contaminated sources then yes that would be of high concern.  What about the production of biochar itself is there this is another concern is there  risk of potentially producing toxic organic compounds in the process that you're then  introducing to the soil?  There are some studies that have looked at this it's an area that we've relied heavily  
**[1:06:13-1:06:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:06:13):**  on the wood ash industry in terms of the analogy looking at the contents of all the priority  pollutants that are present in ashes.  There's been very few chars that are made by the slow paralysis that contain a high  quantity of toxic chemicals.  There are some chars that are produced in extremely fast or flash paralysis that are  
**[1:06:43-1:06:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:06:43):**  more prone to absorption of those chemicals just because there's not enough time to fully  convert them but again that's still a little bit of an area that needs more research.  Most people listening to this are farmers of some scale to start closing this out what  do you want farmers to take away about biochar what we know about it today and where it's  going how should they think about it?  
**[1:07:19-1:07:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:07:19):**  So currently I would say that biochar is definitely a piece of the puzzle to our combating climate  mitigation strategies for agriculture.  The difficulty right now is we don't have full understanding over application rates  over exactly what mechanisms this is doing in the soil.  That doesn't mean that we should abandon this idea.  
**[1:07:51-1:07:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:07:51):**  Biochar has shown tremendous effects in certain circumstances to the fact that that's what  keeps the researchers excited about this material given all of the heterogeneity all of the  difficulties in the researching of it the fact that it has these mystical properties  still warrants research and to attempt to understand what it's doing in the hope that  we can optimize it for the agricultural sector.  
**[1:08:23-1:08:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:08:23):**  Well said and for somebody who is farming and wants to start to use it as part of their  farming practice how do they get good advice or information on application where do they  go for that information?  I mean even asking you you're somebody who does this all the time and you've done it  for a decade and you struggle with giving recommendations given all the unknowns and  
**[1:08:52-1:08:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:08:52):**  there's a lot of people who you know really they're you know I'll say they're just trying  to sell a product at the end of the day without understanding all these little nuances so  if you do believe in this and you want to use it how do you make an educated decision  about actually spending a dollar doing something that's right versus just taking a flyer?  That's it's one of the big challenges I don't have a straight answer for that.  
**[1:09:27-1:09:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:09:27):**  I wish that there's was like an entire depository that we could have for all of the existing  biochar and studies so if someone was growing watermelons they could go and look at oh here's  all the studies that involve watermelons and what types of chars were used.  We can assemble that through various literature studies but we just don't have all of it compiled  in that type of searchable database structure yet.  
**[1:10:03-1:10:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:10:03):**  So it's just try it maybe don't go too big in it and then just do what you can afford  and look for your own results.  I mean that's kind of the takeaway I keep coming back to.  Correct and that's the only advice that we have is baby steps.  Right well I want to appreciate or I want to thank you for coming on today and sharing  
**[1:10:27-1:10:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:10:27):**  your knowledge taking some time out of your schedule to do this.  For people that want to follow along with your work how can they do that and are you  looking for anybody else in trials or if you do have future trials that you want to involve  people in how can they become involved?  Well the best way is if you're interested in this and you do want to get involved send  
**[1:10:45-1:10:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:10:45):**  me an email let me know what you're doing.  My email address would be kurt.spokas.usda.gov just send me an email saying that you are  interested in setting up some type of collaborative research.  That's the best way to get started in it and if I can't handle or if it's outside of my  area I'll find someone else within the ARS family to assist in that effort.  
**[1:11:19-1:11:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-18-KurtSpokas-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:11:19):**  Hi everybody thanks for watching.  Subscribe here to get the latest from the show.  Also be sure to check out some of the great clips and watch the full interviews right  here on In Search of Soil.  Thank you.  