### In Search of Soil  (2020-00-18)
**[0:00:00-0:00:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:00:00):**  So, we meet again.  For the past 50 years, the Holy Grail and Agricultural Research has been getting nitrogen-fixing  bacteria to form a relationship with non-legumes.  Scientists have tried, explorers have looked, but the solution has never been found.  It would be an amazing discovery if you could find that microbe-plant relationship and get  
**[0:00:43-0:00:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:00:43):**  it to work with agricultural crops.  It would solve our fertilization problem because an industry that's fertilizer-intense could  switch fossil-fuel-based nitrogen to something naturally occurring.  But as I said to start this, it's the Holy Grail that's never been found.  That's where synthetic biology comes in.  
**[0:01:07-0:01:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:01:07):**  Synthetic biology is a form of science that involves engineering microbes to perform functions  that they normally wouldn't do.  And today I'm talking to the CEO of a company who's using synthetic biology to solve the  world's fertilization problem.  In this episode of In Search of Soil, I'm joined by CEO of JOINbio, Mike Milley.  
**[0:01:29-0:01:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:01:29):**  JOIN's a unique company.  They're using synthetic biology to engineer beneficial microbes to give growers the same  or better optimized solutions that traits or chemicals do.  They're seeking to reduce chemical use and possibly even replace it in the future using  microbe-plant relationships.  
**[0:01:49-0:01:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:01:49):**  Today's episode is a true glimpse into the future.  And while you may or may not agree with synthetic biology, I think this episode will really  help you understand the complex systems that are occurring naturally within our soils.  So let's get a glimpse into that future at SciFi Today with CEO of JOINbio, Mike Milley.  This is In Search of Soil.  
**[0:02:15-0:02:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:02:15):**  So Mike, thanks for taking the time to join me today.  You're currently CEO of the company JOINbio, and it's a really interesting company.  At the core of it, what is JOIN setting out to do?  I'd say our core mission is to answer a question that is, from our perspective, very important  to agricultural innovation.  
**[0:02:41-0:02:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:02:41):**  And that is, can you take beneficial microbes and using the advanced technologies of synthetic  biology, can you engineer those microbes in an optimized way so that they're delivering  solutions to growers that have the same performance and the same consistency as traits and chemicals  do?  And we're just trying to answer that question, can you do that?  
**[0:03:12-0:03:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:03:12):**  Can you actually engineer that beneficial microbe so that it provides performance that  is unprecedented from a microbial solution perspective?  When you think about that question and even asking that question, how possible is it?  Obviously, you guys must think it's possible if you have a company setting out to do it.  Is this like a 10 out of 10, extremely hard problem to crack?  
**[0:03:40-0:03:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:03:40):**  We wouldn't be there now without the technology we have, or maybe we even need more technology  to get there, or is it more like a five?  It's doable with the tech we have, the knowledge we have, but there's just a lot of work that's  going to have to go into making it happen.  How hard is this to actually achieve?  
**[0:03:58-0:04:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:03:58):**  So I think there's a couple of ways to look at it.  I think when we were proposing this company slash concept inside of Bayer almost three,  three and a half years ago, it was referred to as a moonshot.  So it wasn't a Mars shot, but it also wasn't going across country.  So we talked about it as a moonshot, and this was fairly specific to our nitrogen fixation  
**[0:04:27-0:04:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:04:27):**  project.  So is it difficult?  Yes.  There's really a couple big hurdles that you have to get over.  One is that historically, synthetic biology has been used and has been done in a contained  
**[0:04:44-0:04:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:04:44):**  environment.  And those microbes that are engineered in that contained environment are engineered  to produce a product, produce a metabolite, produce a fragrance, produce a specialty chemical  that's then isolated away.  And everything that happens is inside that container, right, with that engineered microbe.  
**[0:05:03-0:05:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:05:03):**  So that's done.  What we need to do is engineer that microbe and grow it up.  But it has to function in the field.  It has to function on a seed.  It has to function for a grower out in the environment.  
**[0:05:17-0:05:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:05:17):**  And so that means we have to find a whole new set of chassis or host microbes that have  very different properties than E. coli or yeast or some of the traditional synthetic  biology hosts that are used.  So that's one big hurdle.  Can you find those hosts or chassis?  
**[0:05:35-0:05:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:05:35):**  And will they go out and survive in the field?  Will they go out and colonize the plant as the delivery vehicle, right?  The second piece is on a totally different scale or perspective is if you do that, and  they work really well, can you get them registered?  And what's the consumer acceptance of a GMO or an engineered microbe?  
**[0:06:00-0:06:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:06:00):**  Can you get over that hurdle?  We believe the answer to that is a strong yes.  We believe it's connected directly to benefit.  So that if we provide a solution to something as critical as reducing fertilizer levels  with cereal crops, or if we could provide a new solution for Asian soybean rust or citrus  
**[0:06:25-0:06:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:06:25):**  greening, some of these big problems in ag, we believe people will give it a chance.  And then it's just a question of can we develop the safety data packages that support being  able to use these products in the environment?  So these are big hurdles, if you will, or reasons why somebody like Bayer would probably  not take this on in their internal crop science.  
**[0:06:54-0:06:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:06:54):**  It's too risky, right?  And that's why they set up the joint venture with Ginkgo and are doing this.  We've been funded to do this as an independent company because we can take more risk and  do it at arm's length.  We can be more entrepreneurial if we're successful, then one of the folks that we would go back  
**[0:07:14-0:07:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:07:14):**  to with that solution is Bayer.  So it's a very cool model from their perspective.  And it's a really creative way for Bayer to drive innovation for transformative but high  risk projects versus doing it internally where the R&D has to be.  I would just say it has to have a higher probability of success or has to have poor hurdles.  
**[0:07:41-0:07:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:07:41):**  When you think about that first problem that you brought up, you have to create a microbe  that can survive outside of the lab.  It has to survive in the wild.  Is there an analogy of that out there?  Not necessarily an ag, but anywhere where science is engineering microbes that are surviving  
**[0:07:59-0:08:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:07:59):**  in the wild to perform a function that they weren't naturally derived to do?  I would say that we're really just on the cusp of looking at that.  So I think we're clearly driving that question or driving that from an agricultural perspective.  There are people who are looking at it in terms of the human gut microbiome and potential  solutions there.  
**[0:08:26-0:08:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:08:26):**  There's people that are looking at it from an animal health perspective.  There's people who are going to look at it in the context of bioremediation.  So can you take a microbe that already is pretty good at chewing up oil from an oil  spill and can you engineer it so that it's 10 times or 100 times more effective?  Or can you engineer a microbe so that it can bioremediate heavy metals in this type?  
**[0:08:56-0:09:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:08:56):**  So yeah, I think we're at such an early stage.  And I think a lot of this, it's interesting if you go back over the last five, six years  and look at what scientific topics have been the most published, have had the most articles.  Number one is CRISPR-Cas, right?  Hands down.  
**[0:09:21-0:09:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:09:21):**  Number two is the microbiome.  And this whole concept of understanding the microbiome, its relationship to human health,  its relationship to animal health, and in our case, its relationship to plant health  and soil health and the plant microbiome and the soil microbiome, just understanding how  integral these microbes are to the everyday health and production and longevity of these  
**[0:09:50-0:09:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:09:50):**  plants.  This is a whole new area.  People are just starting to understand this and it's us, it's exciting to see not only  is on the plant side, but look at the amount of effort that's going on on say the human  side, recognizing the human microbiome and its role in a lot of different diseases and  
**[0:10:08-0:10:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:10:08):**  human health.  In terms of difficulty and this moonshot, the too risky for Bayer to take on, how much  of it is it actually being hard and how much of it is our understanding or lack of understanding  of microbiology?  I hear this a lot and I don't know if it's true and you can tell me, I mean, you're in  
**[0:10:34-0:10:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:10:34):**  the field that a lot of things when it gets into soil microbiology, we don't understand  very much of how those things function down there in the soil.  And I'm sure it's the same in the human gut.  Is that accurate and is that we're trying to build off of a non-robust knowledge base  going forward?  
**[0:10:54-0:10:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:10:54):**  Is that part of the problem or is this just hard to begin with?  But we know enough at the foundation, it's just hard.  I think it's hard for two reasons.  One is I think the complexity can be overwhelming.  If you take a tablespoon of soil, there's like 4 billion microbes in there.  
**[0:11:19-0:11:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:11:19):**  So the sheer complexity of the microbiome, whether it's on the human skin, whether it's  in a human gut, whether it's on a plant or whether it's in a tablespoon of soil, there's  just a complexity there that at this stage is somewhat overwhelming.  What has made it suddenly approachable, if you will, are the explosion of sequencing  and genomic tools in a high throughput way, along with the software and the algorithms  
**[0:11:50-0:11:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:11:50):**  to process all that information that are emerging from the synthetic biology field.  And so even though there might be a million or a billion of these, our ability to sort  out and look at these is starting to emerge.  But it's absolutely true that we're just at the very, just because of the sheer complexity  of it, we're at the very tip of the iceberg of trying to understand it, very early stages.  
**[0:12:19-0:12:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:12:19):**  Now, if you isolate and take a single microbe, so you reduce, you take the complexity from  what's in a soil sample to let's isolate a single microbe, now you've got something that's  actually fairly easy to work with from an engineering perspective.  Easier to work with than a plant, much easier to work with than an animal or a human from  an engineering.  
**[0:12:44-0:12:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:12:44):**  So understanding pathways, introducing genes or adjusting pathways.  So optimizing, optimizing certain aspects of that microbe for a specific purpose at  the individual microbe level, it suddenly has become doable, if you will.  So I think it's that contrast between incredible complexity out there in the soil, but if you  get to that single microbe, you actually have something that today's genomic tools can actually  
**[0:13:15-0:13:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:13:15):**  work with and sequence and understand fairly effectively.  So when you set out about to do this and you isolate the single microbe, there's two potential  paths I see here is one, you look for a microbe that can survive out in the wild and is receptive  to taking on the traits that you want it to take on.  In this case, it's nitrogen fixation.  
**[0:13:38-0:13:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:13:38):**  So you take that existing microbe and you build nitrogen fixation onto it.  Another pathway could be you take a nitrogen fixing microbe, Rhizobia, and instead of having  it bond with just certain plants, you now essentially open up its filter or its lens  and it can now bond with other plants that aren't just legumes.  Is there one path that is more likely or is there a third path that I'm not seeing?  
**[0:14:06-0:14:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:14:06):**  No, I think in the case of the nitrogen fixation, I think in simple terms, those are sort of  the two paths that you have.  If you think about what the characteristics are of what we call a chassis or host microbe,  some of the ones you mentioned, it needs to be stable in the environment.  It needs to be tractable or easily engineered.  
**[0:14:32-0:14:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:14:32):**  But the other critical one for us is it needs to colonize and associate with the plant.  And so if you think about the ideal nitrogen fixation product for corn, it would be applied  to the corn as a seed treatment.  That's by far the most effective way to apply a new solution to a crop like that, where  you've already got a lot of the farmer has already invested heavily in acquiring that  
**[0:15:07-0:15:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:15:07):**  corn seed from either Bayer or Cortella, two of them, right?  But you get it and it's already been optimized from a genetic standpoint, from a breeding,  hybrid corn breeding standpoint.  And then if you can put a seed treatment on it that provides additional benefit, in this  case, the nitrogen fixing microbe, if you can put it on, when that grower goes to plant  
**[0:15:30-0:15:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:15:30):**  the corn, she's going to do that microbe, that nitrogen fixation solution is already  on the seed.  Now what that microbe has to do then is as that seed germinates, as it goes into the  soil and as it germinates, ideally you want a microbe that associates with the entire  corn plant through its entire life cycle, right?  
**[0:15:55-0:16:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:15:55):**  And it will grow and populate that plant, colonize it in a symbiotic way.  So you might say, well, are there microbes that do that?  And the answer is absolutely, right?  There are microbes who form symbiotic relationships and they get something that they need from  the corn and vice versa, right?  
**[0:16:14-0:16:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:16:14):**  And that microbe can be providing things signaling or providing things back to the corn plant.  So what we're looking for, one of the things we're looking for ideally is sort of a combination  of what you mentioned, which is start with some microbes that already have some of the  nitrogen fixing machinery in them.  Make some adjustments to it.  
**[0:16:38-0:16:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:16:38):**  Because one of the things that happens in those microbes is that they will typically,  they have mechanisms that when there's plenty of nitrogen around, they shut off.  And so what you want that nitrogen fixing microbe to do is not shut off its nitrogen  fixation, but actually ramp it up.  And so you actually have to do some engineering to make that happen.  
**[0:17:00-0:17:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:17:00):**  The other part of this, and I mentioned life cycle of the corn.  If you're a corn grower, the biggest benefit of a product like this, of a new solution  like this would be if it can deliver the nitrogen in the second half of its life cycle.  Because that's when it takes up most of its, if you think about a corn, the corn plant,  it's growing up, it's in that second half of its growth period that it's actually producing  
**[0:17:29-0:17:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:17:29):**  the corn.  And that's when it uses about 78, it needs about 70 to 80% of its nitrogen.  However, if you think about, well, when did the fertilizer get applied?  Way back before when it was planted, right?  So that's why they have to put on, that's one reason why the levels of synthetic fertilizer  
**[0:17:47-0:17:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:17:47):**  are as high as they are, because they have to try to last in the soil through that whole  growing season.  So if we can get a microbe that fixes the nitrogen, colonizes the corn plant via a seed  treatment, right?  Then, and it goes through the lifetime, it can be fixing and delivering nitrogen in that  
**[0:18:09-0:18:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:18:09):**  second half of the growth cycle.  And that's ideal for the grower because now he doesn't have to rely on putting so much  on in the beginning and he doesn't have to worry about having to go back out if he needs  to and reapplying nitrogen to make sure he's got the right amount of nutrient there to  optimize his yield or his productivity per acre.  
**[0:18:33-0:18:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:18:33):**  And I just from doing reading the nitrogen fixation process in a plant, it's very carbon  intensive in order to do that.  Given that, do you have to modify the carbon flow of a corn plant so it feeds those microbes  what they need to do that conversion?  I don't think you can get just a free lunch, right, where they fix nitrogen, they're not  
**[0:18:57-0:19:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:18:57):**  taking anything back.  So do you need to change something within the corn to now deliver surplus carbon in  the form of sugars to really get that pump going?  I think that's a good question.  I don't, to be honest, I don't think we know exactly how it's going to work in a successful,  
**[0:19:17-0:19:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:19:17):**  so one of the things we're looking at is exactly that.  Are there microbes that are out there that have that relationship already in place or  that in theory can form that symbiotic relationship with the corn?  So part of the studies and assays that we do is identifying what we call endophytic  bacteria, ones that are inside, will exist inside the plant and not just on the roots  
**[0:19:48-0:19:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:19:48):**  or not just in the soil, but can they actually populate the entire plant that actually will  be getting nutrients or getting something beneficial from that corn plant, right, such  that they're actually incented or they actually do colonize over an extended period of weeks  and even a couple of months.  That's what we're looking for.  
**[0:20:13-0:20:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:20:13):**  And so for us, because this is new, because people haven't really gone out there and tried  to find chassis or hosts that do the colonization and also can be reasonably engineered in the  ground, a big part of our initial work is identifying as many of these potential hosts  or chassis as we can.  If we zoom out here and we just think microbiology or just general biology, is there a reason  
**[0:20:44-0:20:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:20:44):**  why nitrogen-fixing bacteria form relationships with legumes but they don't with other plants?  In other words, why did some plants evolve not to have this relationship?  What I've heard, I'm not an expert in this area of plant evolution, but my understanding  is that in the case of say soybeans or peanuts and some of the legumes that do fix nitrogen  and actually fix it with these rhizobia microbes, they actually fix it with the nodules in their  
**[0:21:22-0:21:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:21:22):**  roots at a level where they almost don't need fertilizer.  As a matter of fact, people will actually rotate soybeans with corn because after growing  soybeans for a year, there's actually more nitrogen in the soil than before you planted  it.  They actually are nitrogen-positive, if you will.  
**[0:21:43-0:21:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:21:43):**  Where in this whole thing is soybeans were evolving, they must have been in an environment  that was nitrogen-poor.  It was an evolutionary thing where the ones that actually started to develop these nodules  and these nitrogen-fixing microbes would outcompete and would eventually be the norm, if you will,  versus soybeans that were in a soybean environment where you had depleted nitrogen.  
**[0:22:12-0:22:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:22:12):**  You didn't have enough nitrogen there.  Evolution is going to favor the ones that can actually fix the nitrogen, actually evolve  that way.  For whatever reason, if you think about corn, if you go back to the Haber-Bosch reaction  in the early 1900s, when they came up with the synthetic fertilizer, as soon as that  
**[0:22:34-0:22:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:22:34):**  started being applied routinely in US ag, for example, the need for nitrogen was being  totally supplied synthetically.  There was no driver, there was no pressure, evolutionary pressure or environmental pressure  for microbes to do it.  Matter of fact, it was actually removed in that process.  
**[0:22:56-0:23:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:22:56):**  So when you look at corn and wheat and some of these cereals, for some reason, they never  had that, they never had the opportunity to evolve with the nitrogen-fixing microbe.  There was never environmental pressure to drive that.  And so, A, if you look at the corn we have today, there are no known, there is no magic  microbe that you can put on as a seed treatment.  
**[0:23:22-0:23:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:23:22):**  There's no magic microbe you can associate with corn that will deliver nitrogen, will  fix nitrogen from the air and deliver it to the plant like the microbes that are in the  soybeans or peanuts or legumes in general.  So in this moonshot, is the moon landing?  You have a microbe that can associate with corn, colonize with corn and 100% replace  
**[0:23:49-0:23:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:23:49):**  all of the external fertilization needs for that corn plant?  No.  I think I'd say no, that's not, for us, I would define the moon landing as us having  a seed treatment or inferal product that a grower can put out there and he can reduce  his synthetic fertilizer use 40 to 50% and get the same yield or higher yield.  
**[0:24:20-0:24:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:24:20):**  So it's more of a Prius type approach as opposed to a Tesla.  So we, at this point, we're not trying to go all the way to replace it 100%.  We're not even sure that that's practical, but we think it would be transformative to  agriculture to be able to show that you could reduce it 40 to 50%.  That's a huge step.  
**[0:24:41-0:24:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:24:41):**  Now, where you go from there, we'll know better in three or four years, right?  As the whole field sort of evolves and as people make progress.  But for us, the moon landing would be 40, 50% reduction in the input while maintaining  the exact same yield or higher yield than what they're getting if they did a full 100%  input of the synthetic fertilizer.  
**[0:25:09-0:25:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:25:09):**  You think about what's going on now out there with CRISPR-Cas.  I've talked to several people who are involved in the food space, the prepared food space  who are using that technology to do really amazing things.  One thing you said I thought was really interesting was sometimes you can take these microbes  and tweak them to say, get that nitrogen production to really come in the second half of the corn's  
**[0:25:33-0:25:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:25:33):**  lifestyle.  Is there any thought of looking at an existing legume, a soybean, that already has the fixation  part, that's salt, and just really dialing up the nitrogen fixation.  So it supplies, suddenly its roots are putting on 3X the nitrogen that it needs 300 times  as much nitrogen as it needs.  
**[0:25:58-0:26:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:25:58):**  So when that plant dies off, it got enough nitrogen to grow itself, but there's a huge  abundance left in the ground for the next crop that follows it on.  In this whole corn-soybean rotation that we have here in the US, a lot of farmers are  planting corn after soy.  Those soy roots are already there, they just dissolve into the surface, those nutrients  
**[0:26:23-0:26:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:26:23):**  become bioavailable.  What about turning up the dial on current legumes to just produce more in an existing  rotation?  It's a really interesting question.  In theory, it should be possible.  
**[0:26:39-0:26:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:26:39):**  I would say that from our perspective, we focused our initial technical proof of concept  and our initial research on working specifically with the corn itself and trying to associate  some of that nitrogen fixation with the corn.  However, I would say if you could think about it, like you've said, if you could increase  the amount of nitrogen production from a soybean, if you could increase it by 10 or 100x and  
**[0:27:16-0:27:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:27:16):**  you leave behind in a rotational world, if you leave behind that much more, it's going  to be complementary to, or that's going to be an incremental benefit to what you can  do to reduce the synthetic fertilizer.  I would say that's one of those ideas we have that we would look at in phase two or phase  three of our work.  
**[0:27:44-0:27:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:27:44):**  We haven't done anything to date to explore it, I would just say that.  But I think in theory, it's absolutely possible.  The whole point of using these engineering techniques is you can take something very  targeted, and if you understand the pathways and the genes and what they're doing, there's  ways that you can optimize them for a very particular purpose, which may not happen in  
**[0:28:13-0:28:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:28:13):**  nature for 100 million years, but with the tools we have by making these changes, you  can suddenly make the change in a matter of months and years as opposed to waiting for  evolutionary pressures to drive it.  That's really accelerating evolution when you think about it, is the ability to go in  there and have a very targeted output that you want, and then understanding the mechanics  
**[0:28:45-0:28:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:28:45):**  or the mechanisms of that microbe and tweaking it so that you focus all its energy or all  of its overexpression on that targeted output that you want.  Yeah, and it's being done everywhere.  It's yogurt and a lot of other food products have this being done in wines.  When you think about problem or challenge number two that you face, and that's public  
**[0:29:09-0:29:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:29:09):**  acceptance of this, how much legitimate worry is there that this goes Jurassic Park?  You suddenly introduce these microbes into the soil biome that can now colonize with  non-legumes and there's four billion, some large amount of microbes in a tablespoon of  soil that you throw off that whole balance that's evolved to be there.  There's either unforeseen ripples or it creates some sort of trickle-down effect.  
**[0:29:47-0:29:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:29:47):**  How do you even think about when you drop that in the water where the ripples go, given  that immense complexity?  I think the honest answer is that you don't know until you can do the testing.  I think it's an important question that we have to answer.  When I was talking earlier about if there's a big enough benefit to a new technology,  
**[0:30:16-0:30:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:30:16):**  to something novel that people haven't had before, that's really what drives it.  That's what gets you in the door.  What actually gets you registered or what actually allows you to be a product is you're  able to provide both regulatory agencies and the public with enough safety information  that you can answer those types of questions.  
**[0:30:43-0:30:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:30:43):**  Obviously if we come up with a solution like that, one of the questions is going to be,  well, okay, how long is it around?  What's the persistence?  Does it stay in the soil or is it gone at the end of the season type thing?  What impact, if any, is it having on any other microbes that are in there?  
**[0:31:04-0:31:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:31:04):**  At this point, we've worked with native microbes for quite some time.  We've also done some work now with some of the engineered ones.  We're compiling data that shows that those type of worst case effects or worst case outcomes,  that's not what's happening.  That's not the reality with what's going on with the microbes.  
**[0:31:30-0:31:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:31:30):**  You can't just presume that.  You actually have to go out and do the testing and be able to answer the questions to the  satisfaction of the regulatory folks and to a certain extent the consumer.  If you think about ways that these microbes could play out in terms of lifestyle or life  cycle, one could be you inoculate the seed at the time the seed goes into the ground  
**[0:31:55-0:31:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:31:55):**  or right before.  It exists on the plant as long as the plant's alive.  Plant dies, microbe dies with it.  I mean total death, not dormancy, doesn't sporulate or anything like that.  The other way would be it's like a normal legume.  
**[0:32:11-0:32:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:32:11):**  When the plant itself dies, the microbes go dormant in the cycle and most dormant in the  soil and they'll stay there until the next legumes are planted or until they just can't  live any longer.  Would there be a desired outcome here when you're looking at colonizing some of these  non-legumes like corn?  
**[0:32:30-0:32:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:32:30):**  Is it associating with the plant while it's alive and then it's gone?  I'm thinking from a farmer's standpoint, you'd want these in the soil, you inoculate and  you probably do it every time just to be safe, but why not have them survive in the soil  if they could?  Yeah I think it's, obviously you can look at it from both perspectives.  
**[0:32:55-0:32:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:32:55):**  If you're investing money in developing a new product, ideally if you're the company  producing the product, you want the grower to buy it every year.  The economics of it, but in this case I don't think it's black and white.  I think that with time, if we can find microbes that do tend to stay in the soil, and so next  year when you come back, if you plant that corn, if there's a little extra there, it's  
**[0:33:22-0:33:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:33:22):**  an extra boost.  With time, it carries on.  I think that's only a positive because I think what the grower is going to be able to do  then is go from a 40 or 50% reduction, maybe they can go to 60, maybe they go to 70.  You just keep incrementally ratcheting it up.  
**[0:33:41-0:33:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:33:41):**  To me, I think you've got to remember that what's the problem you're trying to solve  for with all this?  Where does the benefit of this come from?  A big part of it is from the fact that the synthetic fertilizers, while absolutely critical  to today's food chain and today's food security and production, are not environmentally sustainable  
**[0:34:07-0:34:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:34:07):**  between the greenhouse gas emissions to produce it.  The Haber Bosch reaction is very, very heavy in terms of the emissions that it does.  Just producing the synthetic fertilizer attributes 3% of the greenhouse gas emissions that are  there.  You also have on the runoff, the impact of the runoff of the nitrogen into groundwater  
**[0:34:34-0:34:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:34:34):**  and into the Gulf of Mexico and such.  These are pretty well publicized environmental concerns.  If you just keep doing it, it's not environmentally sustainable.  Yet today, you can't vilify it because today, it's absolutely crucial to the production  of the food that we all need and want, whether it's for human consumption or animal consumption.  
**[0:34:59-0:35:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:34:59):**  Anything we can do, if you go back to what's the problem we're trying to solve, we're trying  to reduce that synthetic fertilizer use to the smallest number we can.  It both brings down the greenhouse gas emissions and at the same time, we'll have a significant  reduction in the runoff.  Part of this also is you have to design this microbe to work in a synthetic fertilizer  
**[0:35:22-0:35:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:35:22):**  based environment where traditional legumes, mycorrhizal fungi, you provide too much nutrients,  they shut down because the plant just says, well, I don't need this relationship.  I can just go pull this out of the soil.  If you want these microbes to stay associated with a plant, they almost need to turn a blind  eye to what's there and just say, hey, we're needed later on down the line.  
**[0:35:48-0:35:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:35:48):**  Exactly.  Exactly.  That's one of the engineering pieces that us and a few others are looking at is what  can you turn off or turn on to ensure that that microbe is not only fixing nitrogen,  but also delivering it to the plant regardless of the environment.  
**[0:36:11-0:36:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:36:11):**  You want it to do it in a nitrogen rich environment so that it's not turning off.  That's exactly one of the sets of engineering approaches that we're taking.  When you think about the science of this, if you put rhizobia that associate with legumes  in with corn, what exactly happens there?  Is it just like they just don't communicate?  
**[0:36:41-0:36:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:36:41):**  They're just there both next to each other and there's no reaching out by quote either  party to try and form a relationship?  What triggers that?  Do you have any idea in terms of your expertise is there a chemical signal that's-  Yeah, no, it's an interesting question.  
**[0:36:59-0:37:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:36:59):**  I personally don't.  I know people have done some work and that association and that is not there.  Because of the type of microbe that rhizobia is, it also its stability is totally dependent  on that association with the soy root and the dynamics that that evolved with.  You just don't have that whole infrastructure, if you will, that it has with a corn plant.  
**[0:37:36-0:37:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:37:36):**  So as simple as it seems, just transplant it.  The attempts to do that work that's been done on that, it doesn't work.  What I don't personally know is the exact physiological reasons that are preventing  that or why that doesn't happen.  So I'm imagining this corn is your control.  
**[0:37:58-0:38:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:37:58):**  That's where you start with, okay, we have this corn plant, we're not changing this.  We got to get a microbe to go over and talk to this.  What's there?  What has to happen there for the microbe that you're designing to form that relationship  with the corn?  
**[0:38:17-0:38:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:38:17):**  Is it the microbe picks up on a chemical signal the corn sends out?  What I'm trying to get at is how does the microbe in the corn meet?  How do they know, hey, there's something good here.  We have to come together.  Is it exudates?  
**[0:38:32-0:38:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:38:32):**  What brings them together or allows the corn plant to get the microbe to colonize it, to  come inside of it?  So the short answer is it's related to signaling and to nutrients and metabolites that go back  and forth between the two that provide that attraction, whether it's a nutritional attraction,  a signaling attraction, and going in both ways.  
**[0:39:04-0:39:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:39:04):**  As we go all the way back to the beginning of our talk, the complexity out there, the  billions of microbes out there, we're a long way from understanding exactly and knowing  exactly what microbes associate the best and communicate the best and have the best relationship  with corn.  What people are doing is going out and isolating microbes from corn plants in different geographies  
**[0:39:33-0:39:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:39:33):**  and trying to classify into fitness four formals.  By microbes that specifically associate with the corn as a starting point.  Because you've rather than try to, today, that would be a very difficult thing to engineer  in.  We don't understand enough about exactly what all those dynamics are.  
**[0:39:57-0:40:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:39:57):**  But if we can start with a chassis or host that has already evolved, already has the  properties that associate with that corn or that wheat plant, that's a great starting  point.  And that's the power of what we're trying to do is find a chassis or host out there  that already has that built in.  
**[0:40:18-0:40:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:40:18):**  And then can we engineer, can we optimize it, or can we engineer it to significantly  increase the amount of nitrogen not only that it's fixing, but also that it's delivering  to the corn plant?  Yeah.  How much do lab conditions vary over the wild?  
**[0:40:37-0:40:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:40:37):**  In other words, if you modify certain traits of the bacteria, like you said, they could  exist in that container that's a lab, but now you put it out into the wild, all of a  sudden there's other microbes out there.  It has to have defense mechanisms.  It has to just be able to survive on its own while it performs these additional functions.  
**[0:40:57-0:41:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:40:57):**  How much of a challenge is that?  It's huge.  I think that's actually, I mean, I think it's one of the biggest hurdles.  And I think if you look back, people have been working on biological solutions, microbes,  microbial solutions, biological solutions for ag for 100 years, and really more recently  
**[0:41:21-0:41:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:41:21):**  for 30 or 40 years.  And you sit there and say, wow, in a world where environmental sustainability is important,  and in a world where clearly it seems like microbes should be one of the solutions for  growers, why isn't the business bigger?  Why aren't there more biological solutions out there?  
**[0:41:48-0:41:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:41:48):**  And why is the industry today totally dominated by traits and chemistry?  And the reason is simple, it's performance.  And the biggest knock on natural microbial solutions is consistency.  They don't perform with the same consistency that traits and chemicals do.  And one of the reasons for that is because they are living organisms.  
**[0:42:18-0:42:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:42:18):**  The products themselves are living.  They are microbes, and they are impacted by the environment.  And so temperature and moisture and all the things that affect a living organism tend  to, as well as just the environment that they're put in, will affect their performance.  If you think about a chemical, for the most part, it doesn't really care.  
**[0:42:43-0:42:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:42:43):**  You spray that chemical out there, and it kills the bug or it kills the disease.  If you put a trait into a plant, it's relatively unaffected by what temperature the soil is  or how much moisture there is.  It's actually in there.  And so those are the tools that the growers have become very comfortable with, and they've  
**[0:43:05-0:43:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:43:05):**  become the standard from a performance standpoint.  So how do you turn around, how do you take a microbe that is vulnerable or susceptible  to these environmental conditions that isn't consistent, how do you get it so that it has  the same level of performance as a chemical or a trait?  And our belief is that you actually have to engineer or optimize that microbe and get  
**[0:43:32-0:43:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:43:32):**  it up above, get the performance up above the noise or the background that's there when  you have a natural microbe so that it is performing, even if the temperature goes down a little  bit, or even if the moisture, all these things that might affect that microbe and its colonization,  that you've now introduced it, it's now producing enough of the metabolite or it's producing  enough of the signal or it's producing enough of the nitrogen that you are performing on  
**[0:44:02-0:44:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:44:02):**  a consistent basis.  So it really speaks to, because we get that, why are you engineering?  Why not just go find the microbe that goes and does this?  And the answer is people have been running down that path for 30 years.  And there's arguably not a single blockbuster.  
**[0:44:23-0:44:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:44:23):**  There's no biological product that comes close to the use, revenue, success, whatever, of  traits and chemicals.  They dominate.  And it's our belief, our belief is that from an environmental sustainability perspective,  and just in terms of providing growers with tools that they're going to need to address  
**[0:44:48-0:44:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:44:48):**  climate change and regulatory change and consumer demand changes and the whole food security  piece, where are their new tools going to come from?  Where's the innovation going to come from to allow them to withstand all these different  adversity, all this adversity that's coming at them?  And there will continue to be progress and solutions that come from traits.  
**[0:45:17-0:45:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:45:17):**  But the challenge there is you've got to do it one crop, pretty much one crop at a time.  And by far, the one that's had the most investment in it is corn.  By Pioneer and Monsanto and Albert.  A little bit with soy.  But they're really just these big acre crops that have big returns that can justify a 10  
**[0:45:42-0:45:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:45:42):**  to 14 year development cycle.  So you've got to have a big crop for it.  But it's limited to just that.  And then with chemicals, there's the number of new actives, the number of new modes of  action.  
**[0:46:00-0:46:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:46:00):**  All of that has slowed down significantly across herbicides, fungicides, and insecticides.  And at the same time, the regulatory pressure on it and on all those chemicals has been  ratcheted up dramatically.  So the door is open for these biological solutions.  The door is there.  
**[0:46:22-0:46:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:46:22):**  But if you're going to go through it, you've got to go through it with products that perform  close to or at the level that the existing products, that the chemicals and the trees  do.  That's really the real challenge from a scientific and from a scientific perspective.  And is the thought that the biology can do that.  
**[0:46:50-0:46:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:46:50):**  It's just engineering the biology in a way that it can consistently do that.  Like it's biologically possible.  You guys are, amongst other companies, have to just make a solution to take the biology  and say, okay, it's going to work.  We're going to make sure it works every single time as stated.  
**[0:47:11-0:47:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:47:11):**  Yep.  It works every time.  And there's also, you can get into the details of rate.  What rate does it have to go out at?  So that those growers can't be, and this is what I'm saying is, with a seed treatment,  
**[0:47:28-0:47:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:47:28):**  if you think about a seed treatment as a form of application, the amount of microbe you  can put on that seed is limited.  There's only so much space on a given seed for the seed treatment.  So you've got to be able to have it be potent enough at some point.  It has to be potent enough that it can work in those small amounts.  
**[0:47:49-0:47:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:47:49):**  The same thing if you go out and put it in the soil.  They're only going to put out a certain amount.  So you have to have, you also have to have a potency or an efficacy aspect to it, exactly  how you described it.  That microbe has been engineered for a very, very specific purpose, right?  
**[0:48:09-0:48:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:48:09):**  To maximize its production of a particular output or a particular metabolite to address  the disease or address the pest, the insect, or in our case with biofertility, to address  the nitrogen needs.  Are you aware of any microbes being used in agriculture that were engineered and they  go out there and use today and they survive in the wild, let alone forget making associations  
**[0:48:42-0:48:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:48:42):**  of plants, but are there biologicals being used that we currently make that they go out  there, they're used no problem.  So like the survivability problem could be conquered.  Here's an example of it.  The next step is, okay, now it's got to associate with another plant to perform its function,  
**[0:48:59-0:49:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:48:59):**  but are there microbe products out there that are being used?  There's a few examples.  I think the one I'm most familiar with when I was at Bayer was they had a seed treatment  called Pancho-Votivo II.  So the Votivo was a microbe that had in fact been engineered and it provided both the nematocytol,  
**[0:49:24-0:49:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:49:24):**  some level of the nematocytol activity, as well as sort of plant health, higher yield  benefits to it.  And so, and when we went to register that, we actually, the nice thing with it, it was  a good example where we at that time, Bayer, we were able to go and register it via the  States.  
**[0:49:47-0:49:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:49:47):**  So because it was more of a plant health type of an additive or a seed treatment, we were  able to register it through the States specifically.  And Bayer went to them and sat down with the state regulators, said, hey, it's engineered,  here's what it is.  And so it actually is a seed treatment that's used on a lot of the corn or can be used on  
**[0:50:10-0:50:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:50:10):**  the corn.  So that's a real example.  It's a little different.  The engineering that was done on that's a little different, slightly, it's a little  different than the approach that the joint's taking.  
**[0:50:22-0:50:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:50:22):**  But in fact, you ended up with a genetically modified microbe and it was registered and  it is being used.  So it's one example, but that's, there's very few, I mean, very, our approach to this and  our joint venture with Ginkgo and having access to Ginkgo's synthetic biology tools and technology,  this is really the first major attempt to do this in a big way, in a very directed way.  
**[0:50:50-0:50:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:50:50):**  So I think that those products are still to come.  In terms of that petiva seed treatment, how was the efficacy of that compared to say,  you know, just adding nitrogen fertilizer, if one of the targets was yield, how well  did the biological work in terms of boosting yield, you know, versus straight up untreated  seed?  
**[0:51:13-0:51:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:51:13):**  I mean, was it huge?  Like, is there a lot of potential here?  So the petiva, it was, I would say most of these seed treatments, most of these microbial  solutions, and again, I'd say, you know, 90, 99% of them are native, they're natural microbe  solutions, right?  
**[0:51:32-0:51:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:51:32):**  But even the vetivo, the target there is, can you consistently demonstrate a three to  five percent yield increase over not using it, over a control?  That was really the benchmark there.  In our case, and this is what makes what we're doing a bit of a moonshot is, you know, we're  not, it's not going to be very interesting.  
**[0:51:58-0:52:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:51:58):**  We're not going to land on the moon if we simply reduce the nitrogen input by five percent.  Or even frankly, if we have an engineered microbe that increases the yield by five percent,  that's not going to, nobody's going to get excited about an engineered microbe if that's  the limit of the benefit.  The benefit has to be big.  
**[0:52:22-0:52:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:52:22):**  And if you look at, you know, genetic successes or places where genetics have been, except  genetic modification has been allowed, if you will.  You know, in Hawaii, they were going to lose all the papaya crop.  So they allow the genetic modification that protected that.  The same thing's happening now with chestnuts.  
**[0:52:42-0:52:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:52:42):**  We're going to lose all of our chestnuts, but we can, it is addressable with a genetic  modification on it, right?  So there's, if you confront people with this, like something where the benefit is so big  that you can't close your eyes to it, then I think people will at least give the GMO  or the engineered microbe.  
**[0:53:08-0:53:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:53:08):**  They'll look at it, they'll give it a chance.  But you can't be, if you're just down there playing with the same yield increases or the  same benefits that natural microbes provide, then we're, you know, we won't have been successful.  And frankly, why would you spend the time and money to engineer something if a natural  microbe is just as good?  
**[0:53:29-0:53:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:53:29):**  It wouldn't make any sense.  Right.  No, I get where you're coming from.  It's fascinating where this is going, and I can already see parts of the public pushing  back because it's different.  
**[0:53:44-0:53:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:53:44):**  You're engineering something.  It's not natural.  For people that might think that, what are they missing maybe?  Like what's the con argument to a lot of the anti-engineering of microbes that you hear?  What part of the picture are they not seeing beyond the obvious benefit?  
**[0:54:07-0:54:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:54:07):**  But in terms of the some of the potential dangers or repercussions, I think that's where  people really get scared.  So I think there's a series of sort of scientific responses that you can give to that.  But frankly, the public's not interested in scientific responses.  So we could get into a discussion about, do you understand how often microbes are mutating  
**[0:54:34-0:54:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:54:34):**  all the time?  All the microbes that are out there, the microbes on your skin, microbes in your gut, all that,  right?  These microbes are mutating randomly into things that we may not know what they do or  don't do.  
**[0:54:49-0:54:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:54:49):**  And this is where some of the concern comes from, like disease, you know, pandemics and  these things is, are things changing out there, not from people doing it, but just natural  mutation, natural evolution that's taking place.  The benefit to what we're doing is we're doing it in a very controlled, totally known way.  It's very directed.  
**[0:55:15-0:55:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:55:15):**  And once we do it, we also can test what happened and know exactly how it behaves, put it through  all the safety tests.  If it's happening naturally out there in the environment, you have no way, nobody's monitoring  that.  So in some ways, you, by doing it this way, the argument would be, you've introduced more  
**[0:55:33-0:55:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:55:33):**  control and you're able to do the testing to ensure that you're adding benefit, but  no harm.  The problem with that is that kind of a science argument totally gets lost on the public.  And what you have to do is come back with a more of an emotional type of discussion.  And it really has to, the story has to start in the end with understanding the benefit.  
**[0:56:04-0:56:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:56:04):**  And kind of an extreme example is insulin.  Insulin for diabetics actually is made from a genetically modified microbe.  And, but I will guarantee you that there's nobody who's diabetic even thinks about the  fact that their insulin comes from an engineered microbe because it keeps them alive.  I mean, it's just, right.  
**[0:56:31-0:56:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:56:31):**  Nobody even questions that.  Now, you could also make the argument, but wait a minute, that's still in a contained  environment.  Nobody actually injected the engineered microbe into the diabetic.  They actually just took the product.  
**[0:56:44-0:56:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:56:44):**  So there is a difference there.  And I would say for us, that's really the hurdle.  That's one of the hurdles we've got to get over is can we convince people that moving  these engineered microbes from a contained environment to out onto a corn seed or out  into a wheat field, that that's okay.  
**[0:57:07-0:57:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:57:07):**  And the answer to that has to be, partially has to be science driven.  We have to run the safety tests, do the studies and answer everybody's questions.  But it also, part of it will come in, well, why are you doing it?  What problem are you solving?  And if the problem you're solving is big enough, I believe people will give, it's in those  
**[0:57:29-0:57:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:57:29):**  situations that people will turn to new solutions or novel technologies that otherwise they  might not be comfortable with.  Right.  And I guess in the ag side, and one approach is the no synthetic fertilizer side.  And I get that approach and how some people make it work.  
**[0:57:49-0:57:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:57:49):**  On the other side, it's what's going to do more harm, introducing these engineered microbes  to the environment or continuing to pour the same amount of synthetic chemicals on the  environment and having all the repercussions of that both upstream and downstream, figuratively  and literally.  And you just got to say, which one are you more comfortable with?  
**[0:58:11-0:58:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:58:11):**  And I think a lot of this is just the unknown, right?  Like people, we're at a point now in science where a lot of our beliefs and what even seems  possible is being challenged.  Like the whole idea of engineering a microbe to fix nitrogen for a corn plant and do most  of that in the second half of the corn plant's life and then cease to exist when the corn  
**[0:58:37-0:58:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:58:37):**  plant dies.  It's really sci-fi to a lot of people.  And when you can't understand it, I mean, you have fear and fear is a lot of times based  on what's unknown.  And this is a total unknown for a lot of people.  
**[0:58:51-0:58:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:58:51):**  Yeah, I know it's a great point.  And I think it's one of the things we've tried to think about early in this process is to  not just focus on growers.  So when we go out and talk to growers about this technology and we go out to talk to growers  about, okay, what percent reduction in nitrogen would get you excited economically?  
**[0:59:19-0:59:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:59:19):**  Because at the end of the day for growers, you can talk all you want about environmental  sustainability, but you also have to be able to talk about economics sustainability, right?  And those growers are just trying to stay in business.  They're trying to make a living and it's getting harder and harder.  So whatever solutions you bring them, they need to be economically sustainable as well  
**[0:59:42-0:59:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:59:42):**  as environmentally sustainable.  And for us, when we went out and talked to them, that cutoff points somewhere around  25, 30% reduction.  So once you get above 25, 30% reduction, the economics for that grower get really exciting,  get really interesting.  
**[0:59:59-1:00:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:59:59):**  So from a profitability standpoint, which same as being economically sustainable.  And so it's easy to focus on that.  However, to your point, that's different than how the consumer looks at it.  The grower and the consumer are two different entities.  And I think if you look back on the history of GMOs, there was a huge focus on growers  
**[1:00:24-1:00:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:00:24):**  and little to no focus on consumers.  And yet it was the consumers that have ended up being the ones who are the most distrustful  or having the hardest time with, I would say, genetic engineering technology.  And so we're really trying hard at this point to think about that and think about how to  message and think about how to talk about it, not just with the grower, but also with  
**[1:00:51-1:00:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:00:51):**  the consumer.  And again, you have to go into it recognizing the probability that you're going to get every  consumer comfortable with a new technology is zero.  It doesn't matter whether it's backseat.  You think about any technology out there.  
**[1:01:09-1:01:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:01:09):**  If it's new, there's going to be a percentage of people who, no matter how convincing it  is, they're going to be skeptical or concerned.  And so you have to set your expectations on what you can and can't do there.  So we're realistic about it.  And it's certainly not a slam dunk.  
**[1:01:32-1:01:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:01:32):**  It's not a guarantee.  But at the same time, we're so passionate about the potential that we think this approach  has.  And somebody's got to bring it out there for people to test and see and try.  And if it really does work as well as we think it's going to, then we think there's a path  
**[1:01:53-1:01:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:01:53):**  to with the right safety data packages, with the right studies, with the right answers  to people's questions.  We think there's a path all the way to commercialization and actually making a difference in ag as  a whole from a global perspective.  One of the terms that's came up a lot here is the technology that you're using to do  
**[1:02:13-1:02:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:02:13):**  this synthetic biology.  There's GMOs, there's CRISPR-Cas, which is gene editing, synthetic biology.  How does that fit in compare or contrast against GMOs and CRISPR-Cas?  I think it depends who you talk to.  It's actually an interesting name if you think about it.  
**[1:02:38-1:02:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:02:38):**  Synthetic biology, the term would imply that you're synthesizing new life, that you're  actually, that the biology you have is synthetic.  And I don't think that's really not what we're doing.  We're actually using these engineering techniques that are evolving and the technologies and  the instrumentation and the software that allows this to happen at this molecular level,  
**[1:03:06-1:03:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:03:06):**  at the gene level.  It's just remarkable now using those tools for specific purposes.  And it just happens that the field adopted the name of synthetic biology.  And if you look at some of the early pioneers there with Amaris and some of the early groups,  they really pioneered this around biofuels, the whole drive for biofuels.  
**[1:03:34-1:03:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:03:34):**  And then that obviously collapsed.  And so it required people to say, OK, it's really cool technology, but the commercial  market went away.  How do we reinvent ourselves?  How do we, you know, how to end what they've done in different models, whether it's Zymogen  
**[1:03:49-1:03:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:03:49):**  or Ginkgo or synthetic genomics or Amaris or all these, they've all reinvented themselves  around slightly different business models, but aimed at how do these tools, how does  this technology, this really cool technology, how can it apply to specialty chemicals?  How does it apply to fragrances?  How can it apply to bioremediation?  
**[1:04:12-1:04:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:04:12):**  How can it apply to food ingredients?  And maybe one of the biggest ones, how does it apply to pharmaceutical and biotech improvement?  But they're all sort of based on this idea that microbes can do things that we can't  do with synthetic chemistry.  I mean, that's really the underlying, or that they can do things better and at a higher  
**[1:04:42-1:04:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:04:42):**  quality than what you can do with synthetic chemistry or without chemistry, you know,  with a pure synthetic chemistry approach.  And that's really the basis of it is understanding and harnessing, from my view, harnessing the  power of what nature's put into these little microbes and harnessing it to produce metabolites  or products or signal to plants in a way that a chemical can.  
**[1:05:12-1:05:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:05:12):**  Totally different property from a chemical.  And that's why I think ultimately in agriculture, you're going to see, you know, 20 years from  now, you're still going to see traits as a way to address some of the issues out there.  You're going to still see chemicals, but I think you're going to have this whole new  class of products or solutions that are based on optimized and engineered microbes that  
**[1:05:40-1:05:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:05:40):**  solve or solve problems that the chemicals or traits can't, or complement in a very positive  way and in an incremental way, the problems that the chemicals and the traits are solving.  And ultimately, you know, ultimately you've provided a whole new set of tools to the growers  that are out there trying to feed the world.  So in a way, I mean, do you think we've gone as far as we can with chemicals?  
**[1:06:11-1:06:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:06:11):**  The upside there is limited.  That curve's flattening out and the microbial biological solution curve, like we're just  taking off.  That thing can just go exponential?  It's you know, if you, one argument, I mean, one way to look at that is to, if you go back  
**[1:06:29-1:06:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:06:29):**  over the last 10 or 15 years and you take the R and D budgets for all the big ag companies,  what percentage of that went to developing new chemical products or solutions?  I mean, it's, you know, these R and D budgets these guys have are in the, you know, hundreds  of millions to billions, right?  All focused on either trait, either trait in the case of Monsanto and Pioneer, and now  
**[1:06:58-1:07:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:06:58):**  Dow bear, or in the case of chemicals like Bayer and Syngenta, and DSF, and you know,  Les Dow and DuPont and Alex Cortado.  So just, I mean, just massive, massive R and D budgets all on small molecule chemical type  solutions.  And you look at how much money was spent on developing microbial solutions.  
**[1:07:22-1:07:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:07:22):**  And you know, 90% of it is all happening in these small venture capital based companies  that are operating on R and D budgets of, you know, 5, 10, 15 million a year.  I mean, in half for the last, right?  So to me, it's not surprising that performance and consistency and the quality of trait and  chemical solutions is up here.  
**[1:07:48-1:07:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:07:48):**  And down, you know, down here, you've got the microbials, because it's a, it haven't  had the investment, they haven't had the understanding or the technology applied to them.  And at the same time, if you think about where we are as a, as a scientific community, understanding  the microbiome, how early it is, right?  Because it's not to me, it's just understanding a microbe isn't enough from an agricultural  
**[1:08:16-1:08:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:08:16):**  perspective.  You also have to understand that microbe in a soil microbiome, and in that plant microbe  interaction, that plant microbe, microbiome.  And our understanding of that is, it's such an early stage, right?  That to me, it isn't surprising that you have the gap you have today between the two.  
**[1:08:43-1:08:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:08:43):**  And, you know, I think traits, you know, I think there's some problem, I think there's  certain things that that's going to be ideal for.  And that's going to continue to get the R&D spending, it's going to continue to try to  solve problems in the big acre crops.  I think that the chances that that technology goes out to fruits and vegetables and all  
**[1:09:07-1:09:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:09:07):**  these other crops that are used to feed the world, I think that's going to take time because  of cost and just sheer cost that it takes to do that.  And with chemicals, you've got, you know, you've got a regulatory challenge there, where  the safety criteria and the safety bar has been raised so high, particularly from an  environmental perspective, that to try to find chemical solutions that are so selective  
**[1:09:40-1:09:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:09:40):**  that the only insect that they affect is, you know, this one, but it has no effect on  fish and no effect on bees and no effect on anything else.  That's a big challenge.  And if you look back, you know, if you go back in time, that selectivity factor, from  my view, wasn't there.  
**[1:10:05-1:10:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:10:05):**  And you know, should it be there?  Absolutely, right.  If you think about environmental protection, environmental sustainability, but you have  to recognize that with that selectivity and with those safety hurdles, you're going to  dramatically reduce the amount of chemicals out there that are going to get registered  
**[1:10:24-1:10:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:10:24):**  in all likelihood.  And it's made it more expensive to bring a new chemical to market because you not only  do you have to do all the environmental testing, but you've also got to look at all the human  talks and, you know, is there any chance it's carcinogenic?  Well, okay, how long does that test take?  
**[1:10:42-1:10:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:10:42):**  You know, how long do you test something before you decide that it's not carcinogenic?  And you get into the complexity of it is, and the risk of it just keeps getting higher  and higher because our standards get higher and higher.  So in the research you're doing with corn, is corn the lead domino here?  Meaning if you can solve corn and get a microbe to start associating with corn, fixed nitrogen,  
**[1:11:10-1:11:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:11:10):**  that it will be, I'll say easier, not easy, but easier to then get one to associate with  wheat or tomatoes or lettuce, but you got to do one before you can move on to all.  Or do you see certain crops as just better candidates, not economically, but biologically?  So one of the key reasons we're focused on corn is the size of the market.  The economics help justify it.  
**[1:11:47-1:11:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:11:47):**  So if you're going to go, if it's Bayer and Ginkgo are going to go spend this money, they  want it to be on something that's where the benefit is unquestioned.  If you can do it on corn, everybody gets that.  So you've got to, when you're doing a moonshot, you're doing something like this, you've got  to have a strong story behind it.  
**[1:12:11-1:12:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:12:11):**  And clearly the other thing you want to do is you want to have the biggest impact environmentally.  And so we could go solve this problem in lettuce or cabbage or tomatoes.  It's not even going to move the needle from an environmental impact, which is part of  what we're trying to show and part of what we're trying to do.  Well, I mean, I get that part, but let's say you did solve corn and I get the whole big  
**[1:12:34-1:12:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:12:34):**  market side and then you went on to the next biggest crop.  Is it once you do it once you understand enough to make it easier to do it again with another  crop?  Like, in other words, is the biggest hurdle the very first hurdle you have to go after  or do you think each one of these crops are going to be equally as hard?  
**[1:12:56-1:13:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:12:56):**  If you had to look into crystal ball and look ahead.  I think the first one, I think this first one with corn is absolutely the hardest one.  And you think about, because we've got to be able to build all the assays to measure  it.  We've got to understand all the different key things we've done pathway wise.  
**[1:13:17-1:13:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:13:17):**  What I think will make other crops easier or make it go faster is that in parallel with  the work in parallel with the work we're doing right now, we have another whole program built  around identifying chassis, hosts or chassis that are potentially ideal for other crops.  So you may have a, you're going to have a set of, you're going to have, you know, a  handful of chassis that are particularly good for corn or corn like plants.  
**[1:13:49-1:13:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:13:49):**  We also think that you're going to have chassis that are particularly good for other types  of crops as well as for other geographies.  So as you change geographies, remember, these are living organisms.  You know, something that works really well in tropical climates may not work that well  in North Dakota, and vice versa, right?  
**[1:14:10-1:14:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:14:10):**  So and that's the beauty of being able to find these selected chassis or hosts.  They can be selected for crop.  They can be selected for geography.  And when they're selected for geography, there's two aspects to that.  One is climate, but the other is registration.  
**[1:14:31-1:14:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:14:31):**  So for example, if you, if we want to go and register a new microbe, even an engineer microbe  down in Brazil, one of the most advantageous things we can have is to start with a microbe  that's native from Brazil, right?  They don't like new microbes coming in from, that have never been in Brazil before.  And the same exact same thing is true in India, and the same thing is true in China.  
**[1:14:59-1:15:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:14:59):**  So in some of these other markets, bigger markets, if you can start with a microbe that's  native to that country, your ability to go through the regulatory process is significantly  enhanced.  So this just comes back to this whole idea of building a library or a pool of these chassis,  thinking about association with different crops, thinking about different geographies,  
**[1:15:27-1:15:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:15:27):**  and thinking about different geographies.  And I think it really gets to your point, which is, you know, is corn going to be the  hardest one?  Absolutely.  And if we can get it to work in corn at 30, 40%, and we understand why, and we engineered  
**[1:15:43-1:15:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:15:43):**  that, then it's really a matter of finding hosts or chassis that have similar colonization,  similar symbiotic relationships, just with other crops that also, you know, that also  could benefit from a nitrogen-fixing microbe.  Do you think it's reasonably possible that this association between a non-legume and  a nitrogen-fixing bacteria has occurred in the wild?  
**[1:16:13-1:16:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:16:13):**  It's just nobody has been able to find it because maybe they're just not looking.  Like there's, if you think about the trillions and trillions of microbes out there in the  soil, mutating all the time, trillions and trillions of non-leguminous plants, you'd  think at some point in time, there has been some sort of mutation to make that cross.  I mean, eventually it would go back far enough in history and that's how legumes came about.  
**[1:16:42-1:16:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:16:42):**  And is it, the reason I ask is because it's to say like, is it biologically possible?  Like again, you must think it is if you're going for it, but if you guys can recreate  it, then nature probably did, but we just probably haven't been able to find it and  isolate it.  Yeah, I think, I think it's exactly right.  
**[1:17:05-1:17:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:17:05):**  I think either nature has, and we haven't found it or it will, and we haven't given  it enough time.  And you know, so then you'd step back and say, well, where should I go look?  Well, you probably want to look in geographies or areas where people are trying to grow corn  with little to no nitrogen, right?  
**[1:17:28-1:17:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:17:28):**  Where there's a, you know, where it's deprived or so that, so that, you know, and almost  happening in a natural, in a natural way so that those pressures are there to drive that  association or drive that evolution.  So do I think it's, you know, do I think it's happened that that microbe might be out there?  You know, you can, nobody could ever say, you know, it's not possible.  
**[1:17:55-1:18:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:17:55):**  You think about the sheer numbers and complexity and like you say, the mutations going on,  finding it, finding that, that magic microbe and thinking that, you know, and believing  that, oh, that's the magic one to, the magic one to put on a, on a corn plant or that would  associate with a corn plant.  You know, people have been, people have been searching for that for 50 years, right?  
**[1:18:20-1:18:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:18:20):**  I mean, it's kind of Holy grail and they haven't been successful yet.  Um, could they probably, but even if they found one, I would still argue that our approach  and our technology could make it better.  And it goes back to your question, Diego, that you were asking earlier is, you know,  could this same technology improve, even improve even more on legume, uh, soy and peanut nitrogen  
**[1:18:50-1:18:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:18:50):**  production so that it actually became a delivery mechanism into the soil as opposed to just  the, the yield or the production of that soy or peanut plant for that season.  And I think you've got to believe, you know, if you believe in this technology, the answer  is absolutely everything that we could continue to engineer and optimize and enhance it.  Uh, and it's, it's a, you know, would be a, another great use of this technology.  
**[1:19:15-1:19:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:19:15):**  Um, you know, people are, people are talking up now, one of the hot topics now is, is,  uh, sequestering carbon and, and, and the whole world in there is a business world around  that.  But, you know, we also, you know, when we're, when we're fantasizing, uh, we also think  about, wow, I wonder, you know, is there a way that you could use the use microbes as  
**[1:19:38-1:19:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:19:38):**  a way to increase, uh, carbon sequestering both around the roots of the plant or in the  plant as well as in the soil.  Uh, and you know, again, if you believe in this technology and, and if you just let your  head go, you know, where could this go at some point?  Um, I think all those things become, they're still science fiction.  
**[1:19:58-1:20:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:19:58):**  Uh, but they certainly now with the time where we're going with this stuff, they suddenly,  it becomes a very different playing field than all, all I have, the only microbes I  can use are the ones that I find out there and isolate is natural microbes.  You open up a whole new world from a design standpoint of what you, what you can design  that microbe, what you can optimize that microbe to do.  
**[1:20:26-1:20:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:20:26):**  So really, I mean, in 50 years, it could essentially be anything, water improvement, improving  nutrient utilization, isolating specific nutrients out of the minerals and rocks and the soil,  like it's just really the world is the oyster here and this is a whole new frontier when  it comes to ag.  It is.  
**[1:20:49-1:20:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:20:49):**  And it's a, and I'd like to think that the, you know, some of the pioneering work we're  going to do on the ag side, um, will also spill over into some of these other fields.  Um, and I think, you know, and, but I think the one thing on all of these, all of these  different applications are going to have, you know, have to find or have in common is  they're going to have to find that chassis or host works for that application.  
**[1:21:17-1:21:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:21:17):**  And I think that's one of the things that's so unique for, um, applications like agriculture,  bio remediation, uh, you know, applications like that, where the microbe you're taking  advantage of the fact that microbes do exist and can exist and even can thrive outside  of a tank.  They can do that in the environment.  
**[1:21:40-1:21:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:21:40):**  And so can we find ones that, that do that either by their association with the plant  or, uh, how much oil they chew up in a bioremediation sense?  And can we harness and optimize that through engineering into a product that a grower or  somebody can use commercially?  So can we, can we take it from an interesting science experiment, which is great.  
**[1:22:06-1:22:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:22:06):**  That's your technical proof of concept, but for us, you know, landing on the moon means  that that product is in the hands of a grower, right.  That he can use to produce food on a global basis.  That's when you've landed on the moon.  And if he can do it with half of the fertilizer that he originally needed, I mean, whether  
**[1:22:29-1:22:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:22:29):**  it's, whether it's increasing production in the third world, where they don't have access  to synthetic fertilizer, like we do in the U S or whether it's creating a more sustainable  way to grow crops in the U S by dramatically reducing what you do put out there.  Either one is to me is a, is a, is a big transformative benefit to agriculture as a whole, or it certainly,  at this point, and we're, we're careful at this point, you have to keep putting in the  
**[1:22:56-1:22:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:22:56):**  word potential.  But until, until we've, till we've actually done it and have the rigorous field trial,  rigorous science behind it, we, we, you know, it's really just talking about it from a potential  perspective.  To give people some idea of the scale or complexity that goes into this research, just identifying  
**[1:23:18-1:23:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:23:18):**  the chassis to create this symbiotic relationship with corn.  Is it something where you're starting with a million potential choices and you've got  to narrow it down to 500?  Like, like how, what does the funnel look like in terms of how much you have to sift  through and how much do you try and got to get it down to, to even go to the next stage?  
**[1:23:45-1:23:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:23:45):**  The way we're looking at it now, I think you start with, you know, thousands in the thousands,  not, not millions.  So thousand, 1,000, 5,000, 10,000.  But these would be microbes that already have sort of been pre characterized in some way.  And then when they come out of that funnel, maybe you're down to something more manageable,  
**[1:24:10-1:24:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:24:10):**  you know, in that, let's say 50 to 250 level that you can then start to say, gee, how,  how easy is it to engineer?  How safe is, you know, how much, how stable is it?  Some of these factors.  And how long have you guys been working on this for so far to date?  
**[1:24:30-1:24:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:24:30):**  This one probably, I guess, fairly early on, maybe six months.  Okay.  So six months on this early stage.  And if you, if you had to get, yeah, so it's, we've been working with, we've been working  with some early chassis that we had, but it was as we worked with some of these early  
**[1:24:50-1:24:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:24:50):**  chassis, it sort of, we recognize how critical it was, how critical the characterization  of these, of the additional chassis was going to be.  So we're really jump-starting that and really focused in on, on that as a key part of our  key part of our research right now.  Because if you think about it, if you, if you don't, if you don't have chassis, if you  
**[1:25:15-1:25:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:25:15):**  don't have chassis that can colonize and associate with the plant, is that delivery vehicle.  The concept really, it's hard to picture how the concept is going to work.  Right, right.  It's almost like those are your, those are your blank tapes or your DVDs.  And okay, that's what you're starting with.  
**[1:25:33-1:25:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:25:33):**  You can write the content onto those.  They are.  And it's, it's, it's novel because again, for the last eight years, the, you know, the  synthetic biology community has focused on E. coli and yeast and these, these, and so  they're super well characterized.  
**[1:25:52-1:25:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:25:52):**  Everybody knows how to work with them, but they have, they have to be done in a contained  environment.  So you go back to the beginning of our discussion, you know, the big, one of the big hurdles  for us is can we take synthetic biology and move it from a contained environment to a  cornfield or an agricultural environment?  
**[1:26:13-1:26:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:26:13):**  That's a big jump.  And and you're only going to make that jump if you have chassis that have the characteristics  like we've talked about.  Right.  And so this, now I'm more knowledgeable about this.  
**[1:26:26-1:26:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:26:26):**  If we go back to one of the earlier questions, I mean, one of the potential paths is you  take a legume and you now get it to associate with corn.  Well, that's, doesn't sound like that's going to meet your chassis requirement because it  doesn't have a preexisting relationship with corn.  If you had to do that, so you take something that works with soybeans and shift it over  
**[1:26:46-1:26:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:26:46):**  to corn, what, what's the factor there that you're fighting against?  You got to get the corn to accept that?  You either have to get, yeah, you either have to find, find a association or a symbiosis  there.  Right.  
**[1:27:07-1:27:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:27:07):**  I think at this stage of our knowledge, engineering that into say the rhizobia, into the soy,  the soy microbe, that's, that's really beyond our capabilities right now to think you could  change, change an organism or change a microbe to that level.  That's a, that's a level of engineering that's, you know, five, 10, 15 years out.  It's not the reality of what we have today.  
**[1:27:36-1:27:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:27:36):**  It sounds like, I mean, like we don't even know why the plant and that specific microbe  talk to each other.  So if you don't know the language that they're using to communicate, you can't set the speaker  or the receiver on either side to actually communicate.  Is that kind of a layman's way of thinking about it?  
**[1:27:56-1:28:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:27:56):**  Yeah, I think it's, it's, it's just, I mean, I think we're, we're, we're just in the very,  very early days of starting to stand and see some of that.  So there's, I wouldn't say that we don't know anything.  I think there are researchers, particularly in academia who have, um, identified signaling  maul, signaling and stuff that we know some of the signaling that's going on, but, you  
**[1:28:19-1:28:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:28:19):**  know, compared to the whole picture and compared to what's going on, you know, with, with hundreds,  if not thousands and millions of microbes, it's just, it's very, very early days.  What we do know for sure is that that signaling and these communities are, are out there.  They're real.  We do know that, that, that there is a plant microbiome and we know that that plant microbiome  
**[1:28:46-1:28:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:28:46):**  and the soil microbiome together play a significant role in the health and the productivity of  that plant.  What we don't fully understand is that we know that much, but how you can go in there,  going in there and identifying the, if there's a handful of key drivers, if there's key signals  and key, and again, just when you think, okay, I think I can zero in on this.  
**[1:29:20-1:29:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:29:20):**  You might be looking at a cornfield in Iowa and does that even apply to a cornfield in  Brazil?  I mean, is it, it's just this complexity.  There's a complex piece of it that's, that's pretty daunting in terms of understanding  agriculture at the individual plant level.  
**[1:29:40-1:29:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:29:40):**  So if you, if you really want to like make your head spin, you know, we talk about in  human health, we talk about personalized medicine, right?  Oh, and because each of our genomes is specific, we're going to develop, you know, we're going  to develop a, a medical solution for each of us that's personalized to our DNA, to our,  you know, our genomics, right?  
**[1:30:01-1:30:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:30:01):**  So personalized medicine.  Imagine if you had to think about that for agriculture and you're going to develop that  personalized for each individual plant and you just go, no, that's impossible.  I mean, we, we work on thousands of acres and we work on hundreds and hundreds of greenhouses  or, you know, whatever, but, but the idea that you would have something specific to  
**[1:30:25-1:30:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:30:25):**  that plant, yet that micro environment that each of those plants is in, it is probably,  it is different.  And each one is just, just like, you know, every person out there from a personalized  medicine perspective is different.  It's just that, you know, there's three, 4 billion people and there's, you know, quadrillions  
**[1:30:46-1:30:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:30:46):**  of micro.  So it's, it's into the complexity piece of it and stuff, but it's, so on one hand, it's  really daunting and it's humbling to think about what an early stage we are in terms  of uncovering this.  And at the same time, it's super exciting to see where the tools to do this have evolved  
**[1:31:08-1:31:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:31:08):**  to in such a short time.  If you go back 10 years, look at the cost of sequencing, look at the technology people  were using, you fast forward to today, it's absolutely stunning both on the instrument  technology side and on the software algorithm, computational biology side and the, you know,  the learning, you know, the learning tools that are there to do sort of, you know, in  
**[1:31:37-1:31:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:31:37):**  Ginkgo language to do like design, build, test and keep doing iterations over and over  and over again, looking to optimize, looking for these, you know, in the sense, you know,  engineering biological samples, the same way that an engineer was, you know, doing computer  code, it's just, you've got four bases instead of, you know, on and off kind of thing, a  zero and a one.  
**[1:32:07-1:32:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:32:07):**  But it's, you know, the idea is your, you know, nature has programmed things at a level  of complexity and, you know, that we can't even comprehend right now, right?  It's just, when we think about we program computers to do things, you look at what nature's  going to do at the end, and so tapping into that and starting to understand that and starting  to be able to optimize it or do things in a highly selective way for a particular outcome,  
**[1:32:37-1:32:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:32:37):**  that's really the early stages that we're at right now.  And, you know, the tools are going to get better, the knowledge is going to get better.  But at the same time, the need, the need for this innovation, the need for these products,  the need for these solutions, just keeps growing.  And so that's, you know, we come into work every day, or well, we don't come into work  
**[1:33:01-1:33:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:33:01):**  as much as we used to.  But for the lab people coming in, you know, that's really what's, that's really what's  driving everybody is the, you know, understanding just how important it is that we come up with  some new, some new biotech type tools that are going to help these growers and are going  to help address, you know, all these different aspects of food production.  
**[1:33:25-1:33:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:33:25):**  If you could look ahead being six months into this, how long do you think you'd have to  go into the future to see a nitrogen fixing microbe that associates with a corn plant?  Forget the regulatory side, like something you could use on a test plot in the ground,  in the wild, it's working.  How far out is that?  
**[1:33:47-1:33:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:33:47):**  Is that five years?  Is that 10 years?  Where do you think we're at?  I think based on where we are today, I would say optimistically two to three.  Wow.  
**[1:34:02-1:34:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:34:02):**  So pretty close.  You know, and then could, you know, could it take four to five?  Sure.  I mean, we're not, but we've made some pretty significant, you know, we've made progress  to date.  
**[1:34:13-1:34:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:34:13):**  We're getting a better and better understanding of not only what to do, but when we do those  things, you know, what kind of impact it has.  So now we won't, which to your point, there's a difference between having field trial, having  this work in a field trial and having a commercial product that's on every corn seed.  Because in between those two things is you have to have adoption by Bayer and Pioneer  
**[1:34:47-1:34:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:34:47):**  and because they, you know, because they control the corn seed and you want it to go, ideally  you want it to go on as that seed treatment.  So realistically, even after you have something that works, they're going to test it minimum  of two years before they go and put it on everyone, you know, all their corn seed.  So there's always this, there's a delay there if you're going to go out as a seed treatment  
**[1:35:14-1:35:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:35:14):**  and you're going to go to market through Corteva and through Bayer, there's going to be a built  in delay of a couple of years just because that's how the process works.  They don't believe anybody's data but their own, rightfully so.  And they're not going to jeopardize a multi-billion dollar corn franchise, right, on something  that they're not positive is going to work as well as they say it will.  
**[1:35:40-1:35:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:35:40):**  So if you tell growers they can cut their fertilizer by 40% and they go do it and their  yield goes down, that's not a good day.  And so you really, this gets back to sort of the consistency and the performance that  we were talking about.  When you play in the ag world, you've got, you know, your products have to perform, they  
**[1:36:02-1:36:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:36:02):**  have to be reliable.  They're going into an environment that is just loaded with risk.  They don't know, they can't control weather, they can't control all these things.  So the things they can control, like what products they use, they better work and they  better be reliable and they better trust you.  
**[1:36:23-1:36:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:36:23):**  And so you've got, that's the environment you're selling into in the ag world.  And so you have to accept that adoption goes fairly slowly unless, again, unless there's  suddenly there's a crisis, right?  If you're at risk with losing a whole crop, if you're at risk with, you know, if everything's  at stake, then you might adopt a little faster.  
**[1:36:48-1:36:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:36:48):**  And so, you know, if you fast forward three, four years and you're starting to see some  serious regulatory pressure on growers in the Midwest on how much nitrogen they can  use because it's getting into the groundwater or whatever, all of a sudden their incentive  to look for alternatives goes up pretty dramatically.  And that's certainly, you know, I've always found it challenging to try to predict regulatory  
**[1:37:14-1:37:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:37:14):**  timelines.  That's in any direction.  So you have to be careful.  But my point is, when faced with something pretty dramatic, if somebody has a solution,  your willingness to try something new is higher depending on how big the crisis is or how  
**[1:37:30-1:37:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:37:30):**  big the challenge is.  Well considering this has been, like you said, the holy grail of what a lot of people in  ag have been looking for to wait five years, isn't that long term?  Yet just to close this out, I mean, one thing I'm curious of, as a business owner, your  CEO of a company where you're looking five, ten years into the future, a lot of business  
**[1:37:54-1:37:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:37:54):**  is turn and burn, minimum viable product, like get something out there, sell it, let's  keep churning through product.  How do you approach a business, a project, looking at something that's so far out in  the future and still be optimistic about it, still come in excited about it every day,  still keep grinding in the face of failure when one, it's a hard task, it's almost a  
**[1:38:18-1:38:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:38:18):**  seemingly impossible task to begin with, and two, it's just, it's gonna take a long time.  And in so many people listening to this, watching this, they have trouble taking on projects  that are gonna take more than two weeks, and here's one that might take a decade.  How do you do that?  I think there's a couple pieces to it.  
**[1:38:39-1:38:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:38:39):**  One is, I think, myself and the team that I built.  I think we understood what the challenge was, and we knew what we were getting into when  we started.  So we were intentionally set up as a moonshot.  We were set up with the idea that this was a big task, and we all kind of stepped into  
**[1:39:03-1:39:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:39:03):**  this knowing that this was high risk.  At the same time, if we're successful with it, it could have a dramatic impact.  It could really be transformative, and that in itself is exciting.  We also have expanded the portfolio of projects we're working on, so it's not just the nitrogen  fixation, but we have some other pests and disease projects we're working on that probably  
**[1:39:32-1:39:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:39:32):**  could come to fruition, at least from a technical proof of concept, sooner.  So we'll get some earlier successes to make sure we can show how well the technology works.  And then I think scientists are always, when you're in these projects like this, you're  always looking at getting to the next stage.  When you can go from an in vitro success to an in vivo and in planta success, and then  
**[1:39:58-1:40:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:39:58):**  you can go from a greenhouse success to a field success.  I think we all understand that in these type of development programs, you don't go from  zero to 60 overnight.  You know that that's what it's going to take.  But what keeps you going is each of these steps that you're going up is in itself is  
**[1:40:25-1:40:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:40:25):**  a reward and gets exciting.  So I think both of those, knowing what we got into.  And I think deep down in everybody, I think on a daily basis, you're also driven by how  important the need is, the potential impact you can have and the need for it.  And we all believe in microbes.  
**[1:40:50-1:40:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:40:50):**  We all believe in biotechnology and the genomics and the microbial engineering.  And we're all pretty passionate about agriculture and how important it's going to be to the  future of food security and food on a global basis to come up with some of these new solutions.  I think it's pretty clear that the status quo is not going to get us there when we have  5, 6, 7 billion people.  
**[1:41:17-1:41:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:41:17):**  There's plenty of drivers and plenty of motivation.  And if you love that intersection of science and business puzzles, right now, I mean, ag's  one of the funnest places to be.  Because there's very few things that have all the different pieces to it.  And you've got to know the consumer.  
**[1:41:41-1:41:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:41:41):**  You've got to know the grower.  The science has to work.  And you've got to make it work as a business.  It's got to make sense as a business venture.  So it's fun.  
**[1:41:51-1:41:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:41:51):**  And the team is highly motivated.  We've got two great parents supporting us in Bayer and Ginkgo.  And we'll see where it takes us.  But at this point, we're cautiously optimistic.  Well, it's a good place to be.  
**[1:42:08-1:42:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:42:08):**  And one final thought.  What would you want growers, farmers to know about the future of agriculture from where  you sit?  I guess, I think to me, maybe the most important thing to think about is speed.  And I think what worries me right now, and what should worry people, is that an average  
**[1:42:38-1:42:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:42:38):**  product, new product in agriculture, whether it's a chemical product or a trade product,  average development time is 10 to 12, 14 years.  And with climate change and regulatory change and all that's happening that these growers  are faced with, they can't wait 10, 12, 14 years for a new solution.  Things will have already changed.  
**[1:43:03-1:43:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:43:03):**  So in the same way that people are looking at how fast we're developing vaccines for  COVID, if you shift your mind and a problem becomes big enough, you find new ways to do  things.  The beauty of science, the beauty of innovation, the power of necessity, that you have to do  it.  
**[1:43:24-1:43:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:43:24):**  And so I think, to me, a key lesson from this whole COVID thing that we need to take into  agriculture is thinking about how fast as a scientific community, how are we going to  be able to bring new solutions the same way these companies today are trying to bring  vaccines in one to two years when it used to take five to 10?  How do you think, you know, and so I think agriculture as a whole needs to be thinking  
**[1:43:52-1:43:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:43:52):**  about that.  And I think speed of development, speed of new products is going to be critical because  of the rate that things are changing.  And we're going to have to rethink how we do things if we're going to be able to give  these growers solutions in a timely fashion.  
**[1:44:10-1:44:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:44:10):**  I think it's one of the big learnings for me individually that's come out of this whole  COVID thing and watching how this whole race for vaccines has accelerated.  And I mean, if you told people two years ago that you could develop a vaccine, even think  about it, in 12 months, they would have laughed at you.  But now they're, you know, now they're trying.  
**[1:44:34-1:44:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:44:34):**  And whether it's going to be, you know, in 12 months or 18 or 24, it's going to happen  in all likelihood at a record pace.  And that same mindset and approach, I think agriculture has got to be thinking about that,  ideally, before it's needed, not after.  Yeah, it's amazing, exciting times.  
**[1:44:53-1:44:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:44:53):**  And it's cool to get an inside look at it.  So Mike from Joyanne, I want to thank you for coming on and sharing your thoughts today.  I mean, it's been interesting on my part.  But thanks again, man.  Stay safe.  
**[1:45:05-1:45:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-06-JOYN-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:45:05):**  Oh, you too, and enjoyed the questions and the conversation and really appreciate the  opportunity to talk.  So take care and be safe.  And hopefully we'll talk again in the future.  