---
title: Dr. Paul Zorner - Soil Microbes | In Search of Soil #13
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.

---

### In Search of Soil  (2021-07-14)  

**[0:00:00-0:00:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:00:00):**  So, we meet again.  Sometimes nature works in mysterious ways.  For example, you can add one microbe to a soil and you might not see any results at  
**[0:00:28-0:00:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:00:28):**  all. But if you add that same microbe to the soil in combination with other microbes, you might see  miraculous results. To talk about that concept and many others, today I'm joined by Dr. Paul Zorner  of Locus Agricultural Solutions. Paul is going to be sharing his decades of experience dealing with  
**[0:00:49-0:00:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:00:49):**  microbes in agriculture. Let's get into it with Dr. Paul Zorner. This is In Search of Soil.  You know, when you think about soil and measuring data from it, you know, a lot of times when you  measure something, there has to be a lot of knowns involved. Like you have to fully understand what  
**[0:01:11-0:01:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:01:11):**  you are measuring. Is there a danger for this tendency of science and large companies to be too  reductionist when it comes to soil and implying A-B relationships. If A happens, then we expect B.  Well, maybe soil is just so complex given our level of understanding now, we could run a trial,  
**[0:01:39-0:01:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:01:39):**  get a certain result, and not really understand why we got that result. I know a lot of people  who listen to the podcast, watch the videos, sometimes they'll question things and say,  well, is there a study to support that? Is there a study to support that? And one thing I go back  
**[0:01:55-0:02:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:01:55):**  to in my mind when I hear that is sometimes there's just not a lot of studies on this stuff,  and there's not a lot of understanding around it, so there aren't the studies. So when you think  about where we are on the private and public sector looking at science, are we too reductionist  
**[0:02:12-0:02:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:02:12):**  given our knowledge of all these complex relationships within the soil?  And the system is complex. That doesn't mean we can't understand it. We need to appreciate  that it's complex to begin with. And I'm never one for, I think if you can measure things,  
**[0:02:30-0:02:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:02:30):**  it'll help ultimately fill in the gaps in our knowledge and should help better understand that  complexity. But it can be too much at times. Sometimes when you're talking to people,  their eyes will just glaze over to start talking about oligotrophic versus copiotrophic organisms  
**[0:02:46-0:02:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:02:46):**  and the Haney soil test versus chromic acid. And so I think what you have to be careful of,  use terms that people can understand, use language that's common to people, try to use analogies.  And recognize too that intuition is a wonderful thing. I remember as a kid, I grew up on a farm,  
**[0:03:12-0:03:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:03:12):**  a horticultural farm. We grew specimen trees and azaleas and rhododendrons. Also had many,  many acres of raspberries. My mom would go out every day with a shovel and dig up a little piece  of the field that she thought didn't look quite right to her. She thought looked really good and  
**[0:03:28-0:03:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:03:28):**  she'd have me smell it. And say, hey, this smells good, this doesn't smell good, we've got to do  something here. And oftentimes it was like too much water, standing water, so she had a swampy  smell to her. She'd say, look, the soil isn't draining properly. And I think what modern  
**[0:03:46-0:03:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:03:46):**  science is doing is just trying to assign some quantifiable numbers to that basic innate human  intuition. I was reminded that a couple years ago when we were working with a gas-met portable  FTIR, that's an infrared device that will allow you to measure the respiration of soil. You can  
**[0:04:07-0:04:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:04:07):**  set it as a collar, you set it down in the field, and it'll analyze how much CO2 is being emitted,  how much nitrous oxide is being emitted. You can quantify it. And I think of my mom every time I  do that, that she basically was that $80,000 gas-met portable FTIR, and she kind of had a  
**[0:04:26-0:04:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:04:26):**  sense of what she was doing. And so I think there's a mix that, you know, we as human beings  probably do have a good perspective. Breeders, when I was with with Microgen and I talked to our  breeders, they can walk through a cornfield in terms of different, you know, cultivars that they  
**[0:04:41-0:04:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:04:41):**  were evaluating, but they didn't measure squat. They just looked at the plant, its color, its  structure, and they were able to determine which ones were going to be the better ones. And  ultimately we did, you know, morphological quantification and genetic tests and things like  
**[0:04:58-0:05:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:04:58):**  that. But I'd say nine times out of ten, the variety that was selected best based upon those  scientific measurements was the one that the breeder inherently knew. So the human being is a  pretty accurate diagnostic organism, but you can't then layer that into a database and evaluate it  
**[0:05:18-0:05:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:05:18):**  and share it with a lot of other people. You know, I've listened to some remarkable speakers,  whether it's, you know, Gary Zimmer or a whole variety of people, or you listen to like  Kiss the Brown, the documentary that was just made, and Ray Archuleta. But they can't be  
**[0:05:37-0:05:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:05:37):**  everywhere all the time. And so I think the ability now to collect data we might not have  been able to collect to quantify before, putting it into a database and then using it to then  understand and then communicate those principles to other people is a very good thing. But you just  
**[0:05:55-0:06:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:05:55):**  have to recognize that also with statistics, you know, there's liars, damn liars, and statisticians,  it's the old joke, right? That you can prove anything with statistics. And so it's all  something that you combine and you got to use common sense when you're evaluating these things  
**[0:06:11-0:06:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:06:11):**  and talking about it. But the direct answer to your question is no, I don't think we're collecting  too much data. I think more data is better. We just need to evaluate it in a proper way.  Right. Your reference there, Micah Jyn, if you go back to some of the early work there in the 80s,  
**[0:06:27-0:06:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:06:27):**  you're talking about pest control, biological control. What were some theories you were testing  back then and how did that play out over time? Well, you know, the theory at the time,  and being a weed scientist, I was looking for biological control of weeds and you would see,  
**[0:06:48-0:06:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:06:48):**  you know, pathogens of any sort attacking a Wamskorder or pigweed or whatever it happened  to be, cyclopod was one we worked on with Alternaria, that if you were able to replicate  that and put the spores or put the vegetative cells out and, you know, create a rolling  
**[0:07:05-0:07:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:07:05):**  infection that you could control the weeds in the absence of chemical pesticides. And that's true,  but there's also a thing called the disease triangle where you have to have the right  environment, the right pathogen, and the right host. And if all three of those aren't just right,  
**[0:07:20-0:07:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:07:20):**  nothing happens. And so you might have the cyclopod and the Alternaria out there,  but if there wasn't enough humidity and or residual moisture on those leaves,  you wouldn't get the infestation and the infection. You know, by the way, a pathogen seldom totally  
**[0:07:34-0:07:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:07:34):**  kills its host. That's not an ecologically smart game plan. So you're never going to get 100%  control. And of course, we've also lived with the fact that, look, a few weeds here and there  aren't necessarily a terrible thing. And you can hand hoe and do those for the rest of it. So the  
**[0:07:51-0:08:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:07:51):**  same thing would have applied to insect control, where we were using things to create a rolling  infection in different insects. Or we helped develop the potassium salt of oleic acid, which  is commonly known to people as safer soap. We call it a P. And it's a fatty acid, and I'm sure  
**[0:08:17-0:08:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:08:17):**  a lot of your users have probably used safer soap. It basically melts the exoskeleton of soft-bodied  insects, but leaves a lot of the harder ones, especially the beneficial insects alone, just  fine. And so we worked on that. It was an organically registered product. And we even had a  
**[0:08:33-0:08:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:08:33):**  fatty acid called pelargonic acid that was a remarkable herbicide. Literally, you could spray  it like on oxalis. You'd spray it and watch the oxalis melt within about 30 seconds. But the thing  is, fence row to fence row, that product was about $180 per acre. Well, other than for specialized  
**[0:08:52-0:08:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:08:52):**  situations, homeowners, landscapes, things on those lines, spot control, it wasn't going to be  economically feasible. So at Mycogen, I think we had a fair amount of success with different things  that we were doing. But again, it had to be integrated and had to be economic. And it didn't  
**[0:09:07-0:09:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:09:07):**  necessarily always give complete control. It gave good control. But certain people wanted to see  complete control at the time as well. We weren't working on soil health. Ironically, my wife's a  plant pathologist, and she worked for a company called Advanced Genetic Sciences in Berkeley.  
**[0:09:24-0:09:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:09:24):**  During the early 80s. And she and Trevor Suslow, her boss at the time, who I think is at UC Davis  now, we're working on exactly what we're working on at LOPUS today, looking for microbes as soil  amendments to improve yield and quality and soil health. But the tools they had to do that were  
**[0:09:49-0:09:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:09:49):**  basically, okay, let's recover some things from the soil, brew them up, put them back and see if  we can improve upon productivity compared to the controls. Today, we can do a lot of measurements  to help us understand how to optimize that and bring that technology along a little faster. So I  
**[0:10:05-0:10:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:10:05):**  think it's all been there for a while, but we're just getting better at trying to understand the  biology. Being a weed scientist, what are your thoughts on weeds and their function in succession  of a landscape? There's something I've heard always on the more regen ag side, the permaculture  
**[0:10:27-0:10:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:10:27):**  side of, you know, weeds are soil indicators. They're going to tell you what's going on in your  soil and they're there for a function. And if you continue that theory out over time, once that  issue within that soil is repaired by the weed, which is there to repair, then the soil gets to  
**[0:10:47-0:10:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:10:47):**  a point where weeds are no longer needed because there isn't a function in the soil that needs to  be repaired. When I explain that, or if you hear that, what are your thoughts on that?  Well, I am a weed scientist. I'm actually an elected fellow of the Weed Science Society of  
**[0:11:06-0:11:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:11:06):**  America. When I was in graduate school, Bob Zimdahl was my advisor at Colorado State working  on my PhD. And I wrote a paper called In Defense of Weeds, which addressed some of this. I'm a  systems ecologist, or at least I like to think of myself as a systems ecologist. I got an  
**[0:11:23-0:11:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:11:23):**  undergraduate degree in biology from Lewis and Park College in Portland, Oregon, and we just  did a lot of ecological measurements. So I agree with the majority of what you just said. Weeds  are an indicator. Now, there's no doubt weeds compete for nutrients, water, and a whole variety  
**[0:11:43-0:11:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:11:43):**  of things. Harold Coble at North Carolina State University and many other people back in the  70s and 80s did a lot of work that if you get a certain weed population density in the presence  of the crop, you've got a problem. But I kind of look at weeds sometimes as cover crops. I mentioned  
**[0:11:57-0:12:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:11:57):**  Gary Zimmer before. Gary taught me no brown soil ever. And I'm sure people that you've talked to  have talked about this as well. Bare soil is a travesty. Because in essence, whether it's a cover  crop or more better, a mixture of cover crops, weeds could be the same thing. Those plants are  
**[0:12:16-0:12:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:12:16):**  capturing CO2 from the atmosphere, photosynthesizing it. And any normal plant will exude  anywhere from about 20 to 40 percent of its photosynthate out through its roots to feed the  microbes below it. So if there aren't any plants in the soil at any particular point in time, you're  
**[0:12:32-0:12:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:12:32):**  not feeding those microbes and they're not going to be there, at least at the population  densities. They're going to go dormant or they're going to go away. So I think weeds are an indicator  species. I did my PhD thesis on weed seed ecology. There are billions of weed seeds that are present  
**[0:12:51-0:13:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:12:51):**  in any acre of soil and they can survive for 150 years. There's a Dr. Beale's seed experiment at  Ohio State. I remember from the 1980s that he had started 100 years before and you were still  getting seed that were viable after 100 years. And that's a whole other amazing conversation to have,  
**[0:13:14-0:13:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:13:14):**  is how can that be? Because they actually are respiring. But weeds come up as that they are  pioneer organisms. In other words, if you have bare soil, that's the first thing you generally  see. A bunch of weeds sprout up. Weed seeds are normally dormant, but when they're hit with direct  
**[0:13:28-0:13:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:13:28):**  sunlight, that's red light, that'll break their dormancy. When other species begin to grow as well,  more of the secondary species, light gets filtered through that canopy and it becomes a far-red  source and that's generally inhibitory to weeds to grow. So there's ecological principles, but I  
**[0:13:46-0:13:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:13:46):**  think we want to be kind of anthropomorphic about it. I agree. I think weeds are telling you  something. Number one, nature forms a vacuum and if you have bare soil, something's going to grow  there. And that gets things started in terms of, you know, kick-starting the biology of that soil,  
**[0:14:02-0:14:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:14:02):**  especially the microbial population, and kind of setting the stage for nutrient recycling,  organic matter, a whole variety of things that ultimately are going to be beneficial to whatever  secondary organisms come in, whether it's a natural, you know, forest situation and you  
**[0:14:19-0:14:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:14:19):**  eventually get, you know, a canopy and more of a mature forest, for example, after a couple  hundred years, or you come in there and you plant corn or soybeans or alfalfa or whatever it happens  to be and are trying to establish that as your kind of dominant crop. But I think weeds and cover  
**[0:14:43-0:14:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:14:43):**  crops are probably closely related in terms of what they do. A cover crop is a little bit more  manageable in terms of seeding density and, you know, types of things we know it'll contribute to  the soil. But yeah, I think you can learn a lot from watching weeds and looking at population  
**[0:15:00-0:15:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:15:00):**  density of weeds in your soil. I think ultimately when you get your crop established,  you want to be very careful about letting them grow because they will steal water and nutrients  from the crop and cause some issues. In terms of stealing water and nutrients from the crop,  
**[0:15:17-0:15:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:15:17):**  is that offset at all by having potentially another biological layer within the soil?  So let's say you have a corn field. That corn's growing tall. It's up in the air. It has a certain  root profile it's putting out. And then let's say you have purslane growing in the soil. It's flat  
**[0:15:34-0:15:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:15:34):**  on the soil. It's covering areas of the soil. The corn couldn't. It probably has a different  root profile. They could be competing, but is there also some offset of that competition to a  net positive given the purslane there and maybe that's doing things that are helping? So it's not  
**[0:15:54-0:16:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:15:54):**  just a total, let's say, 10 minus 5. It might be 10 minus 5 plus 2. That's a really good analogy.  You know, it's interesting you had mentioned purslane. I don't know if you've ever had purslane  salad, but purslane is very good, yeah, uh, uh, weed to eat. You know, that the the definition of  
**[0:16:12-0:16:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:16:12):**  a weed, by the way, is a plant out of place. And so in your situation, can you really call personally  a weed in that particular situation? Is it out of place? It's potentially contributing to something.  And I agree with you. I mean, I've done a lot of work in India. And if you go to an Indian sugar  
**[0:16:27-0:16:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:16:27):**  cane field, for example, or corn or soybeans, you'll see them growing corn or alfalfa or soybeans  or turmeric or all kinds of things in the rows before the canopy closes on the sugar cane.  And again, they're getting a yield from it. But I think what we'll find in time that those crops  
**[0:16:45-0:16:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:16:45):**  are contributing, you know, complex carbohydrates to the soil that actually benefits the sugar cane.  Because I think, you know, what we're learning is that any plant actually provides that useful  function. It'll draw CO2 out of the atmosphere, you know, convert it to a complex carbohydrate,  
**[0:17:03-0:17:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:17:03):**  exude some of those carbohydrates and other nutrient-rich materials from their  roots to feed the microbes. The microbes in turn will capture that, consume it as a food.  And if they have certain functionalities like nutrient recycling, you know, liberating manganese,  
**[0:17:23-0:17:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:17:23):**  iron, magnesium, phosphates from the soil and putting them in a form the plant can use,  or that their biomass, you know, accumulates and gets deposited as organic matter,  will help hold water. Yeah, you could make a case that that purslane, to use your specific example,  
**[0:17:43-0:17:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:17:43):**  actually was potentially adding to that. Because if the purslane is underneath a canopy of corn,  for example, I wouldn't worry about trying to control it because it's not going to be very  effective because it's a very high-quality purslane.  
**[0:17:57-0:18:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:17:57):**  It's not going to be very effective because it's again, you know, now getting that far red light  and it's going to be limited in terms of what it might be able to do anyway. Yeah.  If you look at it, well, maybe two definitions of weed. You have a plant out of place and then  
**[0:18:18-0:18:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:18:18):**  you have it's performing a soil reparative function. Do you think if you had healthy enough  you could create soil conditions that would not allow weeds to grow or do you just,  or does that theory not hold weight? Well, it does. It's simply, if nothing else from the canopy  
**[0:18:37-0:18:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:18:37):**  I talked about. If you get enough of a canopy and if you get enough plant residue, you know,  I also, back in the early 80s, I was an assistant professor of agronomy at the University of  Kentucky and they were very involved in what is today, you know, the development of what's now  
**[0:18:56-0:19:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:18:56):**  called conservation tillage or no tillage. We called it trash farming back in those days  in Kentucky because you just had a bunch of crop residue on the field that you would plant  directly into it with a knife. Well, if you have that residue on the soil surface,  
**[0:19:13-0:19:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:19:13):**  it's going to inhibit weed seed germination. It's going to allow for better infiltration of water  and if you then get the crop canopy up and going, yeah, you're not going to see many weeds and a lot  of people do, even if you get some weeds. You can go in there with like a Lemke cultivator or  
**[0:19:35-0:19:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:19:35):**  a crimper and just do very shallow tillage. You know, no-till is one thing. I think, you know,  the top five centimeters of soil you can get away with doing some tillage to incorporate some of  that residue, get it interacting with the soil so it'll degrade, but also to control weeds. I talk  
**[0:19:54-0:19:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:19:54):**  about Gary Zimmer and I apologize for using it all the time, but he's a god in my mind. I really love  him. But he took me to one of his organic fields and literally there was not a weed anywhere. It  was a cornfield. I said, you're lying to me. There's no way this is an organic field. And so  
**[0:20:12-0:20:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:20:12):**  he explained to me the types of things that I was just talking about there and so, you know, the  answer is absolutely yes. You can farm to a certain extent without using herbicides. If you have  Johnson grass or some perennial weed or Canada thistle, it might be a different story, you know,  
**[0:20:26-0:20:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:20:26):**  because those perennial weeds will kind of be able to exude or overcome some of that. But I think for  the most part, if you can use the right types of practices, you could probably reduce weed control  to spot treatment as opposed to fence road to fence road broadcast herbicides. You look at common  
**[0:20:49-0:20:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:20:49):**  cultivated herbaceous plants, tomato, lettuce, basil, those types of plants. Are they higher up on  the succession order than weeds? Since most of those have been bred out from wild plants, which  some like nightshade we would consider weeds today, are they on the same kind of plant level as  
**[0:21:14-0:21:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:21:14):**  a weed? The reason I ask is because people go to this relationship then, well, if you improve soil  succession occurs and you move up to higher order species, and if you are trying to improve your  soil as a farmer, are weeds and plants you want to grow really on the same succession level because  
**[0:21:34-0:21:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:21:34):**  they came from the same lineage, so where if it was say weeds and berries or weeds and trees,  now you're moving higher up? Yeah, I don't know if I have a good answer for that. It all comes back  to the robustness of the plant's ability to interact with its environment and creating an  
**[0:21:59-0:22:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:21:59):**  environment from an agricultural perspective that favors the crop you're trying to optimize.  It puts things you don't want there at a disadvantage. You tilt the field in your favor,  literally, with shallow tillage cover crops, establishing a good canopy,  
**[0:22:22-0:22:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:22:22):**  and all of a sudden the plant that you're looking to optimize, the tomato or the pepper,  yeah, that's a good analogy because there are like common nightshade as a weed,  and they probably are from a genetic viewpoint, probably similar in terms of how they deal with  
**[0:22:41-0:22:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:22:41):**  the environment, but you've used agricultural practices to put your crop at an advantage.  Certainly, you're not ever going to get to the point in a normal agricultural field where you're  going to be planting trees, conifers, or things like that unless you decide to change your  
**[0:22:59-0:23:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:22:59):**  plant. You may go from a crop to putting in pasture. People do things like that.  So there are some major transitions in going from agricultural crops to pasture or rangeland,  or you switch from an annual crop like strawberries or tomatoes and then plant almonds  
**[0:23:24-0:23:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:23:24):**  or grapes or things along those lines or alfalfa, but I think in general, any crop has an ability  to succeed in the environment you create for it and many a weed is going to try its best to do  that as well, and that's where the agricultural practices come in and why it's important  
**[0:23:42-0:23:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:23:42):**  understanding what each one contributes to that ecosystem in order to be able to achieve what  you're trying to do yet still retain the health and the sustainability of that soil. You don't  want to borrow from that soil in years one, two, and three and then be paying for it in years five  
**[0:23:59-0:24:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:23:59):**  through fifty because you didn't farm in a sustainable way or even farm now in a regenerative  way that actually builds soil because farming is all about growing soil. Ray Archuleta talks about  that. We're trying to grow soil. A lot of people have a hard time trying to understand, well,  
**[0:24:18-0:24:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:24:18):**  what does that mean? What means you're trying to build biomass and nurture the microbes and  get all that together so that when you do put your crop into it, it actually benefits from that  and adds to the ability to grow soil. Crop productivity and soil health are two sides of  
**[0:24:33-0:24:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:24:33):**  the same coin. One contributes to the other. When you look at weed growth itself, is there,  are there different microbial relationships between different types of weeds? So you have  voxalis, you have sludge, you have lambsquarter, you have purslane. One thing people could say is,  
**[0:24:54-0:24:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:24:54):**  well, they're repairing the soil by what they do. They create above ground biomass and they have  some sort of root, whether that's a mat of roots or that's a deeper tap root that goes down and  does something to compaction, but it's doing it in concert with microbes. Do different weeds have  
**[0:25:13-0:25:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:25:13):**  different relationships with different microbes? Yeah, I don't know the answer to that, but I think  in a very short period of time, we're going to be able to determine that. So I'll back up a  little bit. Now I'm going to mention a company that we're starting to work with called Biome Makers,  
**[0:25:27-0:25:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:25:27):**  B-I-O-M-E, Space Makers, M-A-K-E-R-S. They have some really cool technology in terms of  being, not only do you use metagenomics and sequencing to determine who's there in terms  of the microbes, but also what function they perform because that's actually even more important.  
**[0:25:45-0:25:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:25:45):**  That's okay. It's fine to determine from a metagenomic sequence what organisms are present,  but you really need to know what functionality they're providing. So set that aside for a minute  and then think about the, I think the general consensus in the agricultural community is that  
**[0:26:03-0:26:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:26:03):**  a single cover crop is not as good as multiple species in a cover crop, vetches, legumes,  grasses, tillage radishes. Tillage radishes put this huge beautiful root down, right? We'll break  up hard pan. But what we don't know from a scientific viewpoint, or I don't know any papers  
**[0:26:21-0:26:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:26:21):**  right now, I'm sure there are probably people out there that actually have looked at this and I'm  just not aware of it, is all right, your question, do those different species contribute different  types of complex nutrients that will stimulate a broader range of microbes and therefore a broader  
**[0:26:39-0:26:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:26:39):**  range of functionality into that metagenome, that rhizosphere? Now I suspect the answer is a hearty  yes because I think that's demonstrated by the fact that anybody that talks about cover crops  will really encourage you to use several different species of cover crops than just a single one.  
**[0:26:56-0:27:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:26:56):**  That diversity is a good thing. So where then has,  well let's compare two paths that agriculture has taken on really the science and the corporate side  of things. One path is, I'll call it the regenerative ag side. It's cover crops, it's no-till,  
**[0:27:19-0:27:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:27:19):**  it's nurturing biology to build soil to get a higher yield. Yet traditional ag or conventional  ag has gone after, we're going to chase yield via maybe methods that don't directly  encourage biological soil building. So we could fertilize, we could till, we could spray to get  
**[0:27:43-0:27:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:27:43):**  more yield. And if you look at the yield curve of things like corn and soybeans over time,  those yields have gone up tremendously. Where do you think the chemical side of ag starts to top  out in terms of yield potential? And is that method of agriculture really depleting soils  
**[0:28:08-0:28:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:28:08):**  over time because it isn't building biology as much as is a more regenerative system? And on the  flip side, what do you think is possible for regenerative systems that use different microbial  products like you guys produce and also just basic things like no-till and cover crops?  
**[0:28:28-0:28:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:28:28):**  Can the biological side of things catch up to where conventional is?  Well the answer to that last question is yes because conventional embraces biology.  Conventional embraces regeneration. I mean if you go all the way to one side and say okay I'm going  
**[0:28:47-0:28:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:28:47):**  to moldboard plow 18 inches deep, 12 inches deep and I'm going to use 150 pounds of N and  X pounds of phosphate and I'm going to just control everything with herbicides or insecticides  and fungicides. Yeah, you got a problem. But I would have to say that that's not conventional  
**[0:29:13-0:29:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:29:13):**  farming anymore. People are adopting no-till, people are adopting strip tillage, people are  adopting conservation tillage. People are recognizing that look I can save on input costs  by reducing the amount of fertilizer I'm using. But I recognize that too much nitrogen, too much  
**[0:29:29-0:29:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:29:29):**  phosphate, too much potassium actually inhibits microbial growth. You put too much phosphate,  you put too much phosphate, you slow down if not put in stasis, mycorrhizal activity.  People recognize that well I can use tillage in certain places to control weeds. I don't  
**[0:29:53-0:29:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:29:53):**  necessarily have to go fence road to fence road with a broadcast herbicide because all those  things are inputs, they cost money. And so if you can do it more effectively by creating a more  sustainable farming system and lower what you're doing, have greater output versus lower inputs,  
**[0:30:10-0:30:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:30:10):**  then you increase your farm income. And so maybe your question was well can you divide a line  between good and bad? Well I don't think you can do that today. I think the majority of growers,  A, they care a lot about their ground, they're going to use what tools they need to, but they  
**[0:30:26-0:30:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:30:26):**  recognize that regenerative practices are really important to everybody and I see rapidly advancing  recognition of that and rapidly advancing desire to learn more about how to do that.  I work at the grower Roy Paulman in western Nebraska, he has 10,000 acres of corn,  
**[0:30:46-0:30:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:30:46):**  field corn, soybeans, and popcorn. He's a remarkable man, he's looking at water conservation,  he's looking at all kinds of practice. He has his own smart farm initiative where he's involved  several faculty from the University of Nebraska-Lincoln, IBM, Brandeuler, a cell phone company,  
**[0:31:05-0:31:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:31:05):**  you know a whole variety of people where he's invited them to come to his farm and do things  and then collect the data. Then working with professors at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln  that are really skilled in data analysis and artificial intelligence to kind of help him not  
**[0:31:22-0:31:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:31:22):**  only figure out what's good for his farm but then do the outreach necessary to teach his neighbors  about it so his neighbors can teach their neighbors. I see a sea change in people's attitude  about this over the last five years and the desire to embrace and practice regenerative agriculture.  
**[0:31:40-0:31:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:31:40):**  I don't see a lot of deep tillage, I see some, but you don't see a lot of it anymore. You still see  people with brown soil or not planting a cover crop or things along those lines, but I think  as that knowledge gets spread around people are recognizing that's an important thing to do  
**[0:32:01-0:32:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:32:01):**  and beginning to embrace. Don't you at some point if you  if you say microbes in the relationship they have with plants are based upon  inputs in the soil. So if I fertilize a plant with something I add to the soil  
**[0:32:23-0:32:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:32:23):**  then the plant says well I don't have to go maybe form this relationship with this microbe to go  get it because I can just suck it up right here you gave it to me. If you are in an input  based ag model whatever that is conventional or organic are you stunting the biological potential  
**[0:32:49-0:32:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:32:49):**  of the soil by just giving plants what they need versus dialing inputs back and forcing  plants in the soil microbiome to generate what the plant needs? Well that enforcing is the wrong term  I think allowing is a better term. It's a natural ecosystem so nothing's being forced.  
**[0:33:14-0:33:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:33:14):**  So let me back up. The advice given by a lot of people these days is feed the soil not the plant.  For exactly the reasons that you're talking about that look if you feed the soil the soil will feed  the plant. We do a lot of work in Florida and Florida was built on a bed of dinosaur  
**[0:33:32-0:33:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:33:32):**  bones. There's a lot of insoluble phosphate in Florida soils. If you have the right microbial  populations they will liberate phosphate to feed the plant. You don't necessarily need to be  applying in many situations need to be applying a lot of inorganic phosphate.  
**[0:33:50-0:34:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:33:50):**  But I think what we're seeing is A the plant needs a healthy root rhizosphere. In other words  it needs a population of microbes in its root system in order to help create those conditions  where the plant can effectively interact with the soil in order to get those things it needs  
**[0:34:13-0:34:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:34:13):**  to produce an optimal crop. You're 10 times as many human cells sitting here today. I'm 10 times  as many bacterial cells as human cells and so am I. Without all those bacterial cells  especially in your gut and your intestines you wouldn't be functioning. I think we've learned  
**[0:34:31-0:34:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:34:31):**  that we want to take probiotics but we also want to take prebiotics you know fiber things to feed  those microbes. We want to be careful in terms of taking penicillin because it'll knock the heck  out of that microbiome. Well plants are no different. Those plant roots need that microbiome  
**[0:34:50-0:34:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:34:50):**  and that plant will actually nurture them. It'll exude those complex carbohydrates and nutrients  as I talked about earlier in order to optimize the population or at least grow the population  of those microbes. But then those microbes interact with each other as well because they're performing  
**[0:35:07-0:35:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:35:07):**  a whole bunch of functions. We kind of talked about it's not who's there it's what  function do they provide. And so it's a matter of getting organisms that will liberate  micronutrients like magnesium and zinc and iron and those things that the plant needs.  
**[0:35:25-0:35:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:35:25):**  You have free-living microbes that will fix nitrogen, azotobacter, agrobacterium. We all know  about rhizobium and its interaction with with late to medium crops. But there are lots of free-living  nitrogen fixing microbes that are important that can really remarkably reduce the amount  
**[0:35:44-0:35:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:35:44):**  of inorganic nitrogen needed because they can capture it from the atmosphere. So I think it  comes back to if you can allow those ecological relationships to form and don't get in the way of  them, you can really create a system that needs a drastically reduced amount of  
**[0:36:04-0:36:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:36:04):**  conventional inputs. And the things that interfere with that are deep tillage, not shallow tillage I  don't think, but deep tillage. And other people might argue with that. I'm just giving you my  opinion. Some people say well no tillage whatsoever. I do think shallow tillage is probably just fine.  
**[0:36:20-0:36:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:36:20):**  Or over applying nitrogen and phosphate really will shut down some of the microbial biology  because it signals the the microbe like mycorrhiza and phosphate it signals the mycorrhiza well I've  got enough phosphate liberated around here I don't need to be digging anymore up. And then that  
**[0:36:37-0:36:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:36:37):**  process slows down. So like I say you have to look at it as an ecosystem as a balanced  system where the microbes really are going to do a lot not only for the soil but for that plant.  They're constantly communicating with each other.  
**[0:36:54-0:37:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:36:54):**  Say somebody's in a no-till situation they have cover crops that they're growing like they're  doing what they can via management practices to encourage soil growth. If you wanted to  I'll say fast track and then maybe slow track on a long ecological scale things along in terms of  
**[0:37:15-0:37:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:37:15):**  building soil do you think adding microbes to the soil makes sense?  My initial answer is yes and I have to admit I have a conflict of interest. I work for a company  that sells microbial soil inoculants right and so what we see is when you add  
**[0:37:37-0:37:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:37:37):**  select species to a natural environment you generally will see a response in terms of  greater productivity. It's not just us it's other people as well. But you don't see a lot of  activity it's not just us it's other people as well. But you don't see it consistently that's  
**[0:37:52-0:37:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:37:52):**  one of the things about microbial soil inoculants they're generally considered inconsistent at best  and snake oil at worst right. But they do work and so the question becomes well why is that?  Why couldn't you just develop a natural population to do that same thing? And again to go back to  
**[0:38:10-0:38:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:38:10):**  Midwestern Bio Ag and Gary Zimmer you know they will feed humic acid and they'll use no-till and  they'll do a lot of things and over time their hypothesis was well we can and also  composting that we can build that up more naturally than applying a direct fed microbial  
**[0:38:30-0:38:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:38:30):**  if you will microbial soil and then now the fault of that logic is what is manure or what is  you know running sheep or cattle over a field you know well you're adding microbes  that's what manure is it's a prebiotic and probiotic you know think of the microbes  
**[0:38:46-0:38:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:38:46):**  we're adding as probiotics agricultural probiotics and oftentimes you need to have what we call a  microbial food supplement kelp extract, humic acid, molasses. In India we use milmah you know  all the residue of crushing the sugar cane and putting back everything but the sugar  
**[0:39:04-0:39:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:39:04):**  back on the field. So that's kind of akin to feeding the soil with particular microbes  and we can talk about why I think that's useful. Well let's not why do you think that's useful?  Yeah okay so and Gary Harmon who's a professor a retired professor at Cornell wrote a really nice  
**[0:39:28-0:39:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:39:28):**  paper on trichoderma review paper and he talks about trichoderma in particular and other you  know soil fungi and microbes and talks about the fact that there are certain microbes that  really do seem to even if they're naturally present like many trichoderma species are  
**[0:39:46-0:39:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:39:46):**  naturally present in the soil but sometimes population density makes a real difference.  It's like a probiotic you know people would argue I'm going to answer your question here  in a minute I realize I'm circling around it but you know if you're not taking a probiotic  
**[0:40:02-0:40:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:40:02):**  you should be but some people would say well if you drink kombucha and eat you know raw  sauerkraut and kimchi and things along those lines you'll be just fine yet there's a body  of scientific evidence that say look there are certain probiotics that are better than just  
**[0:40:17-0:40:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:40:17):**  trying to get it all from your environment. Well the same thing with agricultural probiotics  and there's a thing called quorum sensing. Do you know what quorum sensing is or maybe  some of your listeners would not know what it is? Explain that. Okay so quorum sensing  
**[0:40:34-0:40:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:40:34):**  the best analogy I can make is like you're sitting at a party and you know it's midnight  and it's really not very exciting and you're about ready to signal to your friends hey  let's go home or go somewhere else well all of a sudden somebody shows up with live music  
**[0:40:50-0:41:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:40:50):**  and alcohol and boy things really start to click. Well that's quorum sensing and it's  a relatively well accepted scientific principle that microbes practice quorum sensing. That  there are certain microbes that will stimulate activity in others. In other words it is kind  
**[0:41:18-0:41:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:41:18):**  of interesting that you've got a billion cells per gram of soil already in most soils so  you've got people like us taking rhizolizer and putting it into the field which isn't  nearly that that density and you're magically getting these responses and you do get them.  
**[0:41:36-0:41:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:41:36):**  We see increases of 20% to 80% in certain crops with the addition of our trichoderma  plus the psilos combination and so you kind of think well how are they competing? Well  they may not be competing with those other microbes they may actually be turning them  
**[0:41:51-0:41:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:41:51):**  on and a good kind of anecdote I have for that I worked for Diversa Corporation here  in San Diego for a long time. Diversa was instrumental in the development of the field  of environmental sequencing which is now known as metagenomics. Environmental sequencing means  
**[0:42:10-0:42:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:42:10):**  you just go in there and you just sequence everything. 99% of the microbes in the world  aren't culturable. We could find them through metagenomics but we can't actually make them  grow and so we did a lot of environmental sequencing and you could eventually through  
**[0:42:24-0:42:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:42:24):**  annotation determine okay there's all these different species there but we're always frustrated  by the fact and this is the the mid-2000s that okay we didn't know what the culture looked like  or we couldn't culture them. So Eric Mather and his team got together and they were able  
**[0:42:43-0:42:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:42:43):**  to encapsulate one or two cells in a gel bead that was permeable then they would extract the  cells from the ocean, a peat bog, soil, whatever it happened to be, back a column with those gel  beads and then run a solution of soil extract or ocean water whatever happened to be through that  
**[0:43:03-0:43:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:43:03):**  and lo and behold things just started to grow like crazy and the message to me was that they  were all communicating. In other words when you try to use Cook's principles right which is  a single organism you know on a plate and get it to grow independently well these are social  
**[0:43:23-0:43:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:43:23):**  creatures they won't grow oftentimes independently they need each other and they need certain  signals. So quorum sensing to me and the reason I think microbial soil amendments work as long  as they're alive and fresh and are put out at high enough density and they're put out with things  
**[0:43:44-0:43:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:43:44):**  that they can feed on these microbial food supplements we should talk about that, that they  may be acting as quorum sensing in other words they're completing that picture and the kind of  the other analogy of that that I use is like you buy a Ford F-150 all tricked out and it's  
**[0:44:04-0:44:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:44:04):**  got gas intake but you forgot to put a steering wheel in it well you're not going anywhere or you  go I played French horn in high school in the symphony orchestra and if you went to a full  orchestra with everybody there it's just a wonderful experience but if you leave that  
**[0:44:18-0:44:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:44:18):**  especially if you leave out the French horns but also the violins it's just not going to be the  same thing nobody's going to perform as well and so I think what happens with those organisms that  we have found work well as microbial soil amendments are acting to improve everybody  
**[0:44:36-0:44:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:44:36):**  around them they're acting to a certain extent as quorum sensors that will actually cause that  whole ecosystem now to bloom a little bit you know more you know prolifically and get everybody  involved in creating the functionality you want to create the optimal environment for that crop to  
**[0:44:53-0:45:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:44:53):**  grow is this the case then that anything you can do to add microbes to your soil would probably  be beneficial it's just a question of how beneficial so if I think about  traditional ag if we look around the world you have biodynamics you have Korean natural farming  
**[0:45:17-0:45:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:45:17):**  you have composting you have people doing compost teas or do you think that just blanketing all  those things that they're helpful it's just a matter of how helpful they actually are  I think you have to have the right number one you need to support the native microbiology that's  
**[0:45:39-0:45:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:45:39):**  there through all these regenerative practices that we've talked about composting cover crops  minimum tillage a whole variety that in order to to you know make as healthy as possible those  microbes that are naturally in the soil but I do believe and like I said I think composting is  
**[0:45:58-0:46:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:45:58):**  is in this category that if you're going to then add microbes or running your cattle over over  your over your pasture you're adding microbes and that that that will help stimulate those other  organisms that are there to perform a matter and I think it's a matter of having a functional  
**[0:46:18-0:46:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:46:18):**  metagenome so let's talk about environmental sequencing in a metagenome what is that well it  it comes back to the symphony orchestra we'll use that one as a continuing example that that  you may have a micro present but it may not actually be actively growing until it until it  
**[0:46:38-0:46:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:46:38):**  tell it you know get stimulated to do so by another organism it could be that putting the  right microbe in that particular metagenome will actually turn everybody else on so ultimately my  answer is yes that if you can find the right organisms that have the right functionality  
**[0:46:56-0:47:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:46:56):**  to complete that metagenome to make it as functional as possible you're going to improve  things and I do think that you then also have to create an environment for that added microbial to  do its job which is typical regenerative practices like I said you also we feel I feel I think  
**[0:47:14-0:47:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:47:14):**  there's data to support from other people as well that you you you want to to add materials that  that organism can use for food uh because it it needs to get started and and you know and tell it  can get itself established with a growing crop and let the roots feed it uh it's going to have  
**[0:47:34-0:47:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:47:34):**  a hard time expressing that functionality that that whole metagenome needs uh now so it's almost  like you're starting a business and you know initially maybe you need to accumulate some funds  to buy inventory to get the business up and rolling then eventually that business is doing  
**[0:47:53-0:47:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:47:53):**  enough sales or services whatever it's doing that it can fund its own growth but without that  initial injection of cash if you're just relying on sales from day one it might be a slow start or  a no start yeah no I think that's a that's a reasonable and good analogy um  
**[0:48:13-0:48:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:48:13):**  you know the the the the other part of it is is is also I think recognizing that the same  set of microbes at least the optimal set of microbes are going to be different for  citrus in Florida than for you know uh hops in Oregon and Washington so all types are different  
**[0:48:34-0:48:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:48:34):**  the climate is different or a microbe that you apply in February in cold soil might not be the  same microbe you apply in July under warm soil conditions for different environments and we're  learning that ourselves within our own research but I think ultimately where we're going to head  
**[0:48:50-0:48:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:48:50):**  is you're going to have prescribed cocktails that we're going to learn enough about the microbial  functionality and so I'll come back to this company Biome Makers I mentioned some time ago  that that we're going to have a fingerprint you know of what a what a healthy metagenome looks  
**[0:49:08-0:49:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:49:08):**  like and what is optimal for that particular crop that will allow us to combine what's the best  tillage practice what's the best combination of cover crops do we add compost and from what  okay what what uh soil microbial soil amendments should we apply and when what microbial food  
**[0:49:29-0:49:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:49:29):**  source should be applied with those particular organisms and it becomes a bit of a knowledge  intensive uh agricultural program but one that truly establishes an optimal ecological system  that allows that crop to perform as as as as as best as possible but also build soil and and  
**[0:49:53-0:50:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:49:53):**  allows you to to create an ecological farming system that is going to be as productive 10 years  from now or even 100 years from now as it is today in fact probably better because you've you've  you've begun to optimize that that ecosystem is that why you say a lot of microbial solutions  
**[0:50:16-0:50:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:50:16):**  are considered inconsistent at best and snake oil at worst is because you have things for sale on  the market and somebody tries to use it in a tropical soil in florida a sandy desert soil  in phoenix and a wetter forest soil up in the pacific northwest and what arrives in the bottle  
**[0:50:41-0:50:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:50:41):**  or the bag at all three of those locations is the same yet there's different results and somebody  says it works great and somebody's like well this didn't do anything well i think there are a lot of  factors there now let's start with the first one which is you better make sure that the potency of  
**[0:50:57-0:51:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:50:57):**  that is what it should be when it gets to the grower these are live organisms and when they're  shipped around you know under hot conditions sitting on loading docks and you know long  periods of time you can lose potency and if you lose potency you know microbial biomass it's not  
**[0:51:16-0:51:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:51:16):**  alive it doesn't doesn't do much for you so that's that's part of it another part is i do believe  you've got to have a microbial food source you better be combining it with a prebiotic of some  sort and to allow it to get better established in its environment number two with the microbial  
**[0:51:33-0:51:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:51:33):**  soil amendment you better make sure it actually gets down to the roots you know we apply all of  our materials through drip irrigation or some type of irrigation system we're developing a granule  that we can apply under a rain-fed situation but you know microbes don't do a lot of good if they're  
**[0:51:49-0:51:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:51:49):**  just sitting on the soil surface they need to get down in the soil rhizosphere as well and then of  course you need to have those regenerative practices in place as well at least at least  to the greatest extent you can to provide you know those soil conditions that are important for that  
**[0:52:06-0:52:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:52:06):**  microbe as well so you put all that up in a bag and mix it up and ultimately you end up with this  inconsistency as well as what you just talked about well do you have the right combination of  microbes for that crop in that soil type you know we have a we have a fungal organism trichoderma  
**[0:52:20-0:52:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:52:20):**  in a bacterial organism bacillus and they're on purpose because they they pair well with each other  either one alone probably wouldn't be able to do the same job and so if you have microbial  inoculants that don't pay attention to you know kind of an amplified functionality that you get  
**[0:52:40-0:52:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:52:40):**  from having both a fungal component and microbial component i don't think necessarily going to work  as well as when it does and you have to apply it a at a cost-effective mechanism you know growers  can only pay so much and two we also have found that you do have to reapply them they don't  
**[0:52:59-0:53:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:52:59):**  necessarily and yet way you also have to apply them at the right density you you can't you know  put something out that isn't at a high enough population density to impact upon the rest of that  microbial population that's there to truly do its job so what we find too is we're generally applying  
**[0:53:20-0:53:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:53:20):**  optimally two three even four times a year in a perennial crop in order to keep that population  density of that added microbe up to the point where it can serve as the conductor you know  of the orchestra that we we described earlier to get everybody and keep everybody working at optimal  
**[0:53:36-0:53:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:53:36):**  peak efficiency so if you have optimal density of that microbe it's up here and you know application  after application that keeps it topped off what what's what's stopping it in the natural system  from naturalizing and ramping its own population up to these levels or beyond why when you don't  
**[0:53:58-0:54:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:53:58):**  apply it can what was applied not live and reproduce enough to push up to these higher levels  well i'm sure there are many people that argue they should be able to and i'm i will tell you i  wish i knew the answer to that right now our early research suggests that no you got it you got to  
**[0:54:19-0:54:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:54:19):**  top it off from time to time uh i think with like with the bio makers and they're and there are  other other companies that can potentially do this as well when you take a look at not only who's  there but what function are they performing we'll have an answer to what you're saying that we'll  
**[0:54:36-0:54:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:54:36):**  figure that out that we'll see the combination of things that might allow a single application  of a of a microbial soil amendment it'll be enough for a season at least  uh like i said i i think the folks at midwestern bio egg often argued that you know if i if i keep  
**[0:54:55-0:54:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:54:55):**  at this over a period of three or four or five years i can get to the point where i can certainly  see like a 20 increase in yield with a 20 decrease in inputs is that the most they could achieve  could they could they could could that kind of a system be improved even further faster by adding  
**[0:55:12-0:55:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:55:12):**  a microbial soil method i think so because you do see with certain types of compost systems i know  you've interviewed david johnson at new mexico state with his beam system that's a remarkable  system and he inoculates it right and he puts it back up he sees phenomenal increases in yield but  
**[0:55:28-0:55:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:55:28):**  he also sees a much greater prevalence of fungal organisms in that soil he gets he gets a more  fungal dominant soil well those are all clues to to what's going on and and my point on a microbial  soil amendment it's somewhat analogous to creating a an inoculum uh in in that that would ultimately  
**[0:55:50-0:55:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:55:50):**  be represented by a composting system because what that composting system does is it provides  both the probiotic and the prebiotic you're having a food source and you're having the microbes  i think i think a fermentation broth with uh highly dense and with with the right kind of  
**[0:56:10-0:56:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:56:10):**  prebiotic in other words the microbial food supplements is potentially a little more scalable  and more rapid than a composting system but they also can exist in harmony really really well yeah  i like an analogy used before when we were talking is you know what is what are microbes in their  
**[0:56:26-0:56:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:56:26):**  second generation compost it's compost it's broken down and it's eight and now you have the microbes  left if you think okay well well some is good well more should be better and if money wasn't  an object and i don't know the rates of application of a rise eliser you guys have but let's say it's  
**[0:56:45-0:56:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:56:45):**  a gallon per acre if you did a hundred gallons per acre could you expect like exponentially  better results or yes well interesting rise eliser application rates are three ounces per acre by the  way uh along with six ounces of microbial food supplements so we'll start there and we have  
**[0:57:06-0:57:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:57:06):**  tested 10x that and we do see an improvement we don't see any any negative impact but at some  point in time you get a plateau that it only goes up so far because we do test to make sure we don't  see any negative implications of applying too much material uh and we don't but if you applied  
**[0:57:29-0:57:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:57:29):**  instead of three ounces if you apply uh nine ounces or 15 ounces we'll see uh an impact uh  but that impact will gradually diminish it still is maintained that's also a function of the soil  type we generally find that we actually work a little better on heavier soils more organic matter  
**[0:57:50-0:57:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:57:50):**  soils than we do on sanders soils and that that on sanders also if we apply more material we can  kind of reduce that gap uh and that actually speaks to what we were talking about too in terms  of quorum sensing that you know a heavier more organic matter-laden soil probably has a greater  
**[0:58:07-0:58:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:58:07):**  microbial population to start with and therefore the quorum sensing you know you don't need as many  rise eliser conductors to to stimulate what's going on but again we need we need those tests  like i mentioned with biome makers where we can actually plot that out and and and truly take a  
**[0:58:27-0:58:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:58:27):**  look at not only the the the metagenomics but the functionality in the in the metabolomics are you  familiar with the term proteomics or metabol there's an omics for everything right genomics  uh metagenomics metabolomics proteomics well metabolomics is getting a sense for what  
**[0:58:48-0:58:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:58:48):**  metabolites are being exchanged because what happens is literally these microbes are populating  that rhizosphere and they're sending little text messages in the form of chemical intermediates  you know to the plant the plant's sending them back communicating with each other that stimulates  
**[0:59:03-0:59:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:59:03):**  you know gene expression of both the crop and the and the microbiome you know when i was in school  uh you always looked at yield potential as g by e genetics by environment then it became g by e by  n probably was at that point in time too you know genetics by environment by nutrition but it's  
**[0:59:22-0:59:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:59:22):**  clear now it's g by e by n by m microbial genome and that a plant genome truly can't fully express  itself it doesn't have the right microbial genome associated with it because it makes it a more  complete stronger functional metagenome because you look at that particular environment as being  
**[0:59:41-0:59:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:59:41):**  the crop and the microbes together not just the crop not just the microbes uh and and so what  you're trying to do is to optimize that and keep it optimized by all the things that you know we've  talked about for the last hours or so here and on the site you have you know pictures of plant roots  
**[1:00:02-1:00:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:00:02):**  with the rhizolizer product product applied to the soil versus it not and but once it's applied  you see a denser root ball more roots why is that what is happening between the plants in microbe  in the soil that's causing the plant to put out more roots yeah so you know we and we do i always  
**[1:00:26-1:00:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:00:26):**  joke around that i think we could put roots on a on a on a baseball bat not a metal one but i  wouldn't want panic but we very seldom see an application where we don't see a remarkable  increase in root mass especially fibrous roots you know in florida soils uh with uh citrus we  
**[1:00:47-1:00:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:00:47):**  generally will see on average about an 80 increase in fibrous root mass of course you're you're  starting from a low bar there because one of the impacts of citrus greening is that it pickles they  pickles they call it pickling of the roots that's the root so we can get the plant to overcome that  
**[1:01:03-1:01:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:01:03):**  and if you think about it if you're if you if if you double the size of the sphere and i'm not  saying all roots are spheres but it's just a useful analogy if you double the radius of severe  of a sphere you increase the volume eightfold it's all of a sudden you've got this remarkable  
**[1:01:25-1:01:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:01:25):**  increase in volume as we talked about before you're exuding a lot of complex carbohydrates  from the crop you know into the soil and feeding microbes which in turn stimulate the plants so if  you're increasing things eightfold you're probably getting a remarkable increase in both the depth  
**[1:01:44-1:01:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:01:44):**  and the breadth and the amount of complex carbohydrates that are there so that's not  answering your question but what happens is those microbes are are are sending out through metabolic  intermediates those little text messages that are telling the crop okay i'm here it's okay you know  
**[1:02:02-1:02:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:02:02):**  let's put some roots on let's increase chlorophyll density uh there there are certain hormones that  are produced by certain microbes cytokines and sisic acid gibberellic acid a whole variety of  things along those lines but i don't even think that's the major part of it i think it's that  
**[1:02:18-1:02:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:02:18):**  genome to genome interaction where the right microbes with the right functionality are  signaling the plant that we're here we have a functional metagenome operating go ahead and put  some more roots down because we are being very anthropomorphic here but we are we are here and  
**[1:02:34-1:02:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:02:34):**  we're solubilizing nutrients we're fixing nitrogen we're doing all this stuff and so if you expand  your root system you're going to find a lot of good stuff that that the energy you put into  growing roots is worth it because we're here we're going to be able to return more on that investment  
**[1:02:50-1:02:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:02:50):**  of you putting roots down uh because what you also see associated with that generally is an  increase in leaf chlorophyll density which should mean greater photosynthetic flux which should mean  greater accidents in the soil which should mean greater microbial growth which by the way with  
**[1:03:06-1:03:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:03:06):**  the right kind of microbes and we should talk about this generally results in increased organic  matter and we all know that organic matter is also very good especially if it's in the form of  making a lot of both micro and macro soil aggregates that are important for aeration  
**[1:03:23-1:03:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:03:23):**  and water holding capacity and all the rest of those things as well so i i think there we're  stimulating that root growth because of the metabolic interaction between that microbial  genome and plant genome and the plant is saying i i'll agree i'll put out more roots in exchange  
**[1:03:42-1:03:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:03:42):**  for what you're offering so it's taking that trade on you know a farmer is asking that same question  they're going to say well you know these products they sound interesting can they benefit my yield  like i'm going to trade dollars for product which then results in more yield for me a lot of people  
**[1:04:00-1:04:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:04:00):**  listening to this are on the vegetable side can you talk about some of the studies and trials  you guys have done on the vegetable side and what you've seen when you know we have worked  extensively on tomatoes and peppers uh i will admit we started off predominantly in permanent  
**[1:04:15-1:04:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:04:15):**  crops citrus greening in florida uh sod blueberries uh all fold strawberries into a  into a vegetable crop i realize it's a fruit and it could be a perennial but oftentimes it's farmed  as a manual but generally what we see is a you know a 30 to 40 percent increase in yield to  
**[1:04:35-1:04:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:04:35):**  potatoes i'll put in there as well and what we'll see is the crop the crop will jump out of the  ground faster like in potatoes we did a study in imperial valley where we treated every other row  with rhizolizer uh and literally the rhizolizer treated rows were out of the ground 10 days before  
**[1:04:53-1:04:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:04:53):**  the non-treated rose and the grower came by and oh my god what did you do to my field you've  you've killed every other row it's like no no you know everything that was treated just up wait for  it and sure enough eventually those others came up and they were very excited because in a cold  
**[1:05:09-1:05:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:05:09):**  wet season yeah they could maybe get the ground the crop out of the ground faster and get it to  market faster with that and then we see anywhere in potatoes from a seven percent to a forty percent  increase in yield but almost uniformly we will see uh more into class a or or versus class b or us  
**[1:05:29-1:05:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:05:29):**  number ones versus us number twos in tomatoes we generally see higher bricks more yield peppers  greater yield in strawberries uh we see larger fruit we can turn like a  20 count box into an 18 count box strawberries it goes backwards by the way a larger fruit is a  
**[1:05:49-1:05:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:05:49):**  smaller count box uh and and generally increase bricks increase color uh and several of our  growers have self-reported that they've been able to to reduce uh npk applications by anywhere from  15 20 and one case one bar could reduce it by 40 in florida in very sandy soils and my belief in  
**[1:06:13-1:06:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:06:13):**  that is well number one we increase because we generally see an increase in in nutrient uptake  nitrogen phosphorus things along those lines into the plant we generally see an increase and  we've chlorophyll density uh but we see those deeper roots and expanded root systems so in  
**[1:06:29-1:06:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:06:29):**  a sandy soil if you've got a deeper more volumous root mass well you're not going to in a sandy soil  in a heavy rainfall climate you're not going to get it washed down below the root mass is easier  therefore you ought to be able to use less because it's it's got a greater capacity of taking it up  
**[1:06:47-1:06:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:06:47):**  throughout a a deeper soil profile so all those things go into into you know that you know the  handle crops and the vegetable crops and things that we have that we have worked on how do you  guys address the location issue or my biome issue if i'm in california somebody else is in quebec  
**[1:07:08-1:07:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:07:08):**  and somebody's in florida are we getting the same jug of stuff well you are getting the same  jug of stuff uh this particular point in time although we're introducing there's riser lyser  we're introducing a product called pantago which is a yeast that is it has similar performance  
**[1:07:26-1:07:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:07:26):**  characteristics but a it's a yeast and b it has a a different climatic profile it'll it'll grow  better and perform better under cooler soils than rise allies as well but we also will adjust uh  uh the application rate like six ounces instead of instead of three ounces four applications a  
**[1:07:44-1:07:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:07:44):**  season as opposed to two applications a season and right now we're working to develop an azeotobacter  a free-living nitrogen fixing microbe and taking a look at other things in order to  to add to that cocktail realizing that we have a great foundational product uh but that we want  
**[1:08:00-1:08:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:08:00):**  to then you know optimize it for specific regions if not you know fields and well so we're we're  working very closely internally but with people like biomarkers and others to get a handle on okay  no kidding what's going on what can we do to follow the population ecology of what we put down  
**[1:08:20-1:08:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:08:20):**  versus what's there and the impact upon it and combine that with these other practices such as  adding a microbial food supplement adding compost adding a cover crop no tillage all those things  also as a function of time of year of climate irrigation schedules right like i said before  
**[1:08:35-1:08:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:08:35):**  this becomes a knowledge intensive program that sometimes can get a little heavy for people to say  just tell me what to do right and so you have to really think about okay how can we simplify this  in terms of helping grow understand uh what he or she needs to do when and where on their on their  
**[1:08:51-1:08:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:08:51):**  farm and what they what they think is best this isn't a matter of us coming in and say hey we're  from the government we're gonna help you we generally try to understand with every grower  we work with okay what are your pain points what problems do you have what's your soil type  
**[1:09:04-1:09:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:09:04):**  you know and then determine that we actually can help uh because we don't think we can we're not  going to go in there and try to put something in place that we don't feel is going to do them  any good or at least come back when we think we have a different solution for them right what  
**[1:09:19-1:09:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:09:19):**  about in terms of time the application a lot of people listen to this they're transplanting crops  is there a benefit do you think of using product yours or somebody else's a microbial type product  at time of seeding if they're doing transplanting so it's in contact with the roots as soon as the  
**[1:09:41-1:09:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:09:41):**  roots start forming and then they're transplanting that little cube of inoculated soil and root mass  into the ground well absolutely i'm a big fan of that you know anything that where we have a seed  crop from other crops strawberries uh blueberries you know things that are transplanted not a  
**[1:09:56-1:10:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:09:56):**  tomatoes and peppers are transplanted these days i i think the best program would would be to  inoculate them in the greenhouse and then transfer them and then they transplant water have inoculum  as well and then maybe feed them again a third time uh in order to truly get things going  
**[1:10:16-1:10:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:10:16):**  especially if they if they have for example fumigated their field the strawberry grower  you know because you're basically wiping out everything you know once you do that  that's why if you get on a z-pack or something like that as a human you better be taking a  
**[1:10:30-1:10:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:10:30):**  probiotic immediately after you do that to kind of re-establish what's going on  but i think absolutely uh that's the way to go when you're doing those things  what about your were your thoughts on feeding the soil using something that we're adding as  
**[1:10:47-1:10:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:10:47):**  humans so not by plant scrolling i've heard people like dan kittridge mention things like well he  might add some molasses or a sugar type spray to his soil if they've had really cloudy days  photosynthesis is down they've had a big stretch of that you want to keep the microbes pumping so  
**[1:11:04-1:11:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:11:04):**  he'll run sugar into the soil do you think that you could see a benefit of adding different  microbial food sources to the soil just on their own you're not adding microbes you're just trying  to feed the microbes that are there beyond yeah i think so i mean there's a company ql qlf quality  
**[1:11:24-1:11:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:11:24):**  liquid feeds uh that that has molasses based fertilizers uh and i know other people that are  that are doing that that's again i'm being redundant with the compost that's what compost  is you're adding a food source as well as the microbe itself uh but i i do believe there are  
**[1:11:45-1:11:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:11:45):**  some you know you that particular example i hadn't heard before but if you've got you know  cloud cover and reduced photosynthesis yeah that kind of makes sense that if it's reduced  photosynthesis you're probably not getting the flux of complex carbohydrates into the rhizosphere  
**[1:12:00-1:12:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:12:00):**  that you would otherwise so why not tap it if it if it economically makes sense why not put a  little food source in there i think one of the things we need to explore is well what kind of  food source is best for what microbes uh you know molasses is pretty readily accessible although  
**[1:12:17-1:12:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:12:17):**  there's a lot of reducing sugars in it versus uh humic acid which is a little bit more complex  it's like eating uh fiber instead of you know uh or whole wheat bread versus white bread right  you know because they say it's a little harder to digest or putting your potatoes you know in  
**[1:12:35-1:12:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:12:35):**  the refrigerator after you cook them to create more resistant starch uh that's a little more  difficult so it doesn't impact to digest it doesn't impact your glycemic index as much  i think we'll learn things like that with with those types of foods and again it comes back to  
**[1:12:49-1:12:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:12:49):**  you know trying to understand the microbial ecology and and having an easy way to measure  those things uh because i think we'll learn a lot from to be able to optimize and provide data for  a question like that when we can when we can not only functionally understand that better but do  
**[1:13:08-1:13:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:13:08):**  it such that the grower can actually do it on the back of their tailgate so we've worked internally  on a program to kind of develop something that that's easy you know it's not going to do the  grower much good if it costs them five hundred dollars an acre to do that kind of sampling you  
**[1:13:23-1:13:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:13:23):**  know and their return is only fifty dollars an acre so we we've got to develop these tools and  then scale them and get the cost down to where it makes sense and to where it's deployable  on a field scale you know sending things back to the lab is fine right now but yeah that's two weeks  
**[1:13:41-1:13:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:13:41):**  or you have to you have to have a cheap enough sample that you you can take enough samples to  get rid of variants or if you just took one sample for field well what if your what if your dog peed  on that spot you know yesterday uh you know it's you need to be able to do enough sampling but  
**[1:13:56-1:14:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:13:56):**  that makes sense as well and so you know people are looking at spectral reflectance and  you know robotic probes and all kinds of things in order to scale it and reduce the cost.  You know with all your work with microbes over the years are there  
**[1:14:12-1:14:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:14:12):**  off the shelf options that you think would be great for feeding microbes in the soil?  You know we've talked molasses, humic acid, is there anything else that comes to mind?  Yeah, kelp extract is very good we with that we work with a company called Nature Source,  
**[1:14:26-1:14:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:14:26):**  311 has great product it's a it's it's it's a fermentation product of of natural natural crop  plants you know so and you know I think people are trying to best optimize what's in there you  need some micronutrients you know you need a food source maybe some protein amino acids you know  
**[1:14:44-1:14:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:14:44):**  quote-unquote protein protein hydrolysates in order to provide a complete food for the  microbes that you're trying to feed or the endogenous microbes that you're trying to feed.  Whether through the work that you all have done or any partners that you've worked with or anywhere  
**[1:15:02-1:15:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:15:02):**  you've worked in the past do you find that there's common groups of microbes that tend to be missing  in cultivated agricultural soils?  Yeah I wish I could answer that I'll bet you other people that you have worked with could probably  
**[1:15:21-1:15:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:15:21):**  answer that better than me I'm I'm just beginning to try to take a look at things like that.  In general you know trichodermin and mycorrhiza for example is fungi and you might determine that  I think those two are important in particular and they are but they're you know there are literally  
**[1:15:39-1:15:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:15:39):**  millions of bacterial species and hundreds of thousands of fungal species in every spoonful  of soil so it's a matter of what's there and at what population density and their ability to then  get turned on and so I think if you can if you can if we go back to that quorum sensing principle  
**[1:16:02-1:16:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:16:02):**  that if you get the right band together you know with the right song you know you're gonna you're  gonna wake up the right guys and girls and and have a fully functional microbiome so I don't  I don't know if there's anything missing per se although I suspect there probably is but I don't  
**[1:16:20-1:16:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:16:20):**  think we really know enough yet to kind of make that determination and hopefully some of these  new tools will allow us to do that and it's not necessarily even the microbe that's missing  it's the functionality and so I'm beginning to think too that that you may have a situation  
**[1:16:37-1:16:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:16:37):**  in certain you know say northern soils versus southern soils that you may find a particular  fungi is missing in the northern soils that's present in the southern soil you think oh I've  got to add that microbe back but what you really need to know well is the functionality present  
**[1:16:52-1:16:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:16:52):**  it's quite likely that that a particular microbe that's in the southern soil it's not in the  northern soil might have a brother or a second cousin that's a different species or even a  different genus that still provides that functionality so we need that metabolomics  
**[1:17:06-1:17:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:17:06):**  function to tell that oh how about that those microbes have adapted something that grows better  under those particular conditions that particular climate has become the dominant species provide  that function as opposed to one that that is present in Louisiana or in Brazil I don't have  
**[1:17:26-1:17:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:17:26):**  a lot of evidence of that but I think when we get at the end of the day we're going to find that's  the case. When you guys arrived at something like trichoderma why did you feel that was important  to include in the mixture? Yeah we did a lot of research in terms of reading the literature  
**[1:17:44-1:17:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:17:44):**  you know my major professor in college Bob Dindo I says they call it research for a reason right  somebody's generally done something they don't call it search and so you know we stand on the shoulders  of giants right Gary Harmon and Joe Klepper at Auburn and I could go on and on in terms of people  
**[1:18:01-1:18:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:18:01):**  that have contributed to this and so we tried to study and then we added our own kind of mindset  in terms of which strains to use and how to combine them the necessity of keeping them fresh  you know we sell our product as a as a as a cold chain it's shipped coal to the grower in a in a  
**[1:18:21-1:18:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:18:21):**  cold pack and to optimize we also produce it at very high densities and and can do that economically  so that we're applying absolutely fresh material at a high density a combination of a fungi and  bacteria that and also the microbial food supplement that we put with it yeah so there's a  
**[1:18:39-1:18:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:18:39):**  certain amount of this that that you know we learned by looking at the literature but there's  also a certain amount of it that we did that when we did the studies we found that you wouldn't  expected those results and so that combination of things that we that we recommend to people  
**[1:19:00-1:19:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:19:00):**  I think are unique to what we're trying to accomplish. Well even based on that research  like what does trichoderma do as part of that soil metagenome like what function is that performing?  Number one fungi have a much larger genome than bacteria do you know prokaryote versus a  
**[1:19:17-1:19:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:19:17):**  eukaryote and we haven't talked about it yet but certainly another important function here  that's the other side of the coin of crop productivity is is carbon sequestration  and as you know we we have a leading program called carbon now where we're helping growers  
**[1:19:34-1:19:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:19:34):**  utilize common farm working with nori in the carbon marketplace and and helping them just  on their their current and past regenerative practices forget about rhizolizer for a minute  in terms of helping them get compensated for their practices that have added carbon to the  
**[1:19:49-1:19:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:19:49):**  soil that wouldn't have been there had they not doing these particular regenerative practices  so back to trichoderma. Trichoderma is a is a is a eukaryotic fungi and if you read the literature  most people will not most i say i think the pertinent literature will support the statement  
**[1:20:09-1:20:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:20:09):**  that you're going to get net carbon sequestration if you have high carbon use efficiency organisms  and i'll i'll talk about that in a second but generally a fungal dominant soil what you want  are organisms that when they consume the nutrients that are being exuded from the plant or that you're  
**[1:20:28-1:20:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:20:28):**  putting there or might be present in the soil already turn that carbon into biomass as opposed  to respired co2 if it's a low carbon use efficiency organism that that eats and you know you know  respires and and and doesn't put on biomass you're you're you're not going to do much for carbon  
**[1:20:49-1:20:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:20:49):**  accumulation in the soil uh stuart grandy at the university of new hampshire uh uh ponjak  uh travetti at colorado state i mean there are many others i think are showing that that that  ratio of fungal to bacterial microbes or oligotrophs versus copiotropes as panjack likes to call them  
**[1:21:15-1:21:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:21:15):**  or high carbon use efficiency versus low carbon use efficiency as stewart grandy uses is very  important and so adding trichoderma create as a adds the ability to create a more fungal dominant  soil uh and for example that's one of the reasons that minimum tillage or no tillage becomes  
**[1:21:36-1:21:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:21:36):**  important because fungi develop mycelia uh you know yards if not you know maybe even miles of  them i don't know if you've ever seen a fairy ring in a forest you know what that is no it's a  you know it's a circle of mushrooms okay and that circle can be three feet across or three miles  
**[1:21:55-1:22:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:21:55):**  across well they're like an aspen forest they're all one organism uh and so the fungal hyphae are  just an extended root system in terms of communicating with the plant but as they consume  those nutrients from the crop they simply uh added on as biomass and so that gets accumulated as  
**[1:22:15-1:22:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:22:15):**  organic matter all organic matter is a microbial product it may have originated in the plant either  as those nutrients or as fallen leaves or stems or what have you but they generally have been  processed by those microbes especially the fungi to to that build up in the soil so we think  
**[1:22:33-1:22:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:22:33):**  trichoderma is very important because it's a very powerful elicitor in terms of metabolites  that's i mentioned the paper by gary uh harman and he's the father of trichoderma if you want  to put it that way other people have done some nice studies as well mycorrhizae is important  
**[1:22:50-1:22:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:22:50):**  as well uh but that fungi add a lot of genetic complexity they are very good at converting  sugars and plant material to microbial biomass fungal biomass that then gets deposited as carbon  and they're very good at converting those secretions to materials that also will help  
**[1:23:11-1:23:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:23:11):**  aggregate soil in the micro and macro aggregates that becomes a very important part of the story as  well because what you see in generally a degraded soil it's almost like dust uh you know it doesn't  have a lot of structure to it when you see a really healthy soil it generally has a lot of  
**[1:23:27-1:23:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:23:27):**  structure which which generally means that a good organic manner has a lot of micro and macro  aggregates and those macro and micro aggregates are almost like housing you know condos for the  microbes because the microbes form those and they're inside of there and helps protect them  
**[1:23:41-1:23:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:23:41):**  against degradation and helps hold moisture and helps with nutrient exchange all kinds of  interesting things and and fungi in particular have the genetic machinery to be able to stimulate  all that can you talk a little bit about carbon sequestration i've seen this come up in the  
**[1:24:01-1:24:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:24:01):**  comments and i think this confuses some people and they don't fully understand this is how can you  have plants and microbes sequester carbon in the soil when they're eating respiring and some of them  respire carbon dioxide themselves which is then going back up into the atmosphere so if you're  
**[1:24:24-1:24:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:24:24):**  adding more microbes that respire co2 how does it not net out to zero and how are you actually  sequestering that carbon dioxide into the soil or carbon into the soil through plant microbial  interactions and not preventing the excess from going back up into the atmosphere yeah okay good  
**[1:24:49-1:24:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:24:49):**  point um and it comes back to these high carbon use efficiency versus low carbon use efficiency  organisms so let's start at the top literally uh atmospheric co2 it's a resource for that plant  plant are remarkable carbon pumps they take carbon dioxide facilitated by photosynthesis and turn into  
**[1:25:10-1:25:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:25:10):**  complex carbohydrates that that uh create stems leaves fruits roots a whole variety of things  and as i said before depending on who you read or what crop you know you're getting at least 15 or  20 exit dates maybe up to 40 exit dates of that photosynthetic uh complex material that's fed into  
**[1:25:31-1:25:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:25:31):**  feed those microbes okay so the microbes will concern that and there are certain populations  of microbes that yeah they're they're they're they're they're not very efficient they'll consume  that it's like a teenage boy right actually maybe a teenage boy because they are growing that's not  
**[1:25:46-1:25:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:25:46):**  a very good example maybe like me right uh i i'll i'll eat all this stuff and and i'll just respire  it out as as co2 but a a young growing child will will take this food in they'll put body mass on as  well in other words high carbon use efficiency in other words the amount of carbon they consume to  
**[1:26:06-1:26:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:26:06):**  the amount of body weight or biomass that they put on is very high point nine point eight where you  get certain organisms that will consume you know a kilogram of the population will consume a  kilogram of sugars and respire you know uh nine tenths of a kilogram out is co2 we actually saw  
**[1:26:26-1:26:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:26:26):**  that when we did our initial studies with with this gas met you know analyzer i mentioned earlier  it's a it's a portable ftir and you can measure nitrous oxide and you can measure carbon dioxide  uh emissions and we're just out there trying to show to the grower that that we're hopefully  
**[1:26:44-1:26:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:26:44):**  changing you know the soil because then with the citrus grower you know they get one look a year  right they see the number of boxes that come off their field and that's kind of you know their  yearly testimony on on whether what they're doing is getting better or worse we're trying to do  
**[1:26:59-1:27:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:26:59):**  something to help them understand you know on a more frequent basis how they could think about  their soil and we we put root traps in the ground uh where we could they're like a chicken wire column  you pull them up after six months or a year and you could actually see you know the the differences  
**[1:27:17-1:27:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:27:17):**  in the root mass well we wanted something else as well so we were doing spectral reflectance  and taking a look at chlorophyll density but we thought well let's take a look at soil respiration  well sure enough we saw a 35 reduction in co2 emissions and a 80 reduction in nitrous oxide  
**[1:27:33-1:27:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:27:33):**  emissions and so like holy cow this is like my mom smelling soil right we just have a an electronic  an electronic sniffer uh and so we started reading about it and and and and and thinking about it  doing some other studies and what i have come back with is this concept of high carbon use efficiency  
**[1:27:53-1:27:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:27:53):**  low carbon use efficiency organisms they were placed long before i started to take a look at  this i think the folks that i've you know talked about earlier have really done some remarkable  work and so if you have the wrong population of microbes you're going to get a net respiration  
**[1:28:09-1:28:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:28:09):**  if you have the right population of microbes you're going to have net sequestration and generally  people consider that right population of microbes for net sequestration to be fungal dominant or at  least high carbon use efficiency dominant organisms right so that carbon's going into like their  
**[1:28:26-1:28:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:28:26):**  hyphae and the mycelium which are expanding out which the above ground example is a tree right  like absorbing all that carbon in they put it in the wood that wood's not going anywhere till  eventually one day it does we're underground so if you can keep getting these fungal hyphae growing  
**[1:28:43-1:28:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:28:43):**  longer and longer spreading out further and further that's where you're storing all this  carbon right that's that's not a good analogy but you know there's c3 versus c4 uh photosynthesis  plants a c3 plant will respire there's photo respiration you know at night plants respire co2  
**[1:29:01-1:29:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:29:01):**  well c4 plant has a malic acid pathway well they'll capture one of those co2s and put it  into a c4 a four carbon molecule to keep it from escaping and they're a little bit more  photosynthetically efficient because of that so the same thing down below that you know uh  
**[1:29:15-1:29:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:29:15):**  nature adhors a uh you know inefficiency so those microbes become very important therefore it  becomes very important to do those things necessary from a agricultural practice perspective  to just try to create a more fungal dominant or at least high cue dominant soil so that you can  
**[1:29:34-1:29:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:29:34):**  aggregate or accumulate carbon as opposed to degrade it and respire outside your wheelhouse  but are you aware of any soil microbes that absorb large amounts of co2 so if you have ones that are  taking it in yet respiring it off i'm thinking okay well again there's got to be this natural  
**[1:29:58-1:30:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:29:58):**  balance what's sucking that extra co2 up in the soil are there microbes that are co2 feeders well  i would never say no uh but you're right it's a little bit outside my wheelhouse i'm not aware of  one there are chemical processes like uh calcium carbonate you know you know rock formation that  
**[1:30:18-1:30:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:30:18):**  will geologically capture carbon but off the top of my head and i'll i'll look into it and i'll  email you if i find something but this particular point in time you know i can't off the top of my  head give give an example of a microbe that's doing that other well i take that back oh is  
**[1:30:37-1:30:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:30:37):**  that blue green algae you know cyanobacteria they definitely would be an example of that  they have photosynthetic apparatus uh their soil dwelling and they certainly would would consume co2  have a degree of archaic photosynthesis and convert that what i don't know is what their  
**[1:30:56-1:31:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:30:56):**  carbon use efficiency would be right no there we go i feel proud of myself like  a brain cell clicked right well there's somebody referenced on a past podcast i can't remember who  it was but they said something along the lines of of part of what's helping plant growth is that co2  
**[1:31:15-1:31:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:31:15):**  is that co2 respired from microbes in the soil as it comes back yeah i you know i have a good friend  tony michaels that i worked with at pegasus capital advisors and i worked with in hawaii  and he actually was the ceo of midwestern bioag and tony always felt as though when you have a  
**[1:31:36-1:31:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:31:36):**  a good canopy like say soybeans or corn and you had a and you had a higher co2 density  under the canopy than above it because of that soil respiration you are going to get greater yield  i i don't know if i buy that or not it makes sense right uh but i guess you know it's a matter of  
**[1:31:59-1:32:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:31:59):**  equilibrium constants and to me especially now that we're beginning to monetize soil carbon for  growers i i think keeping as much carbon in the ground is more important than trying to boost your  yields by a few percentage points by by creating a not that tony was suggesting this he's going to  
**[1:32:18-1:32:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:32:18):**  slap me silly if he listens to this uh that tony was suggesting that okay you need to to prime the  soil to to do nothing but but you know respire co2 yeah but i think it's an it's an economic  trade-off and and you know at 15 a ton and you know the wonders of common farm and you know  
**[1:32:39-1:32:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:32:39):**  you know our ability to truly monetize this as you know we we we actually were able to organize  a payment from spotify to one of our growers a couple of weeks ago and i think it's a sea change  i think we're going to be able to to further incentivize growers to adopt regenerative practices  
**[1:32:56-1:33:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:32:56):**  because it's going to create a second crop crop for them carbon yeah can you have a little bit  about that because that's this is something i think we're we're just really getting into the  brink of out there is an industry and i'll go back to an interview i did with joel salatin back in  
**[1:33:11-1:33:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:33:11):**  like 2013 and he talked about you know wouldn't it be great you know on the wall street journal  if it said you know like the total number of earthworms per cubic foot of soil versus what  the dow did and we're kind of getting here in a way right with the amount of carbon sequestered  
**[1:33:29-1:33:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:33:29):**  can you talk about where that industry is right now with farmers and companies looking to offset  carbon emissions where's that intersection what's that industry look like and where do you think it's  going right okay so uh i always start with talking about ratan law you know the professor at ohio  
**[1:33:50-1:33:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:33:50):**  state university uh won the food prize this year and the japan prize last year for his work on soil  carbon he he is the father of a lot of these principles many many other people globally working  on this but he's a good person to quote in particular that he you know he estimated that  
**[1:34:06-1:34:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:34:06):**  agricultural soils globally have lost about 1.35 billion tons of carbon over the last hundred years  120 years and then if all we did was put that back the calculation is that that would be worth 65  parts million of co2 in the atmosphere so 415 to uh uh what is that 350 that's a big deal right  
**[1:34:30-1:34:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:34:30):**  now a lot of people will say well look you can only pack so much carbon  in a in a in the soil you can't put 10 pounds of manure in a five-pound bag  well number one i think we're a long way from getting to that point and that agricultural  
**[1:34:45-1:34:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:34:45):**  soils represent the world's most scalable solution to climate mitigation and oh by the way  putting carbon in soil is a good deal unlike carbon being absorbed into the the ocean where  it destroys productivity increased carbon in agricultural soils increases productivity it's  
**[1:35:02-1:35:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:35:02):**  a good thing for lots of different reasons now on the flip side of this you see every week another  company committing to be carbon neutral by 2030 2040 2050 are committing billions of dollars to to  to stimulate this and there are lots of groups the carbon underground soil health institute you know  
**[1:35:22-1:35:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:35:22):**  many organizations that we could name that are dedicated to to improving this um and what is  important i think and i've worked on policy i'm a member of a group called e2 the environmental  entrepreneurs that is aligned with the nrdc the natural resources defense council and i was part  
**[1:35:43-1:35:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:35:43):**  of a small group that that went to the senate ag committee in 2017 and and we're with the national  corn growers and myself there about six of us and we've talked to folks about getting language in  the farm bill to incentivize soil health and we along with other people that were promoting that  
**[1:36:04-1:36:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:36:04):**  were successful you see language in that and it provides funds through you know conservation  service and other usda programs for people to embrace and study and adopt regenerative  soil practices because we understand one of the best ways of increasing soil carbon is to  
**[1:36:20-1:36:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:36:20):**  implement these regenerative practices but what really you know i think incentivizing people uh  you know works really well and that if if there were marketplaces and there are now we work with  nori which is a carbon marketplace which works with spotify as an excuse me shopify which is the  
**[1:36:40-1:36:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:36:40):**  company we were working with and others companies that have committed to be carbon neutral and  realizing that okay look i can i can i can try to lower the number of miles my service trucks drive  or i can shut off the lights in our building or put in leds as opposed to incandescent you know  
**[1:36:57-1:37:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:36:57):**  you can do a lot to reduce emissions but if you're truly going to become carbon neutral  or even carbon negative you've got to have drawdown and agricultural soils are the best  bet for drawdown so why not stimulate agriculture to amplify what they're doing and to optimize what  
**[1:37:15-1:37:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:37:15):**  they're doing by paying them uh for the carbon that they're putting in soil and so there are  companies like indigo they're funding this on their own balance sheet uh the climate action  reserve is working with people vera you know registries they're involved and and authorizing  
**[1:37:34-1:37:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:37:34):**  and doing things along these lines but nori is a really a good example of a of a of an entity  that is creating a marketplace which is bringing interested buyers together with validated sellers  of carbon and they work with comet farm which is a usda program developed at coloro state university  
**[1:37:52-1:38:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:37:52):**  by keith pastien and his group and you you know it's it's it's a huge metadata base of soil types  nutrient tillage practices all kinds of things that the grower fills out into a platform and  then that metadata base uses artificial intelligence to project the amount of carbon  
**[1:38:12-1:38:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:38:12):**  that's sequestered versus if they had not been doing those things and of course it has to be  validated by a third party and and we just completed that process with one grower kelly  garrett in iowa he's a very progressive grower and he was authorized for 20 000 metric tons of  
**[1:38:30-1:38:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:38:30):**  carbon over the last five years the neat thing about the nori program it's retrospective it pays  for the last five years of what has been going on uh and it's a 10-year contract they sign and so  he was able to market that a certain portion of them i don't think he marketed the whole thing  
**[1:38:48-1:38:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:38:48):**  right now at fifteen dollars per ton and at twenty thousand tons at fifteen dollars a ton  that's a nice check and it's you know i think growers are becoming very excited uh there are  there are other programs out there for them to look into where they can now begin to think about  
**[1:39:06-1:39:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:39:06):**  their their farm economics not only about optimizing yield and quality but optimizing  soil carbon as well and the really remarkable thing about that as i said earlier they're two  sides of the same coin when you get a more productive crop you generally get more soil  
**[1:39:23-1:39:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:39:23):**  carbon sequestration especially if if it's accomplished with a variety of regenerative  agricultural practices which in the end is what we're doing because that's what built soil health  and soil health is what keeps the whole system sustainable that we'll have  
**[1:39:38-1:39:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:39:38):**  we'll have healthy soils or increased soils as opposed to diminished soils over the next  hundred years as opposed to 1.35 billion tons that that you know professor allow you know  is estimated that we have lost over the last hundred years i'm sure you've watched uh kiss  
**[1:39:54-1:39:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:39:54):**  the ground you know woody hillerson documented and and he mentions in there that people say we  only have 60 years of harvest left and then the soil is going to be gone well that's a scary  number right i i i i think we can we can slow that down i think we can reverse it i think we can  
**[1:40:10-1:40:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:40:10):**  build it back the other way i think we can grow soil as ray archuleta says in that same film by  these things and i think the best way to stimulate the speed at which that happens is to incentivize  growers by you know rewarding them for the carbon they put in the ground and that's happening right  
**[1:40:26-1:40:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:40:26):**  now and i think our carbon now program is a great example of that is this the pendulum then that  that starts to swing where that starts to swing the other way before i i think a lot of conventional  ag farmers maybe felt trapped for lack of a better word as well i could do other practices but i'm  
**[1:40:46-1:40:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:40:46):**  trying to pay the bills you know i switch off i i'm going to take a hit on yield during this  transition where if you're now have the ability to start getting paid for sequestering that carbon  to a different method does this ease some of that land tradition moving over the adoption of  
**[1:41:09-1:41:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:41:09):**  different practices you know as it said i've you know i graduated you know from college in 1976  i grew up on a farm i graduated with my phd in 1980 that's a long time ago i would still repeat  the same thing i told you before you know i worked on you know conservation tillage practices in  
**[1:41:27-1:41:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:41:27):**  eastern colorado uh my first job at university of kentucky as a weed scientist we did a lot of work  on that trash farming i talked about i just i just don't buy into the fact that growers you know  consciously made decisions to optimize yield over soil health i mean a lot of those people went  
**[1:41:43-1:41:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:41:43):**  through the decibel in the 1930s they they used the best tools available to them and as new tools  have become available and new knowledge it gets rapidly adopted so what's going on now is i think  especially with the ability to monetize carbon sequestration we're going to see even more rapid  
**[1:42:03-1:42:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:42:03):**  adoption of practices and we're going to see how to amplify even beyond typical regenerative  practices with microbial soil amendments or who knows what other remarkable technology might  become available uh to to continue down this path where where a grower is now optimizing both his  
**[1:42:22-1:42:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:42:22):**  above ground yield as well as his his or her below ground yield in terms of soil carbon  sequestration which then ultimately you know gets rid of the 60 years you know 60 harvest  lives you know extend it to the next 10 000 years i you know i was the ceo of hawaii bioenergy back  
**[1:42:40-1:42:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:42:40):**  in 2009 10 11 uh and it was a consortium of hawaiian landowners one of which was  kamemia schools which is the largest landowner in hawaii and when i came in uh to interview they  didn't ask me about the economics or anything else what they asked they said all right look we've  
**[1:43:02-1:43:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:43:02):**  been here for a thousand years these are native hawaiians what are you going to do to make sure  our land is as as as productive and supportive of our community a thousand years from now as  it was a thousand years ago and i was like wow that's that's a really good question and it really  
**[1:43:22-1:43:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:43:22):**  speaks to what we're talking about right now i mean people have been aware of this for thousands  of years uh now we're just we're getting a handle on how to implement it such that it makes sense we  have the knowledge we have the tools to measure we can improve upon it we can decide about  
**[1:43:40-1:43:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:43:40):**  technology that we may have adopted and embraced in the 60s and 70s that just doesn't make as much  sense now we can improve varieties we can create these microbial communities and i think you'll see  broad recognition because all growers are natural stewards of their land it's their legacy uh it's  
**[1:43:59-1:44:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:43:59):**  what you depend upon it's like my mother smelling her soil every morning yeah there's a grower i  know who doesn't doesn't think about it so hasn't thought about it so for the last 60 years do you  think we're we're close to a day where any farmer regardless of scale will be able to have access to  
**[1:44:21-1:44:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:44:21):**  a marketplace to sell their carbon sequestration credits yeah absolutely uh right now there is a  thousand acre limit on the nori platform you know a floor but growers can can form a a coalition  to add 100 acres at a time 50 acres at a time and create a thousand acre entity in order to do that  
**[1:44:44-1:44:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:44:44):**  uh i'm involved right now uh i was a director of a company called Godavari for 13 years  in India uh has one of the largest sugar cane processing facility in India that they turn  them turn into renewable chemistry uh they make sugar and power as well but they make a lot of  
**[1:45:01-1:45:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:45:01):**  chemicals from renewable resources and i'm now a board member of the Karnataka Institute  Kia Kiaar of agriculture applied agriculture research Kiaar i'm a director i should know  i don't know what that name stands for but uh you know in India you're lucky if you have five acres  
**[1:45:23-1:45:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:45:23):**  there's a law you can only have so much and people people collaborate to do things well we're trying  i'm working with Larry Walker who's working with Michigan State uh with Samaya Vijivahara University  and Kiaar to to deploy these practices in India which is kind of ironic because i actually think  
**[1:45:40-1:45:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:45:40):**  Indian growers are already there they already do a lot a lot of cover crops and and composting and  things like that i think we can learn from them but what we can do is potentially allow them to  monetize what they've been doing for a while as well the one thing that i think is really inequity  
**[1:45:55-1:46:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:45:55):**  right now you know with the concept of additionality on soil carbon sequestration for example in in in  the the uh nori program if you've been doing it for more than 10 years you you're disqualified  that's that's that's almost everywhere they have that kind of thing well you got to do something  
**[1:46:13-1:46:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:46:13):**  different well why punish the people that have been ahead of the game for 50 years that's got  to change and i fully plan to you know through my policy and advocacy routes you know advocate to  you know get rid of that it just it makes no sense to me whatsoever you want to keep people doing it  
**[1:46:31-1:46:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:46:31):**  but why punish people that have been ahead of their time for a long period  but that's a whole nother hour-long conversation well it's an interesting future for for people  that want to learn more about the different services you have to offer they want to learn  
**[1:46:45-1:46:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:46:45):**  about rise eliser and try that or get access to that how can they do that yeah well number one  the rise eliser carbon now is our carbon program and again an unabashed promotion here i know we  were going to talk about science but we are the first company to truly monetize at scale soil  
**[1:47:05-1:47:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:47:05):**  carbon for one of our growers and we're very proud of that because it's an important contribution to  society it's important contribution of the grower and important to us but you can learn more about  locus at www locusag.com so l o c u s a g dot com and you can send a note you know people like  
**[1:47:23-1:47:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:47:23):**  torrisa de john who you met will get that immediately i'll get it our staff will get it  and and we'll answer right away whether you're interested in and what we have today available  through pantago and rise eliser our carbon now program or just general advice as to gosh i'm  
**[1:47:39-1:47:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:47:39):**  interested in regenerative agriculture who can you connect me to that's local to me because we try to  help people understand if we can't help them well who can't right and a lot of people listening to  this i mean they might be that indian equivalent sub five acre farmer you know is that the size  
**[1:47:56-1:48:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:47:56):**  farmer you deal with absolutely i you know again i have a you know i told you i grew up on a farm  in oregon it didn't tell you how many acres i don't think we had more than 10 acres maybe 30  acres at times my mom would lease a little bit more but you know growing specimen mugel pines  
**[1:48:14-1:48:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:48:14):**  and azaleas and rhododendrons you didn't need a lot of land but you know my mom was born in 1912  grew up through the depression a couple of world wars you know and she she was her own person you  know managing that farm that operation i i can remember getting up at four in the morning you  
**[1:48:32-1:48:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:48:32):**  know unloading a truckload of tam junipers and going to school then being told to get home right  away because i had to plant those tam junipers you know uh and and and and go on from there so  i i think rural america rural anywhere is is very important and there are a lot of large corporate  
**[1:48:50-1:48:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:48:50):**  farms 10 50 000 acres but there's an awful lot of people that are small growers as well and  you know just my own comment here i i think agriculture is a pathway to peace  agriculture is a foundation of a free society here we are and you know right now in the midst  
**[1:49:07-1:49:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:49:07):**  of our election we have a remarkably democratic society and i think that's because we have so many  great resources in terms of our soil so we need to protect them our ability to produce food  hungry people are anarchists and i think you know as as a nation we have gone out  
**[1:49:25-1:49:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:49:25):**  unabashedly trying to help people you know in africa in india uh in korea all over the place  all over the place to help them to better understand how to how to grow food and i think what we're understanding now is that if there's certainly a scarce resource that we need to protect  its soil and that we're developing the knowledge either through like the comet farm program which  
**[1:49:48-1:49:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:49:48):**  is a usda nrcs program or other mechanisms we have a remarkable aggregation of knowledge that  we can share people now the key is well how do we make it understandable and simple so that people  can can quickly adopt it and then if we can incentivize them a reward from them for that  
**[1:50:06-1:50:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-13-PaulZorner-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:50:06):**  adoption to the soil carbon programs awesome all the better  so  