### In Search of Soil  (2021-00-30)
**[0:00:00-0:00:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:00:00):**  So, we meet again.  Biochar – plant matter turned charcoal via pyrolysis.  It's an often talked about soil amendment that's able to put carbon into the soil  for a very, very long period of time.  The big question is, is it worth it?  
**[0:00:38-0:00:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:00:38):**  To answer those questions, today I'm talking to Francesco Todorici of Olympic Biochar.  And he's going to talk about what biochar is, how it functions in the soil, how you  can make it, what you should think about if you're purchasing it, and overall, is it  worth it?  This episode should fill in some of your knowledge gaps around biochar and give you a little  
**[0:01:00-0:01:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:01:00):**  bit more information to decide if biochar is right for you or not.  So let's get right into it and talk biochar with Francesco Todorici.  This is In Search of Soil.  So Francesco, within the world of biochar, what would you say is your claim to fame or  what are you known for?  
**[0:01:22-0:01:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:01:22):**  What would you like to be known for within that world?  Well here on the Olympic Peninsula, it's really promoting and working with citizen scientists.  It's to get biochar into the ground.  And yeah, it's really working with the individual and educational.  Work shops have a business where I sell it, but it really is passionate about getting  
**[0:01:52-0:01:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:01:52):**  biochar into the ground.  And one thing that I use occasionally is, no, don't let perfection get in the way of  putting biochar in the ground.  And in promoting the local citizen scientists, local users, because there's so much information  out there about what's being done and research.  
**[0:02:18-0:02:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:02:18):**  And it's the local people that really jazz me in that what they're doing with it and  what they're experiencing it from it.  So I'd say that's it.  It's really letting people know that it's not mysterious.  It's not something that it's out there that somebody else do.  
**[0:02:41-0:02:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:02:41):**  You can make it yourself.  It's simple.  You can buy some.  Play with it.  Have fun with it.  
**[0:02:48-0:02:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:02:48):**  And to help regenerate the soil and work with climate change as a solution for climate change.  For me, that's important.  Yeah.  And yeah, it's getting everyone to use it.  How do you see the citizen scientists fitting into the greater piece of research?  
**[0:03:14-0:03:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:03:14):**  I like to consider myself a citizen scientist doing trials.  I think there's good and bad to citizen science.  You get people that maybe just make claims without doing all their testing.  Yet there are a lot of people doing really good research and you can't rely on academia  to do it all.  
**[0:03:32-0:03:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:03:32):**  How do you view being a citizen scientist?  I view it as someone, especially when one is working with biochar.  And if they're working in a garden, whether they have their own garden or they're working  in a community garden, put it in the soil.  See what's going on and use your knowledge.  
**[0:03:56-0:04:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:03:56):**  Some of the most, use your knowledge of the way the soils work.  What's good for your plants.  And every plant is different.  In that, what does it need?  What nutrients does it need?  
**[0:04:09-0:04:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:04:09):**  How does it work?  Start small, small.  And I think that role is driving, can help drive academia and real science.  By that I mean, I have seen examples through the years having worked with biochar now for  going on, you know, nine, ten years.  
**[0:04:33-0:04:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:04:33):**  Examples of established science, research science, university science, going down trails  that citizen scientists have drawn them, brought them back.  And I think the role of citizen scientists is we're observing this.  Why?  Let them, let citizen science be the driver for academia.  
**[0:05:03-0:05:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:05:03):**  I don't know why.  And it's so much that academia is learning today as far as soil, as far as the interaction  between microbes, mycelia, bacteria, that there's an old Da Vinci quote that we know  more about the heavens above than the soil beneath our feet.  And that's true today.  
**[0:05:27-0:05:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:05:27):**  We're learning daily more those interactions.  And so I think citizen scientists, they intuitively know or by observation what works and what  doesn't work and will biochar work in what they are doing.  So that's why I think the role of citizen scientists is that as long as you're not doing  no harm and it's especially for someone that's growing their own food, they're not going  
**[0:05:56-0:05:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:05:56):**  to go out there and actively do harm.  Yeah, I think it's as simple as you do some trials.  One plant gets this, one plant doesn't get it.  What do you see?  And I don't think enough people do that.  
**[0:06:10-0:06:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:06:10):**  I think there's just too much blind following out there.  Somebody says to do this, so I do it.  And then they don't see results or they don't have a control to compare against, so they  can't tell if they actually see results or not.  And then they say, well, it didn't work or it works great, but they don't really know  
**[0:06:27-0:06:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:06:27):**  either.  Exactly.  And I've seen examples of citizen scientists with a community garden that I work with.  Well, we started off with a research, a friend that works biochar that's been a biochar  compatriot for years.  
**[0:06:42-0:06:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:06:42):**  We helped set up a trial in three different beds.  So where we did a control native soil, biochar and compost, biochar compost and mineral balancing.  And the joy of working with citizen scientists, and I heard it just on a webinar just the  other day, was that after one season, the people in this community garden, it hurt their  hearts to see the natives and what the plants were struggling in the native soil.  
**[0:07:17-0:07:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:07:17):**  And they just added biochar and compost to everything, which totally blew the research.  And that's OK.  It was the citizen scientists.  And we've done soil tests and showed the increase in carbon content and carbon extent and CEC,  cation exchange.  
**[0:07:40-0:07:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:07:40):**  But that citizen scientists and we have to just be accepting that citizen scientists  are going to do what they're going to do.  It's they're not getting paid to follow a protocol.  And the blind following of things that someone has heard can be an issue.  And that is like they hear and we see today often this instant gratification biochar is  
**[0:08:11-0:08:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:08:11):**  not a fertilizer.  And so people will throw biochar in and say, we didn't get results.  And I've seen university researchers do this.  We didn't get results.  Well, they didn't work with the biochar, understand the properties of the biochar.  
**[0:08:29-0:08:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:08:29):**  Biochar is not a soil amendment in and of itself.  And that's important to remember.  Do you think that's maybe where the reductionist mindset gets in the way of I apply this and  I just want to try and quantify it down to a set result.  But maybe within some of these realms of soil, we don't understand it enough.  
**[0:08:50-0:08:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:08:50):**  If you don't understand what's going on in your system to start with, if you don't understand  what you're adding to the system when you combine them, you don't know about either  one fully, you can only measure what you can measure.  But you may be missing stuff or factors in the experiment that you thought you had accounted  for that aren't even playing a role in it because you just, you don't fully get what  
**[0:09:13-0:09:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:09:13):**  you're taking on.  And I think that's where there's potentially a lot of error around this is like you said,  I've talked to Gloria Flora about this and biochar and she talked to somebody at university  to study and they did an inefficient test in her mind.  They didn't fully understand the properties of that biochar, what temperature it was produced  
**[0:09:34-0:09:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:09:34):**  at, what the material was and they just applied it in a certain way and they didn't see the  results and they said, okay, well, here's the results.  But she's like, well, you're missing a whole bunch of stuff here.  So you didn't really do an accurate test.  Most definitely because all biochars are not created equal.  
**[0:09:52-0:09:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:09:52):**  There is the variation of what was the feedstock one used, what temperature was it made at.  How was it quenched?  How did one activate the biochar?  The interrelationship of the life that one has in the soil that they're working with.  And this is, it's easy to miss things and it's easy just to study, to look at the path  
**[0:10:23-0:10:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:10:23):**  of what I love is conventional farming, which is an application of NPK and say that's all  the plant needs and learning to understand it's not all the plant leaves.  So I agree.  We end up, it's easy.  Just think that we're studying something that's really going to be the end all and it's really  
**[0:10:49-0:10:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:10:49):**  not.  We may be missing something.  How would you define biochar?  I pulled up because it's a little blurb that we have and I'll read this and then go out.  Biochar is a carbon rich product, product of a process called pyrolysis, which is the  
**[0:11:11-0:11:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:11:11):**  heating of a dry biomass to temperature, to high temperatures in an oxygen limited environment.  Biochars are high, long lasting.  For example, in Amazonian biochars have been carbon dated five to eight thousand years.  And so it, needless to say, biochars used to grow plants is not current gaining steam  as an important ingredient in the global regenerative agriculture movement.  
**[0:11:47-0:11:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:11:47):**  That's a little blurb that we hand out when people ask about biochar and how to activate  that biochar, why it's important in gardens.  Biochar is, it's a type of charcoal.  It's not biochar until it's biologically active.  And there are many different properties of different types of biochar.  
**[0:12:10-0:12:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:12:10):**  I have seen myself when I make biochar myself, I personally have made biochar from scraps,  from tree trimmings, from pine cones, from cow dung, from cat poo, made all these different  biochars and they're all different, different properties.  But it's any, it's the carbon that's left after the pyrolytic process.  And depending upon what the source is that you can have biochars that have anywhere from  
**[0:12:47-0:12:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:12:47):**  a 40% carbon content to well over 80% carbon content.  And that's important to know and it has different soil properties.  So it's essentially carbon.  And one other thing, it's a carbon that is called a recalcitrant carbon, which is a very  hard, long lasting carbon because all the volatiles have been cooked off, burned off.  
**[0:13:17-0:13:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:13:17):**  So for example, if I leave a branch to rot, it will rot its carbon and that carbon will  be beneficial.  But those volatiles, many of those volatiles will off gas and release the atmosphere.  Biochar when you use this pyrolytic process, you retain about 50% of the carbon that would  normally get released to the atmosphere retains bound up in the biochar.  
**[0:13:50-0:13:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:13:50):**  So that was a long answer, but.  In a biochar, I think people think pure carbon.  So if it's anywhere from 40 to 80% carbon and there's X left, what's that X made out  of?  What else is in there besides that carbon that you're adding to the soil?  
**[0:14:09-0:14:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:14:09):**  What's left in it?  Yeah.  There are some minerals, depending on how one produces it, you may have traces of polyaromatic  hydrocarbons, which different in the concentrations one have or the microbes will eat those, the  bacteria will eat those.  
**[0:14:34-0:14:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:14:34):**  So there are different traces that are left in there.  For somebody looking to do this, adding the carbon to the soil in this recalcitrant form.  So it's not going to be food for microbes right away.  They're not going to go in and try and digest this fungi, aren't going to go after it right  away.  
**[0:14:57-0:15:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:14:57):**  I'm putting carbon in the soil, which is beneficial for a few reasons as I see it.  You're taking carbon out of the atmosphere and you're sequestering it in the soil.  But there's other benefits happening in the soil and I'll let you speak on that.  So when you put that carbon down, you tie it up from going into the air, what's happening  in the soil?  
**[0:15:15-0:15:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:15:15):**  How are you getting benefit from that compared to say compost carbon, which becomes a microbial  food source?  Excellent question.  And thanks for directing it a little.  The biochar, if anyone watches this, I would suggest they just do a Google search on images,  
**[0:15:34-0:15:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:15:34):**  biochar, and look and see what the biochar looks like under an electronic microscope.  You'll come up with that literally thousands of pictures of how you make it, different  kilns, but the pictures under an electron microscope are very revealing.  It's a honeycomb structure.  Biochar in itself, if I want to take and put a teaspoon of biochar in or teaspoon,  
**[0:16:03-0:16:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:16:03):**  tablespoon in my hand of biochar, it would have the surface area of about a football  field.  It is an enormous surface area.  It's more air, more space.  It also absorbs moisture.  
**[0:16:21-0:16:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:16:21):**  It is that surface area in that space becomes a home for bacteria inhabitant.  Mycelia, bacteria die and what they do in their life, mycelia then will go and take  the nutrients.  Biochar is negatively charged.  So biochar will attract to itself positively charged ions.  
**[0:16:55-0:17:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:16:55):**  And for example, nitrogen, it will absorb nitrogen and when it's not absorbed, adsorb.  It's attached to the surface area of the biochar and it makes it available to the bacteria,  to the mycelia, to the roots then to go to the plant.  So that's the, and moisture, it retains moisture.  So one then will water less and it will improve, the poorer the soil, the bigger change you're  
**[0:17:36-0:17:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:17:36):**  going to see.  However, it does improve both the fluffiness of your soil and it's more of this relationship  between what the biochar does in the soil.  One of the things it does is it has a negative priming effect and this is something that  they've only seen in the past few years.  
**[0:18:04-0:18:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:18:04):**  So for example, when one puts compost in the soil, that carbon, the organic matter in carbon,  I mean in the soil, will break down and release to the atmosphere.  And one can measure that, that's measurable from year to year.  When one puts biochar into the soil, it works.  It has a relationship with that labeled carbon, unlike the recalcitrant carbon, so the carbon  
**[0:18:34-0:18:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:18:34):**  of compost is a labeled carbon.  It's more available to plants and will break down rather, you know, quicker.  That labeled carbon, that relationship, this negative priming is, say for example, one  has started off with 100% just straight labeled carbon in the soil, compost carbon.  After a year, these numbers are just, for example, after a year you have 75%, after  
**[0:19:05-0:19:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:19:05):**  two years you'll have 50%.  If one has biochar in that soil with that carbon, then in the first year you won't see  as great a reduction.  So your soil organic carbon is more stable and more long lived.  And those are some of the things that the biochar does in creating this healthy soil  
**[0:19:35-0:19:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:19:35):**  bio.  And you're one of the hotbeds of biochar, the Pacific Northwest, a lot of research is  being done up there in universities and at the citizen scientist level.  There's a lot of great practitioners up there, companies up there.  Speaking about this integration of biochar into the soil, why has the Pacific Northwest  
**[0:19:58-0:20:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:19:58):**  and states like Washington looked at this as a tool to help guide the soil?  Interesting question.  I think part of it may be because of the enormous amount of the forest industries that we have  up here and the knowledge of seeing some of the effects of a healthy forest fire in the  carbon that's left afterwards and looking at some of those systems.  
**[0:20:40-0:20:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:20:40):**  The part of it may be in some of the readings that I'm doing recently and it's just personal  reading of the connection to the soil, the connection to the land.  And this biochar is something that is just compelling when you start to look at and become  aware of it.  There's more research on it.  
**[0:21:17-0:21:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:21:17):**  And for example, in university researchers, there's a university researcher that I work  with today.  Well, I started doing some stuff about six years ago and this university researcher was  referred to me to possibly participate in some stuff.  And the university researcher said, and I won't divulge your name, but he said, you  
**[0:21:40-0:21:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:21:40):**  know, I really don't know anything much about biochar, so I'm really not your guy.  And he was a university researcher with soils.  Well, in the course of about six years, this university researcher has become one of the  foremost researchers and experts on biochar.  So that's how quick it's happening.  
**[0:22:08-0:22:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:22:08):**  I think we're reaching a tipping point where the university researchers that are open to  observing what citizen scientists, back to them again, are observing and what they're  finding, they are compelled to start doing some research.  And this researcher right now is doing a lot of research with compost and biochar.  Can you talk about some of the trials that they've done and any results that you're aware  
**[0:22:41-0:22:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:22:41):**  of from those trials?  Yeah.  I'll give one that I'm very aware of and this is a university researcher, Washington State,  with a researcher that's now moved over to Montana.  But they've done multiyear trials with biochar that they produced themselves using a flame  
**[0:23:01-0:23:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:23:01):**  cap kiln, which is a type of, which is one way to create the pyrolytic environment.  And this was on organic forms on the San Juan Islands.  Anecdotally, one had heard, I had heard, prior to seeing this research that biochar inhibits  the leaching of nutrients, especially in the Northwest where we get substantial rains.  Nutrients in the wintertime will leach from the soils.  
**[0:23:33-0:23:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:23:33):**  So what this research was, they put the biochar in control, where they had control, and then  with biochar, with biochar that was charged using beneficial microbes and seawater and  different things.  And under the root zone of the plants, and they were growing dry beans, under the root  zone they installed these little capsules that would measure NPK.  
**[0:24:04-0:24:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:24:04):**  And after the growing season, when they took, when they measured the amounts of NPK that  had leached through the plants and through the root zone down to below the root zone,  they found that the plants that had biochar had between 30 and 40 percent less NPK.  So that was retained in the biochar in the root zone.  It wasn't making its way down to the capsule.  
**[0:24:39-0:24:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:24:39):**  It wasn't making its way down to the capsule.  It wasn't leaching out.  And that was the first time, it may have been done before, but that's the first time that  I saw university research, it's Washington State, not Washington State, University of  Washington research that quantified this.  
**[0:25:00-0:25:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:25:00):**  They've continued to do several, they've done like three years worth of research and showing  different, over years, over years the greater benefit that one gets.  So that's one.  As a citizen scientist researcher, I was personally involved with a tomato grower here locally  on the North Olympic Peninsula, just outside of Port Townsend.  
**[0:25:30-0:25:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:25:30):**  In one year, he agreed to do some trials with some biochar.  He grows all his plants in 20 gallon pots in a greenhouse, all his tomatoes.  And so he was willing to dedicate four pots to biochar mixers with four different varieties  of tomatoes.  The first season we activated, we charged the biochar, just simple, I charged it with  
**[0:26:00-0:26:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:26:00):**  worm tea for about a week, just mixed it, stirred it in, and we put that in the soil  mix at a 10% mixture.  The results the first year after we were done, and I let, again, being citizen scientist,  citizen science, I let the tomato grower really kind of, we talked of how he wanted to do  it.  
**[0:26:29-0:26:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:26:29):**  In this first year, he treated both plants, he put the same amount of moisture, the same  amount of nutrients, fertilizer, for both the control and the biochar enhanced.  At the end of the season, we looked at the results and he measures the results by number  of fruit.  He doesn't weigh them.  
**[0:26:52-0:26:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:26:52):**  And he said, you know, I really didn't see much change, any change.  So let's revisit this next year if we're going to do it, what we're going to do.  So the next year we came in and said, okay, so if we're going to do it, let's really stress  the biochar plants.  What he did in the control, he changed the entire soil.  
**[0:27:17-0:27:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:27:17):**  He took out the old, put in new.  I said in the biochar one, let's leave it exactly.  We just took out the plant, shook off all the soil from the roots and left it in there.  We could still see the biochar there.  And what the intention was to give it 50% less water and no fertilizer through the entire  
**[0:27:41-0:27:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:27:41):**  growing season.  Well, being citizen scientist, he has volunteers come in.  It was not 50% less, but it was substantially less, at least 40%, probably 40% less.  And nutrients through the course of the growing season, it got fertilized a couple of times,  but much less than what his normal protocols are.  
**[0:28:08-0:28:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:28:08):**  When that season was over, he showed across the four different varieties of tomatoes,  a 17% increase in yield.  And the biggest thing he had was no blossom end rot, which is important for tomato growers.  So he said, when he looked at that, he said, you know, I'm going to need to really kind  of reevaluate, I've been doing the test.  
**[0:28:39-0:28:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:28:39):**  Unfortunately, he saw the tomato farm we haven't considered, but that was an example.  Another organic farmer that I worked with that uses a different biochar, but he was  originally from Wisconsin and he was familiar with biochar from in Wisconsin.  He grows all his tomatoes at his farm using biochar.  Well, at our local farmers market, and this isn't big research, but they do a blind taste  
**[0:29:08-0:29:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:29:08):**  test of tomatoes.  And his tomatoes, one, I believe it was three out of the four categories for taste.  And when I talked to Max about this, Max said, I said, what do you think that is?  He says, I think it has to do with tomatoes are very, besides the nutrients, tomatoes  are very susceptible to the amount of moisture.  
**[0:29:34-0:29:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:29:34):**  And the biochar gives them a constant moisture.  So they don't run through that cycle of a lot of water, less water, a lot of water,  less water.  It's constant.  So those are a couple of examples, a few examples of research, both university research and  
**[0:29:52-0:29:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:29:52):**  citizen scientists.  Here in this and thinking about a lot of what I've learned during this series, already talking  to people so far is the big driver of plant growth, one part of it is the health of the  community of microorganisms in the soil.  So if you're adding biochar to the soil, you're not necessarily helping that plant directly  
**[0:30:17-0:30:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:30:17):**  per se.  Like the plant is not going in and mining or doing anything with that biochar other  than maybe taking some water that's maybe tied up in its matrix.  So really what you're doing when you're adding biochar to the soil is you are amplifying  or enhancing that biological community within the soil matrix.  
**[0:30:40-0:30:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:30:40):**  And that, if enhanced the right way, the optimum way for the plant you're growing results in  better plant growth.  That's how I see this chain of events.  What are your thoughts on that?  Exactly, you're facilitating a healthier soil biome.  
**[0:30:56-0:31:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:30:56):**  And there's been a lot of talk about soil, about biomes, both human biomes, soil biomes.  And it's that enhanced soil biome where we have trace minerals available, where we have  a healthy bacterial life, mycelia, worms are important.  And what worms do in that?  So yes, you're correct.  
**[0:31:27-0:31:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:31:27):**  It's the biochar in and of itself isn't feeding the plants.  It's feeding all those wee beasties, as you might want to call them, in the soil, creating  a healthy soil biome, which then create healthy plants.  I heard there is an author that has written a book and he's written one.  It'll come to me, but his newest books is going to be the, he's talking about, because  
**[0:32:05-0:32:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:32:05):**  it's the saying, you are what you eat, and it's what his latest book that's going to  be, David Montgomery is the author, is going to be coming out and he's looking at the title  B, you are what your plants eat.  And so if that isn't available, if in the soil biome, healthy bacteria, in those things  that plants need to be healthy, nutritious, tasty, they won't end up in the food, in the  
**[0:32:38-0:32:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:32:38):**  plant, whether it be a leafy plant or tomato, a bean, and that doesn't then transfer over  to us.  So yes, the biochar of itself is just a means to assist in growing a healthy soil biome.  And while we're doing that, we're generating the soil because most of our soils have been  so depleted for whatever reasons.  
**[0:33:12-0:33:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:33:12):**  In being this healthy skeptic that wants to believe, which is how I quantify myself here,  I think maybe the issue we see around these things are we fully don't understand what's  happening below ground in terms of soil biology.  A lot of mainstream agriculture either dismisses it or downplays it.  So there's not a ton of research being done there to begin with.  
**[0:33:37-0:33:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:33:37):**  Now you're adding something a little further out on the curve to something that we already  don't understand that well.  And you're adding this other variable in that is potentially enhancing that environment  and making it better.  And now we have to try and say, well, how did it make it better?  
**[0:33:55-0:33:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:33:55):**  How does this affect the plant?  I do think it's just lack of understanding, or maybe it's time.  You're not going to see results this season, or you might not see results next season.  But if you looked at something like any soil built over 10 years or 20 years using a consistent  regenerative management method, you would definitely see results over time.  
**[0:34:20-0:34:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:34:20):**  Rotational grazing is a good example.  Year one, you'll see some results, but 10 years later, if you compare them against year  zero, you'll see dramatic results.  And I think that's where biochar and some of these other things maybe, I don't want  to say they fall short, but they get short changed is people want the instant result.  
**[0:34:39-0:34:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:34:39):**  They don't stick with it long enough to try.  And yet, and we don't understand it fully to begin with.  So it comes down to me when I think about this is I don't see a harm in adding it.  Can you think of it negative of putting it into the soil?  So let's forget any positive benefit.  
**[0:35:00-0:35:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:35:00):**  Let's say there's no positive.  Is there a negative that you could have by putting it into the soil?  Well, I would suggest that if anyone is putting in, especially if they're putting in a biochar  that they made themselves, to possibly be a little, there weren't this old test, this  old one would say, if you're going to test your biochars, it's called a worm avoidance  
**[0:35:32-0:35:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:35:32):**  test.  And so if you have a worm bin and a lot of people have worm bins or they have compost  piles in the corner, in one corner of the, of your worm bin, dig out and put biochar.  Just put a spoonful, a cupful of biochar in there or a shovelful, depending on how big  it is.  
**[0:35:55-0:36:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:35:55):**  Go back a few days later, if the worms have gone away from the biochar to the other side  of your bin, then there's something wrong with your biochar.  My experience, we have just a small backyard.  I live on a very small lot, less than 5,000 square feet, and they have a container compost  that's open at the bottom, but it's closed with a lid.  
**[0:36:25-0:36:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:36:25):**  And we started just kitchen waste.  And we throw in biochar because I have a plentiful amount of biochar.  That is, over time, it is just teeming with worms with the amount of biochar we put in.  There are organizations.  There's the U.S. Biochar Initiative and the International Biochar Initiative.  
**[0:36:54-0:37:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:36:54):**  If anyone is going to get purchased biochar, then I would suggest that do your due diligence  and find out if those biochars, commercially produced biochars, have been tested, ask the  question, have they been tested per the IBI, the International Biochar Initiative, testing  protocols?  Because they've been working on this for decades now, for a decade at least.  
**[0:37:25-0:37:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:37:25):**  So say somebody does want to buy commercial biochar from your company or some other company,  I mean, you even find it on Amazon these days.  What should you be looking for, either on writing, on the bag, the box, or on the website,  if you're, say, growing a vegetable application?  What characteristics do you want in that biochar to say, okay, this is what I want, or if you're  
**[0:37:50-0:37:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:37:50):**  deciding between two, this is what I don't want?  I would look at, if one, again, I would ask the question, do you have your tests per the  International Biochar Initiative soil classification, biochar classification?  That will, and then ask for a copy of it.  That will give you several things.  
**[0:38:14-0:38:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:38:14):**  It will give you carbon content, and the IBI has different qualities of biochar that's  starting as low as 40% up to over 80%.  And from a premium biochar, I think it's, I believe if I'm correct, 40% you are considered  to be biochar.  But then there's different, 40 to 50 is one grade, and a premium biochar is over 60%.  
**[0:38:47-0:38:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:38:47):**  Many of your commercially produced biochars that are byproducts of co-generation plants,  and there's more and more of them coming online now, they will have carbon contents of well  over 80%.  And then look at your gradation defines, and a lot of those, are you buying chunky biochar?  Is it self-produced?  
**[0:39:13-0:39:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:39:13):**  Have they graded the biochar in some way?  But the big thing is, ask the question, have you done testing per the International Biochar  Initiative?  And then there are a couple of other tests, because the International Biochar Initiative  also has, whether or not they're certified, ask that they've done the testing for polyaromatic  
**[0:39:37-0:39:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:39:37):**  hydrocarbons, PAHs, PCBs, and dioxins.  Those are tests that you send them, they're sent off to third party testing labs, certified  laboratories, and measure those.  And they have standards for those.  I would ask those questions.  
**[0:39:54-0:40:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:39:54):**  I would not have even thought of asking those questions until I started working with a co-gen  plant in which I get their biochar, and before I put that biochar further on the market,  I did my due diligence so that when someone like you or someone wanted to purchase some  biochar, I can say, this is, it meets the parameters of the International Biochar Initiative.  So, knowing that they've done those tests and you could look at results, if you were  
**[0:40:27-0:40:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:40:27):**  using it for vegetables, would you choose something with a higher carbon content with  a finer particle size?  Yeah, a finer, you don't, yeah, you don't want fines, you don't want dust, although  that's okay.  But yes, a finer particle size just makes it more workable.  
**[0:40:46-0:40:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:40:46):**  If you have a big, because if I, when I use it, when I make it in a flame cap kiln or  in a large top lit up draft stove, when I put in a two inch diameter chunk of branch,  I'll end up with about an inch and a half diameter chunk of wood that looks exactly  like the branch that I put in.  You see all the rings, you see everything, it's exactly that.  
**[0:41:16-0:41:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:41:16):**  That one can either crush up or not crush up, the soil will do the work and if you live  in an environment where you have a freeze thaw cycle, the freeze thaw cycle over a few  winters will break up your larger pieces.  But for a home gardener, someone that has a little bed or someone's going to use it  in their, their raised bed or in, they're going to grow vegetables in pots like I do,  
**[0:41:44-0:41:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:41:44):**  the finer, the finer gradation is easier to use.  Yeah.  I mean, I've, I make mine at home quite a bit.  I just kind of use it in a modified cone kiln.  I smash it up with a shovel in there.  
**[0:41:57-0:42:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:41:57):**  I don't mind putting it on course, personally I figure eventually it's going to break up  from walking on it, harvesting stuff out of it.  I'm not too concerned about that.  One thing I have had people comment when I've posted stuff about this on Instagram is the  effect of biochar in the pH of the soil.  
**[0:42:16-0:42:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:42:16):**  People are really concerned that biochar carries a higher pH, meaning it's more alkaline.  I was putting it on pretty heavy to say, oh, you're going to drop the pH there.  To mine, this is how I tested the pH because I'm making it at home.  I'm not buying it from somebody.  So I didn't have anybody to ask.  
**[0:42:31-0:42:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:42:31):**  I just put some in a jar, kind of crushed it up more, put water in, measured the pH  of that water.  It came out about nine.  So two part question, one, is that an okay way to measure the pH of the char and what  are your thoughts about biochar affecting the pH?  
**[0:42:49-0:42:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:42:49):**  Biochar, yes, it is alkaline.  First of all, to answer one question, yes, that's an acceptable way to do at home to  measure your pH.  I know commercial composters that will test their compost just using strips.  One can see biochars that test as high as a pH of 10 or greater.  
**[0:43:29-0:43:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:43:29):**  Then others, depending on how the process that they made, the pHs may be lower.  That is another function when one does the IBI testing, it will show what the pH is of  that biochar.  It's listed on the test.  And then you add this sort of thing that with water, one other way to lower your pH is to  
**[0:43:52-0:43:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:43:52):**  rinse your biochar.  So you can lower it and some of the finds it will leach out.  So over time it will balance and you're not growing plants in a straight biochar media.  So it balances out over time that pH.  I've heard that blueberries are susceptible to pH.  
**[0:44:24-0:44:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:44:24):**  They don't want a high pH.  But there are examples of blueberry growers that are using biochar and having good results.  So it is, know what you're putting in and again, if we start off back to what we do,  do a little trial.  How does it work?  
**[0:44:47-0:44:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:44:47):**  Is it hindering the kale that you're planting, the one plot versus the other, or the lettuce  or the carrots or whatever you're growing?  And do one's own due diligence.  In this time where we're at, if I start getting more of a relationship with the soil, a relationship  with what is alive with life, it's going to be better for me in the long run.  
**[0:45:21-0:45:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:45:21):**  The way I think about the pH too is it's not like you're adding lime to a soil where you  apply water that instantly can lower the pH.  You're applying something that has some ash residue on it that will slowly leach off over  time.  So it's not like you're releasing all that alkalinity into the soil at one point in time  
**[0:45:43-0:45:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:45:43):**  to shock the surrounding soil.  Maybe in a vacuum, the biochar itself is alkaline.  You are diluting it and then you've got to figure, okay, well, how much of that alkaline-producing  ash and material on the char is going to release at any given time into the water?  I just haven't seen a big problem.  
**[0:46:03-0:46:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:46:03):**  I've applied it heavy.  I have videos on this where I've done it where I've put down a carpet.  I've taken a bed and I've carpeted the bed with a char.  So edge to edge, length to length, pour it on an inch thick, and then put soil on top.  I've planted a cover crop on top of that and I've had cover crops five feet high growing  
**[0:46:24-0:46:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:46:24):**  on it within months after doing it.  So that's where the citizen science in me, the anecdotal, what I'm observing is saying  like it's not a negative.  Whether it's a positive, okay, we can debate a lot of that.  But I personally, like I'm not seeing a lot of the negative effect from it.  
**[0:46:44-0:46:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:46:44):**  So then it comes down to a time, money, more of a resource trade-off.  Do you want to spend the money?  Do you want to spend the time making it?  I get those things might preclude you from using it, but I don't see a negative in terms  of adding it to the soil itself.  
**[0:46:59-0:47:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:46:59):**  No, and what you described, I agree completely, and what you described your method of incorporating  a biochar to your beds, where you put it in, you cover it with soil, then you put a cover  crop.  So what you're allowing the biochar to do is to let, I have a different first person  that really looked at the biochar that I had and said, hey, I want this, how much can I  
**[0:47:24-0:47:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:47:24):**  get of this?  And he says, I'm a lazy farmer.  Let nature do the work.  And that's what you just described, was putting it in, covering with some soil, putting a  cover crop, the roots will go down, the life from below the biochar will come up and it  
**[0:47:46-0:47:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:47:46):**  all mixes together.  And that is the healthy soil biome we talked about before, so that when that cover crop,  I don't know if you do a minimal till or no till, but that's another, if you leave the  root zone in there and don't disturb that much, then that's, to me, that's the ideal  because that life that you've created in soil is there and ready to give to whatever plants  
**[0:48:18-0:48:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:48:18):**  you plant in that.  So yeah, you just, you described the way that I would tell people, if you have the time,  the best way to do it, that's one of them.  The other way to incorporate your biochar is I always ask the question, do you have  a compost pile?  
**[0:48:35-0:48:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:48:35):**  And invariably the answer is yes, then mix it in with your compost.  Mix it in 5 to 10% by volume and what that biochar will do, number one, it enhances the  composting process.  It also minimizes the greenhouse gases that are normally emitted during the compost, mainly  nitrogen and it makes that nitrogen available to the plants.  
**[0:49:09-0:49:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:49:09):**  And what you've also done is by you putting it in your soil and letting it work over a  winter and with a cover crop, when the compost is ready, the biochar is charged.  And it's very, it's just, that to me, those are the two simplest ways of putting the biochar  into your, incorporating it into your garden, into your soil.  One concern I had somebody voice on a YouTube comment, and I'd never thought about this  
**[0:49:42-0:49:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:49:42):**  before, and it seems valid to me.  You let me know what you think, especially being in the Pacific Northwest where there's  been a lot of industry paper mills.  I don't know if there's been smelting up there saying trees are long-lived.  They're absorbing a lot of nutrients out of the air.  
**[0:49:58-0:50:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:49:58):**  If you have a tree growing for a long time and it's absorbing pollution from the air,  say it's downwind of some of the activity that happened pre-1980 where there's a lot  of smelting activity and like EPA restrictions were a lot less than they are today, that  wood would potentially have sequestered in it, heavy metals, bad things.  Now you're taking that wood, you're burning it, and you're not volatilizing those heavy  
**[0:50:32-0:50:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:50:32):**  metals, but you're now just concentrating them into a char which you're putting into  the soil.  You are then growing food in.  Do you have a worry around that?  Or have you ever seen anything on that?  
**[0:50:43-0:50:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:50:43):**  Yeah, I've seen questions around that.  And again, I go back to, especially for a commercially produced biochar, look at the  tests.  And personally, the biochar that I work with, besides people that make their own and helping  them make their own, is harvested from its hog fuel.  
**[0:51:13-0:51:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:51:13):**  Its hog fuel is when a tree comes into a mill to be processed, either in chips or as lumber  or whatever, the first thing they do is they take off the outer layers and so that they  have the pure wood underneath.  That outer layer is hog fuel.  So the biochar I work with, to give an example, it has that and then it also has about two  
**[0:51:39-0:51:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:51:39):**  thirds that and it's one third construction and demolition debris, which is certified  to be no lead-based paints and no treated lumber.  Now I've run several, several of a multi-year, every few years I'll run a test and the concentrations  of the metals that are tested per the International Biochar Initiative are well below, well below  anything that is considered harmful.  
**[0:52:12-0:52:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:52:12):**  So I don't have an issue with that because one of the questions that one needs to raise  is when you put those, when you put the biochar in the soil, what do the microbes interact  with and what do they, the microbes and the mycelia, the bacteria, what do they eat and  transmute into something else?  So how is, if we have X amount of metals in there, what's the concentration of those metals  
**[0:52:54-0:52:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:52:54):**  if one were to take a measurement when one initially puts everything in, if one takes  a measurement a year later, two years later, is there a difference?  And then all those metals taken up by the plants and all those metals then taken up  into the fruit of the plants.  So personally I don't have an issue with, I mean I would not use treated lumber, I would  
**[0:53:33-0:53:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:53:33):**  not use something with lead-based paints.  But other than that when I make biochar myself out of scraps of materials, I'll sometimes,  I store firewood on wood pallets, sometimes after a couple of years I pull those pallets  out, some of the wood is rotten, some of the wood is still good and I just pyrolyze it  well and make biochar.  
**[0:53:54-0:53:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:53:54):**  Right.  Yeah and I think, you know, where are you making it?  People making it on a home scale, homestead level, a lot of times they have brush around.  You know probably if your site used to be a foundry or some other commercial site, if  you know it's never been that or zoned industrial, well then you know okay the stuff growing  
**[0:54:15-0:54:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:54:15):**  on it probably isn't absorbing heavy metals from the soil, from activity on that soil.  Maybe there was some stuff drifted in but then I could make the argument that stuff's  already in the soil anyway.  You know.  And it's probably already in your food already because it's drifted into the soil, it's in  
**[0:54:32-0:54:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:54:32):**  the soil and it's, if the plants uptake it then it's there.  So yeah.  In terms of application rate, what are your thoughts on that per square foot or per hundred  square foot basis?  For people who want to get started in this, if they're buying some, a lot of times you  
**[0:54:50-0:54:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:54:50):**  see it sold in small bags, maybe that's a gallon size.  How much should you start with so you are kind of balancing that cost to getting enough  in there to matter ratio?  Well I think whatever one gets in there will matter over time.  Some of the rates goes back to if, and I'm sure you've seen it, but one looks at Terra  
**[0:55:19-0:55:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:55:19):**  Preta del Indio when the researchers and the people that are actually working with behind  the International Biochar Initiative and researchers, Johannes Lehmann from Cornell University.  Back in 2008 I believe it was, they went to the Amazon and where they looked at these  biochar-enriched soils, these charcoal-enriched soils.  What they found at that time was some rates of, you know, they measured the carbon 20%  
**[0:55:55-0:56:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:55:55):**  and so they've been talking about 20% and I think 20%, I think for an initial application,  I mean if you make it yourself and you want to do it fine, I think that personally would  be a little bit high.  I recommend rule of thumbs, rule of thumb.  If you're talking about in the top six inches of soil, if you wanted a 10% by volume biochar,  
**[0:56:25-0:56:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:56:25):**  that would be roughly 40 gallons per 100 square feet.  That would be for 10%.  That can be expensive if you're buying it yourself.  Then the other one is, so I say, and if you start off with, start off with less.  If you put in 5%, that's 20 gallons per 100 square feet.  
**[0:56:54-0:56:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:56:54):**  It's sufficient to get things going and even less than that is sufficient, but 20 gallons  per 100 square feet, usually, you know, I'll usually work with that where people are working  with.  So that's a good rule of thumb.  Five percent is 20 gallons per 100 square feet.  
**[0:57:15-0:57:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:57:15):**  Ten percent is 40 gallons per 100 square feet for by volume measurement in the top six inches  of your soil.  And if you're putting biochar in your compost, then put in a 5 to 10% because most compost,  especially if you're using kitchen scraps, that will break down by volume.  So if I start off with even commercial composters, they'll start off with a large pile that say  
**[0:57:44-0:57:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:57:44):**  is 100 cubic yards.  And after the composting process, it will have shrunk down to maybe 60 cubic yards.  Well if they put in, say, just for conversation, for ease of math, so if you put in 5% biochar  in a 100 cubic yards compost pile and at the end of the compost price process, you have  50 cubic yards, the biochar hasn't shrunk down.  
**[0:58:21-0:58:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:58:21):**  So that 5% by volume is 10% by volume.  So you can put in less in your compost and end up with a higher volume composition of  your biochar.  But those are the numbers that I normally use.  There's been a couple of ways you've talked about producing it in a blanket on the first  
**[0:58:45-0:58:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:58:45):**  one.  Cap.  Flame cap kiln.  Yeah, a flame cap kiln, top lit updraft stove.  People you can do them in cone kilns.  
**[0:58:58-0:59:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:58:58):**  What are your thoughts on production methodology versus final results?  I use a cone kiln, it's open top and I've had some people say, well you're not going  to get as good of results out of that is the kind where, and again I can't remember the  name I'm blanking on right now, where you have a smaller vessel that you pack with wood,  you put that inside another vessel.  
**[0:59:22-0:59:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:59:22):**  A retort.  A retort and you light around that.  Are you going to see different results going from a kiln to a retort?  You know, you will see some different results.  I have a dear friend that does a lot of work using large top lit updraft stoves.  
**[0:59:43-0:59:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:59:43):**  So it's not a retort, but it's a flame propagation and you drive off the volatiles and he is  just now, he's never submitted his biochar for any of this testing.  He has excellent biochar, but just to see for himself, he's going to start submitting  this.  I know flame cap kilns, especially the cone kilns, which are contiki, the contiki kiln  
**[1:00:11-1:00:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:00:11):**  is a premier flame cap kiln.  That's what it is.  It's a cone kiln and there's been a lot of research and it's sent in and it has excellent  properties.  I like to say it's a function of the feedstock and the operator.  
**[1:00:38-1:00:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:00:38):**  So if you have someone that, if you've got a feedstock, how dry is your feedstock?  And this also goes into how much smoke one creates.  So if you have a drain in the area where I live, we're lucky even at the end of the summer  to end up with feedstock that maybe has a 15% moisture content.  We're lucky if we get that low.  
**[1:01:05-1:01:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:01:05):**  Flame cap kilns are forgiving in that you can burn, you can you pyrolyze feedstock that  has a higher moisture content.  It will take longer.  It may smoke a little, but most of the smoke that's coming off is the gas, the water being  put off.  
**[1:01:28-1:01:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:01:28):**  And you can tell there's been some interesting, just by visually, of how do you put it in,  the color of the flame.  Are you producing a lot of methane or little methane?  And I'm sure you've seen in yourself the different colors of your flame when you add material  versus when it's just, it's just pyrolyzing almost completely.  
**[1:01:58-1:02:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:01:58):**  So you will end up with different results depending on what one uses.  But I'll go back to what I said early on.  It's biochar and don't let perfection get in the way of putting, producing and or putting  biochar in the ground.  Do you think using too small of feedstock results in more ash because it just burns  
**[1:02:28-1:02:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:02:28):**  too quickly?  Say you use rice hulls or even cow manure, I'm curious on.  So you have herbaceous material there that you're burning.  Does the ash to char ratio get too high?  Well, it can get to, again, it's the operator and it's what one's using.  
**[1:02:52-1:02:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:02:52):**  There are, there are some of these top lit updraft stoves.  If one were to look at rice hull gasifiers, there's work in the Philippines with one gentleman,  Paul Bellino, Dr. Bellonio, that has done, I mean, they use rice gas, rice husk gasifiers  commercially in bread making plants and it burned, they burned very efficiently.  And it's the function of the stove and the operator of don't let it pyrolyze to ash.  
**[1:03:28-1:03:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:03:28):**  When I use in my little gasifier stoves, when I go out and do workshops, I'll use wood pellets  just because they're uniform and I get a really good burn.  And it's very small stove that's 27 ounces.  It's one that's made out of soup cans and tomato cans.  And it's knowing what the fire is doing.  
**[1:03:53-1:03:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:03:53):**  Once that fire dies down and it'll start to smoke, I quench and I put it out.  Then I get no ash.  If I would just to leave it, it's like a charcoal barbecue.  All the charcoal that's left will turn to ash.  So yes, would depend the feedstock, the rate of application and how one, one pulls out  
**[1:04:18-1:04:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:04:18):**  the feedstock when one stops and one stops the burn and puts in other material, puts  in new material, one will create more ash.  And yes, a more straw will create more of an ash.  Straw would also create a lower carbon content.  Straw will be a less recalcitrant.  
**[1:04:39-1:04:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:04:39):**  It won't be as long-lived.  So it depends on the feedstock does affect the properties of the biochar that is created.  I know this might be tough without visuals, but let's say you were at a workshop and giving  people tips on being a good operator.  What are some things you really want to watch for when you're feeding feedstock into, let's  
**[1:05:09-1:05:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:05:09):**  just use a cone kiln for example.  Well, a cone kiln, there's a couple of ways of how one starts a cone kiln.  One can either fill it all up and start it on top and let it burn down.  I prefer where you start a little fire in the bottom and start adding material.  And so as that material one looks, you get your little, you go like any fire, you get  
**[1:05:36-1:05:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:05:36):**  started with smaller material, with kindling and you come to bigger.  Say your fire is going now.  By visually you look at that fire, when it looks as though you can see that the flames  have died down.  It's like a charcoal barbecue burning now.  
**[1:05:55-1:05:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:05:55):**  And then you start to see ash forming.  Add your next layer.  You will then get some smoke come off and you'll get more flame because that heat from  below is what is driving out the volatile gases in the material you've just added.  And because of the design, as you know, of a cone kiln, there's no air coming in from  
**[1:06:21-1:06:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:06:21):**  below.  The only air comes over the top.  So you're creating that oxygen starved environment.  And when you look at it, you'll see that the flames are not on the material.  The flame is actually above the material.  
**[1:06:39-1:06:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:06:39):**  The flame, and as you come up, the flame is actually at the top of your cone because that's  where the gases rise.  The oxygen that comes over the top mixes with the gases and ignites.  Okay, so watch that flame go down.  The flame comes down to the charcoal that's left, the biochar.  
**[1:07:04-1:07:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:07:04):**  Add your next layer and let it burn.  And another rule of thumb is you add so that you fully burn everything, char everything,  is that in the middle of your burn is where you add your larger materials.  And if you have a large contiki kiln that's maybe four or five foot in diameter, you could  be adding feedstock that's two, three inches in diameter in that middle of that burn.  
**[1:07:34-1:07:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:07:34):**  As you get towards the top, then start reducing the size again so that it gets fully pyrolyzed  and fully turned to charcoal before you quench it.  So it's the visual.  And I'll give one example of, it's our relationship and it's the operator's relationship with  the fire, with the stove, kiln, whatever they're using.  
**[1:08:06-1:08:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:08:06):**  I worked with a group called Sea Char with an art Donnelly and Sea Char built some toplet  updraft stove tea luds out of five gallon pails that were, and he was using them in  Costa Rica for migrant workers, farmers that were picking cacao beans and coffee beans.  And this was going to be, and they were making biochar.  So Art went down at one of his, we brought these down, he was working with an NGO down  
**[1:08:40-1:08:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:08:40):**  and he was an NGO and he pad the stove and he was demonstrating to the women because  it's women that do the cooking in Costa Rica.  And so it's been the thought that you can't add with a toplet, you put in your one load  and you don't add any materials afterwards.  Well, the cookers, the women that were using, operating these stoves are doing it.  
**[1:09:09-1:09:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:09:09):**  And then all of a sudden they kind of lifted the lid and they started to put more material  in and Art was going to say, no, don't.  And he just backed off and he let them do what they do, even though they were using  a new stove.  And Art said, they did things with that stove I did not think was possible.  
**[1:09:33-1:09:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:09:33):**  And what I learned that day is they have a relationship with fire that I will never have  because they cook three meals a day over fire.  And so whether it's, I'm sure from the very first burn you did with your comb kiln to  where you are today, your relationship with fire is becoming more part of you.  And so your experience of what you do it is, is, you know, practice.  
**[1:10:07-1:10:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:10:07):**  There's, it's practice, you know, it's practice makes perfect.  Yeah, and it's, I think there's something within us that just has this intrinsic connection  to fire.  It's hundreds of thousands in our DNA.  And I think a lot of that gets lost now with people living in cities, you know, the closest  
**[1:10:29-1:10:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:10:29):**  you might come to a fire is lighting a candle these days or, you know, striking a lighter.  And when, when you start a fire, there is just something romantic.  It just feels cool.  Like my Saturday morning ritual, I try to every weekend as I get up before the sun is  up and I start that kiln now and I go have a fire and it's, I look at it like, okay,  
**[1:10:52-1:10:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:10:52):**  when I'm making bio chart, sure.  It might help the soil.  If it does great, I don't think there's a negative as I discussed before, but a big  part of the making it for me is like, it's fun for me and kind of relaxing to step away  from the screens, to just make a fire, to manage the fire.  
**[1:11:09-1:11:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:11:09):**  And if that's all the benefit I got out of it and I'm just left with this char afterwards,  like for me, that's enough.  I realize that isn't everybody, but I think there are some special experiences.  Like you said, when you do this a few times, fires are addicting.  And I don't mean in a, in a pyromaniac lighting buildings on fire type of way, but in this  
**[1:11:32-1:11:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:11:32):**  kind of soulful way, there is something about burning that fire and looking into that fire  that just, there's a lot of mystery there.  You know, there's a lot of us in there.  I, I, I have to agree with you completely with that and this personal experience.  I mean, you know, we're doing this right in the middle of this whole COVID lockdown and  
**[1:11:52-1:11:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:11:52):**  everything else.  In the beginning of it, there's a friend who has a large Kon-Tiki kiln that's a few miles  away and I was going to do a workshop and he was going to bring his kiln back in.  It was on March 7th, I believe.  And we, we had to postpone.  
**[1:12:07-1:12:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:12:07):**  I chose, didn't have to, I chose to postpone that workshop.  Well, a few weeks later, later in March, maybe in April, he got in touch with me and he said,  his name is Leon, Leon said, you know, I'm not on my property and I'm going to do a burn.  I'm going to do my kiln.  He said, do you want to get out here?  
**[1:12:30-1:12:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:12:30):**  You want to, you want to come on out?  And I says, I need to get out.  Yes.  And we went out and he was using very wet material that he had, but he had started,  I mean, I went out mid, mid morning.  
**[1:12:43-1:12:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:12:43):**  He had already started early in the morning and he burned hours after I left and I was  out there for about four or five hours.  And it's that whole just being with it and talking and, and, and that, that relationship.  And the other gentleman that I talked about just recently that I've known for years that  works with bio chart lives about 30 miles from here.  
**[1:13:09-1:13:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:13:09):**  We just contacted each other recently.  He says, you know, I've got this 21 year old mentee that is really into things that we're  going to do in a bunch of burns and maybe you ought to get over.  And my response to his, let me know when I could use a few hours of just hanging with  you and your young mentee being with the fires.  
**[1:13:32-1:13:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:13:32):**  It's not for everybody.  However, I mean, I don't know a person who doesn't like standing around a campfire.  And if you're using a flame cap kiln, it's a campfire that's producing a lot less smoke  than a campfire.  Yeah.  
**[1:13:47-1:13:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:13:47):**  And if you do it when it's cold, all the better because now you're warm.  Yeah.  Yeah.  It is a cool kind of Zen experience.  And the other thing I like about it is in today's day and age, it feels like we get  
**[1:13:58-1:14:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:13:58):**  on this treadmill of work of always doing the next thing.  It's a process.  You start the fire, you finish it.  So you can, within a few hours, you get the enjoyment, but you did something and you see  the result right away.  
**[1:14:09-1:14:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:14:09):**  It's tangible.  Hey man, I made something I can use like making a loaf of bread or something like that.  So it is a cool experience.  Along the tips that you had, I think one thing I had to learn was just what you said is instead  of piling up the biomass, you're kind of layering it on like pancakes, stacking pancakes, slowly  
**[1:14:29-1:14:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:14:29):**  going up, creating uniform surface.  And that way you get that more even burn.  Like you said, once you just see that outer white coloring on, bam, next layer goes on.  And with the cone kiln, I don't see any smoke.  In fact, if you watch kind of even around the edges, you see these little vortices where  
**[1:14:47-1:14:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:14:47):**  the fire is drawing in the gas or anything trying to leak out the sides.  If there's no wind, you'll see it actually curl back in where it's reburning it and just  cycling it off.  So it's a very clean, clean burn.  It's a very clean burn.  
**[1:15:04-1:15:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:15:04):**  And then one thing that you alluded to and it's that it's very Zen.  What I'm doing, especially if I'm working with a flame cap kiln, a cone kiln, I have  to be present.  I have to be mindful of what I'm doing.  I don't have to be, but the fire will show me that I'm not being present because I'm  
**[1:15:28-1:15:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:15:28):**  off doing something else.  I come back and I got a bunch of ash or I put too much on and I have a bunch of smoke.  And so backing away from being in the screen or being locked up on the screen or being  locked up, of coming to that moment of Zen, that moment of mindfulness, of being present  with something.  
**[1:15:52-1:15:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:15:52):**  It's like it really does.  It nurtures me and I know it nurtures other people.  And when I do workshops and stuff, the workshops where we can do actually do a burn and that's  the ones where the one where people really get off.  And that's where the real learning happens and the real discussion happens.  
**[1:16:20-1:16:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:16:20):**  Because when I'm standing there with a PowerPoint and explaining and whatnot, it's almost like  teaching to a class.  Yeah, there are a few people that ask questions, but when you're standing around a flame cap  kiln, a large burner, that's where the learning happens.  That's where everyone you'll notice there's maybe if there are 12 people there, you'll  
**[1:16:44-1:16:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:16:44):**  have three different conversations going on at the same time and everyone getting something.  So yeah, I agree.  Everybody looking to start this at home and they don't have a kiln, they don't want to  fabricate one because they're not sure if they want to get into it.  Do you think they can get good results out of just digging that cone out of the ground  
**[1:17:06-1:17:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:17:06):**  and doing the burn in that cone?  Yes, they can.  Yeah, they can.  And there are some excellent YouTube videos.  Josiah Hunt has done them in Hawaii, he shows that.  
**[1:17:22-1:17:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:17:22):**  But they're all out of, again, search YouTube and yes, one can and one will and there are  certain different ways that one can quench it of just pouring water on it.  But start off with a small, it doesn't have to be a six foot diameter.  Start off something that's maybe 24 inches deep and 24 inches in diameter, 24 inches  deep in a cone shape and play with it.  
**[1:17:51-1:17:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:17:51):**  And if nothing else, I mean, you can just cover it up with the dirt that you pulled  out and leave the biochar there because you can quench it with soil.  And there are the minerals that the biochar pulls from the soil.  There's an activation process that all happens.  So when sometimes, oftentimes when they're using these large, doing these large burns  
**[1:18:15-1:18:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:18:15):**  in ground, they won't use water to quench it, they will actually mount dirt over it.  And then when you excavate the biochar, you've mixed in, you've got some soil, some minerals  already mixed in.  So you've started the process of charging your biochar.  The quench is an important part of the process.  
**[1:18:37-1:18:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:18:37):**  So let's say you get to the end, your cone is full.  You're seeing that white and ash layer form on the top.  It looks like everything is burned.  I want to now put it out.  If you're using water, how do you go about that?  
**[1:18:53-1:19:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:18:53):**  And what else is the water doing besides just extinguishing the fire?  There are a couple of things the water is doing.  First of all, there are two ways of doing it.  Does one want to pour the water into their kiln?  Well, one wants to dump the biochar out, depending on the size of the kiln, depending on where  
**[1:19:15-1:19:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:19:15):**  you're doing it, on a layer that's not going to burn maybe a piece of metal or something,  or even on the ground, but you will burn any grasses or stuff you might have there and  then quench it on the ground.  The reason I say doing that is because if you do it in your kiln, it will shorten the  life of your kiln because of the oxidation of the hot metals getting hit with steam and  
**[1:19:42-1:19:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:19:42):**  water.  It starts the charging process.  It opens up the pores.  It starts to create the film around on the outer layer biochar because biochar does  have this film, which captures where the nutrients and where it's mined, it's not in the biochar,  
**[1:20:12-1:20:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:20:12):**  but it's actually encased around a film on the biochar.  And so using a water quenching does do that.  And I will sometimes water quench, oftentimes when I'm out doing demonstrations in small  top lid updraft stoves, I just have a larger container like an old popcorn can that I will  dump the biochar and put the lid on.  
**[1:20:41-1:20:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:20:41):**  There's no air and I end up with dry charcoal, dry biochar.  But it does need to be put water on it at some time because biochar is hydrophobic when  you begin with it and it will actually float.  It needs to be sit with water for a while because it will absorb quite a bit of water.  And when one quenches your biochar with water, you've started the process of getting some  
**[1:21:14-1:21:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:21:14):**  moisture into the biochar.  Let's say now you've quenched, the biochar is now sitting in the kiln.  What's your preferred method or next step at that point?  Do you go to reduce particle size at that point or are you looking to charge it at that  point?  
**[1:21:28-1:21:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:21:28):**  Depending on what you've used, it's using some larger flame cap kilns.  If you've got chunks that are three inches in diameter, I'd want to break those up a  little.  But if you're using small material, you can go right to charging it.  A simple way, depending on how much you've created, when I've done it workshops with  
**[1:21:58-1:22:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:21:58):**  people that have used large repurposed fuel oil barrels that were five and a half feet  in diameter, standing five and a half feet tall instead of buying a large flame cap kiln.  I know several farmers that are doing that, using material like that.  And you'll end up with large pieces of material.  And one of the simplest ways of breaking up that material is when you dump it on the ground,  
**[1:22:27-1:22:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:22:27):**  run it over with a piece of, with a tractor, run it over with your pickup, you know, and  it'll break up those pieces and then charge it.  I've seen people that have put this material inside like two piece, two tarps and then  put one tarp on the ground, one tarp on top, run over with the tractor, pull that tarp  off.  
**[1:22:49-1:22:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:22:49):**  You've broken it down a little bit.  And then on that tarp, they've actually charged it on the tarp where they've added moisture,  maybe added in this case where we were on an island and they took five, 10 gallons of  seawater, the minerals from the seawater, put that on the chart, some beneficial microbes  and whatever they add in their mix, worm castings, and then just folded, covered it up, let it  
**[1:23:17-1:23:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:23:17):**  sit for about four or five days and then put it into their garden.  In addition to soil building benefits, what are some of the other potential uses for biochar?  I think you were involved in a project that involved landscape remediation involving some  sort of pollutants using biochar?  The first project, first commercial project I did with this biochar was at the, as I said,  
**[1:23:44-1:23:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:23:44):**  I think I believe I mentioned, I get the biochar that I use from a paper mill from their steam  boiler and it is not part of the paper making process.  It's not a byproduct of that.  So this boiler makes steam for the paper making process because they use a lot of steam, they  use a lot of heat.  
**[1:24:09-1:24:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:24:09):**  In where I live, it's a seaport town, there is a port.  The port of Port Townsend is under regulations from the Department of Ecology, Washington  State Department of Ecology for the discharge.  They are monitored at the amount of zinc and copper that they discharge to the bay.  And zinc and copper, when I was working at the Environmental Compliance Office I worked  
**[1:24:36-1:24:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:24:36):**  with, it was interesting but a lot of people thought it was from the bottom scraping of  boats because they work on boats in the shipyard.  And it turned out that the majority of the zinc and copper came from metal roofs and  the biggest contributor of zinc and copper was from chain link fence.  Because anything that's galvanized contains, that is the galvanization process.  
**[1:25:10-1:25:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:25:10):**  So it's that zinc and copper.  So what we did was identifying what the sources were, the big sources that we went after were  the runoff from their corrugated metal roofs.  And so we made these downspout filters out of biochar and used a couple of different  blends, some of them with 80% biochar and 20% little peak pellets and other was just  
**[1:25:35-1:25:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:25:35):**  pure biochar.  And with either one of the filters that we used, we were able to remove, take in some  cases over 5,000 parts per billion zinc and reduce it to less than 10.  And which brought them, and they were allowed to discharge something about 100, 160 depending  on whether it's zinc or copper, to their waters.  
**[1:26:05-1:26:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:26:05):**  Well, we were able to put in these simple filters that were made out of recycled, they're  called IBC coats, international container.  They're the ones where syrups would come in and different liquids come in.  You've seen them, the metal cages with a plastic liner.  That's what we repurposed and used.  
**[1:26:33-1:26:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:26:33):**  And having one cubic yard of biochar in this filter, we were able to remove from about  it from up in some cases 8,000 square foot metal roof, all the stormwater runoff, all  the rainwater runoff to bring that roof into compliance.  And not using, using point of source remediation, not putting it all on the soil, on the ground,  and then having a big treatment facility, which is a typical engineering way of doing  
**[1:27:10-1:27:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:27:10):**  it.  And as an engineer, that's the way we did it.  But doing it as a point of source made for a simpler solution to remove their contaminations.  So that's a project that I've done.  They use it, it has been used in Colorado for mine reclamation, restoring the land.  
**[1:27:30-1:27:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:27:30):**  It's used in rain gardens.  So again, stormwater, not water, but this, it is stormwater runoff from roads or from  roofs.  Rain gardens that are typically mixed with compost and some wood chips.  If you put in some biochar in with that mix, it will remove the hydrocarbons and zinc because  
**[1:27:53-1:28:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:27:53):**  many people do not realize, but I believe, I may be off on a number, but 10% of automobile  breaks are zinc.  So every time you step on your break, you're putting zinc on a pavement.  And when it rains, that zinc, if you're close to a water source, ends up in the water and  the zinc really affects the fish.  
**[1:28:14-1:28:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:28:14):**  So yeah, it's got, and there are more and more, I'm also doing a project.  This is a soil.  We're getting ready to do a project with the city here that they compost all their biosolids  from their wastewater treatment plant and co-composting with the biochar because the  compost enhances the composting process and then measure different things in the finished  
**[1:28:44-1:28:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:28:44):**  compost afterwards.  And there is a lot of work happening with that right now in California because California  is diverting all their food waste from your waste stream and it has to be composted.  They can't end up in your trash.  So there are a lot of different things.  
**[1:29:03-1:29:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:29:03):**  I'm working one project that tomorrow they're picking up some biochar.  It's someone that has anaerobic digesters, a plant here in a company here in Seattle area,  and they want to remove the smell from the process and they're going to be running it  through a biochar filter because biochar activated carbon filters.  Some people you can buy a composter that you put or where you can collect your compost  
**[1:29:35-1:29:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:29:35):**  in your kitchen and it has a charcoal filter.  Well personally I throw biochar in my pail under my seat, which is a three gallon pail.  It never smells anymore.  It absorbs the smell.  So is biochar activated carbon same thing or maybe not the exact same thing, but are  
**[1:29:58-1:30:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:29:58):**  they perform the same?  They can perform in similar manners.  Yes, activated carbon is put under a certain pressure and is treated in a different way.  Whereas biochar, you get what you get when you do it, but there are people that are working  what they call designer biochars and then post treating the biochars and making them  
**[1:30:23-1:30:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:30:23):**  into more of an activated charcoal, but they do have many of the same properties.  In that point of source filtration project, were they able to test that biochar and see  that those heavy metals were getting caught up in the char?  Well we have not tested them, tested the actual biochar that's left in there, but we do know,  so if you're pulling in 5,000 parts per million of zinc and you're discharging less than 10,  
**[1:30:58-1:31:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:30:58):**  so say just for numbers 5,000 going in and 50 going out, so 4,950 parts per million didn't  just disappear.  It's been absorbed to the surface of the biochar through that negative charging that the biochar  has.  Now, it's in a water bath.  
**[1:31:22-1:31:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:31:22):**  That water bath is there all the time and there was one researcher, Hugh McLaughlin,  who I sent him pictures and we were talking about it and he asked me, he says, well in  that bath is there any slime or is there any algae?  And I said, oh yeah.  He said, well, because the question was how long will the biochar last in these filters?  
**[1:31:48-1:31:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:31:48):**  And he said it's possible that they might last for an indefinite period of time because  depending upon what that algae that's in there, that algae could be feeding on the zinc and  transmuting it because mycelia will do different things.  Mushrooms will remediate in different ways.  I don't know.  
**[1:32:14-1:32:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:32:14):**  We did not test it.  One of the gentlemen that I worked with in building these, what his thought was, which  I would have loved to see this happen, when they, he used to work in, when corrugated  metal is made, is made when the roof galvanizing is made, they put a charge on a sheet of metal  and then the zinc is pulled from the solution and bound to the metal.  
**[1:32:52-1:32:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:32:52):**  And he had worked in that process.  He said, what if we put in a sheet and change the polarities, can we then put in enough  of a charge to break the bond from what's on the biochar, the zinc on the biochar and  pull it off the biochar and put it on a metal plate?  Right.  
**[1:33:18-1:33:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:33:18):**  And that was something that I think is, further research is worth doing because then one could  recycle zinc.  One could then also, your biochar that's in these filters, these type of filters, would  last indefinitely.  So I don't know.  
**[1:33:36-1:33:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:33:36):**  So the analogy to the soil here is it's holding pollutants coming off a roof.  You put it into soil, it could hold stuff in the soil, good things, bad things, and  it's locking them up in place.  So the biology, be it bacteria, be it fungi, whatever, now has a chance to access that  versus before where it may have wanted to just flow to a lower level of the soil.  
**[1:34:04-1:34:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:34:04):**  So you're holding stuff there and then you're allowing the biology to go in and do whatever  it does with that stuff.  Exactly.  Well, I mean, this has been great.  I think it's filled in a lot of the gaps that I had around biochar knowledge.  
**[1:34:22-1:34:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:34:22):**  For people out there listening to this and watching this, what's one takeaway you want  them to have about biochar?  It's not a mysterious element.  It's something that if you like building little campfires like you do, go ahead and make some  biochar.  
**[1:34:45-1:34:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:34:45):**  Start using it.  Play with it.  Have fun with it.  And see what it does.  It's not a mystery.  
**[1:34:58-1:35:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:34:58):**  It's something that our ancestors through the millennia have been using on different  continents both in Northern Europe, Africa, South America, the Plains Indians, I mean,  they burned and that burn was creating some biochar.  It's something that's in our DNA and I think we've forgotten it.  Well, it's been great, Francesco, for people that want to learn more about the work that  
**[1:35:30-1:35:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:35:30):**  you're doing, where's the best place to go?  Well, I would say you can go to my website, which is OlympicBioChar.com.  It's pretty minimalistic on that website.  We will be putting up some links, but I would start with a few places.  I would start with the International Biochar Initiative.  
**[1:35:55-1:35:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:35:55):**  Just search that.  Look at the U.S. Biochar Initiative and from both those places, there are links to a myriad  of information where one can go.  As open as I am in talking with you today, if anyone reached out to me from my website,  I have a resource sheet, simple sheet.  
**[1:36:22-1:36:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-11-FrancescoTortorici-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:36:22):**  There are great videos that are out there, some that I like, and I'd be happy to share  it up with anyone.  Thank you.  