### In Search of Soil  (2020-00-21)
**[0:00:00-0:00:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:00:00):**  So, we meet again.  Whenever you hear somebody talk about no-till, you always hear it talked about in a positive  light.  Why is that?  What is no-till preventing?  
**[0:00:30-0:00:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:00:30):**  Or maybe a better way of asking that is, what problems do tillage cause to the soil structure?  And if you are farming on land that has suffered from tillage, either self-imposed or a previous  owner imposed, how do you solve the problems that tillage created?  How do you use nature to undo the work that we did?  Well, today to answer that question and much more, I'm talking to farm educator and former  
**[0:00:56-0:00:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:00:56):**  Extension agent, Jim Horman.  A lot of poor soil structure is due to excess tillage.  The tillage is causing that when you go down and you dig in the soil and you go down two  inches, I can tell you that probably some type of vertical tillage, anywhere from two  to four inches, they'll go down and you can find those layers in the soil.  
**[0:01:19-0:01:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:01:19):**  Jim is somebody who has been involved in agriculture for his whole life, from working on farms  as a child, to managing farms throughout his career, to studying environmental science  at the PhD level at The Ohio State University, where he also was a University Extension agent,  an educator in the Ohio area.  Over the course of his career, he's focused a lot on grazing, water quality, no-till and  
**[0:01:43-0:01:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:01:43):**  cover crops, and today we're going to talk a lot about no-till and cover crops.  You can learn more about Jim's work at HormanSoilHealth.com, which I've linked to below, and while a lot  of Jim's experience is on large acreage, the subject matter is something that easily scales  down.  So whether you're on 10,000 acres, 1,000 acres, or half an acre, the principles are still  
**[0:02:07-0:02:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:02:07):**  the same.  Keep the soil covered, minimize soil disturbance, and keep a living root in the soil as much  as possible.  But now let's jump right into it with the great Jim Horman.  This is In Search of Soil.  
**[0:02:23-0:02:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:02:23):**  Jim, when you look at soil, at the very basics, for people that might not understand soil  and they might think it's, hey, this is just a inert thing in the ground that I grow plants  in, how do you describe soil to farmers?  I would have to say that soil is a living organism.  When you look at the composition of soil, it's 45% mineral, and it should be about 50%  
**[0:02:51-0:02:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:02:51):**  pore space.  But the most important part of that soil, what really makes soil what it is, is that  other 4-5%, 3-4-5%.  A lot of our soils are now down to 2% organic matter.  But the organic matter to me is like the head and the brain and the heart.  
**[0:03:08-0:03:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:03:08):**  It controls so many things in the soil.  I can remember I was interviewed about Martian soils, and I said, that's really not soil  because it doesn't have organic matter.  It doesn't have the living organisms in it.  That's what makes soil.  
**[0:03:24-0:03:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:03:24):**  Otherwise soil is really just ground up rock.  And if you look at sand, silt, and clay, the only difference between those three is the  size of the particles.  Sand will break down into silt.  Silt breaks down into clay, and that's just ground up rock.  
**[0:03:40-0:03:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:03:40):**  It doesn't become soil until you add the biology.  I know from looking at a lot of the work that you've done, you've talked a lot of compaction  in the past.  Let's focus on that.  We'll circle back to organic matter a little bit down the line.  
**[0:03:54-0:03:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:03:54):**  For pore space and compaction, how big of a problem is that when it comes to soils?  You've seen a lot of ag soils throughout the Midwest.  When you look at them, can you talk about a compacted soil and how that maybe performs  differently than a soil that's looser and friable?  So it all goes back to that carbon.  
**[0:04:16-0:04:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:04:16):**  When you till a soil, that's really what creates the compaction.  I really get upset, or I upset a lot of engineers because they will tell you that soil compaction  is due to wheel traffic.  But it would be interesting to do an experiment.  We could take 100 people and put them across the field and put them a foot apart and have  
**[0:04:38-0:04:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:04:38):**  them dig in the soil, and every one of them will find a compacted layer there.  Now, are you telling me that tires went evenly across that whole field?  No, that is where the tillage tool went.  It's smoothing.  What happens is it smooths that soil when it's wet, and that's causing the compaction.  
**[0:04:57-0:05:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:04:57):**  Basically, if you take two clay particles, they have a negative charge, you put a positive  atom in between there, it's going to set up like concrete.  And that's what's happening in our soil.  We're losing the organic matter with the tillage.  And what we call soil compaction is really just poor soil structure.  
**[0:05:16-0:05:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:05:16):**  That's really what most soil...  Now, does that mean that if I have heavy equipment and I go across the field, yes, I can cause  soil compaction.  But rain can cause soil compaction.  If you plow a field and that soil will start to settle, you'll lose pore space as it rains.  
**[0:05:38-0:05:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:05:38):**  And the rain is coming down sometimes 30 miles per hour, it can actually compact you.  So rain and gravity are also maybe not as much of an extent.  The heavy equipment is major.  But really what soil compaction is due to, or poor soil structure, is due to a lack of  living roots, it's due to a lack of biology in our soils.  
**[0:06:00-0:06:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:06:00):**  Our soils, we've lost anywhere from 50, 60, as much as 80% of our organic matter from  our soils.  And when you do that, what happens is they shrink.  I do this quite regularly.  I mean, anybody can do this.  
**[0:06:15-0:06:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:06:15):**  Just go out to a fence row and look at the fence row.  And you will see anywhere from a six to nine inch elevation difference where you have undisturbed  soils.  And the difference between that and say your end row.  Now on the end rows, it tends to be a little more compacted.  
**[0:06:33-0:06:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:06:33):**  But the difference there is due to the tillage, we've taken all that organic matter, put it  up into the atmosphere, and what has happened is our soils have shrunk.  And that's that lack of pore space.  Now all we have left is mainly the middle portion of the soil and it's cemented together  by those negative and positive charges, and it becomes very dense.  
**[0:06:56-0:07:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:06:56):**  The way you can break that up, you can do it with tillage, but unfortunately, you're  just making it worse.  But a root will do the same thing.  It'll push the soil down, it pushes out, and it physically lifts that soil, expands it  like an accordion.  
**[0:07:11-0:07:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:07:11):**  And then when that root decomposes, now you get the pore space.  And that's how you start to expand your soil is by adding roots, and you start to add that  organic matter, and that's what makes good soil is the organic matter.  Then we start, instead of forming micro aggregates, those are the real fine tiny pieces of soil  that are covered.  
**[0:07:36-0:07:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:07:36):**  Now we're going to start to form what we call macro aggregates.  Those are the little pieces of organic matter and roots and clay and silks and sand particles,  kind of all glued together with the root accidents and the microbial poop, and that will allow  the air and the water and the gas exchange, and that will start to expand our soil.  And that's when you see the soil crumble, that's when you know you have good soil structure,  
**[0:08:03-0:08:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:08:03):**  okay?  And that's what we're trying to do.  When you look at compaction, you have organic matter being depleted, and then you also have  the actual tilth of the structure of the soil being changed by, say, tillage.  Is there a bigger cause of compaction in there?  
**[0:08:20-0:08:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:08:20):**  Is it the tilling which breaks up that natural supportive pore space and loosens it up so  then when rain comes it wants to make it settle?  Or is it the fact that you're now oxygenating that soil, bringing the organic matter up,  it's volatilizing off, it's burning off, it's being consumed by the microbes in the soil,  and then you get both?  
**[0:08:38-0:08:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:08:38):**  So is there one side that is more problematic?  I'd say it's just a combination of both.  It's that whole process.  When you oxygenize a soil, the microbes go nuts, and they eat up.  The most important part, what's lacking in most of our conventional soils, is the active  
**[0:08:57-0:08:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:08:57):**  organic matter.  So the active organic matter is your root accidents, your sugars, your polysaccharides  in the soil that give us good soil structure.  And when you oxygenize it and you turn it over or you really fluff it up like that,  what happens is you put a whole bunch of oxygen in there and the microbes go nuts, and then  
**[0:09:18-0:09:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:09:18):**  the microbes start to consume all that active carbon, and then pretty soon what will happen  is you lose all your structure, micro-aggregates, not as many macro-aggregates, and pretty soon  your soil starts to shrink.  And then the other problem that happens is when you take that tillage tool across that,  now what you're doing is you're taking all those micro-aggregates and you're cementing  
**[0:09:46-0:09:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:09:46):**  them together.  Because I can go out in any field, I just did this the other day for another video,  and we went out there and we dug in a soil that had been no-till since 1992, quote no-till.  Only it really wasn't no-till.  The guy told me that he'd done some turbo-till, and I could tell you the exact depth that  
**[0:10:05-0:10:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:10:05):**  he turbo-tilled it, and he told me what years he did it.  You know, it was a couple of years apart, but we could find those levels in the soil  and that soil broke apart on an even plane, straight across, right to the depth that he  turbo-tilled that soil.  And we could see that in the soil.  
**[0:10:21-0:10:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:10:21):**  And then we went to another conventional field, and that field was like a solid chunk of concrete.  They had done so much tillage that the soil was just really hard, really dense.  Of course, it was dry out, and it's always going to look worse when it's dry, but you  could get in that soil and it was just solid, had no structure to it whatsoever.  So the more seeds you do, the more oxygen you put in, and then you're going to start  
**[0:10:51-0:10:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:10:51):**  getting these levels.  I can still find the plow pan from 50, 60 years ago, even though guys haven't plowed  for 50, 60 years.  We can find that level still in the soil.  It's still there if you're doing conventional tillage.  
**[0:11:05-0:11:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:11:05):**  Now, if you start doing no-till, cover crops, start growing a lot of wheat and things like  that, it's a little harder to find because they're breaking that up.  The more roots you get in there, it takes a little time, but they'll break those levels  up and they can get down there.  The biggest thing I can remember, a quick story, is we went to Minnesota, oh, probably  
**[0:11:26-0:11:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:11:26):**  10 years ago.  Most beautiful soil I've ever seen, the soil was the color of your shirt, just pure black.  I said, oh, this is such beautiful-looking soil.  We dug in the soil and we could find a compacted layer.  Their biggest complaint was, I said, boy, you guys must get pretty good yields here.  
**[0:11:44-0:11:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:11:44):**  Well, it really varies.  He said, depends on how much rain we get during the summer.  And yet there was a field right next to it, they had a dry summer and the corn didn't  look very good.  125, 150 bushel corn, okay?  
**[0:11:57-0:12:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:11:57):**  Should raise 250, easy.  Right next to it was this beautiful no-till field and had the same amount of moisture.  Well, we went over there, no compaction, the roots were getting real deep.  So we dug a hole where the conventional soil was.  Guess what?  
**[0:12:13-0:12:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:12:13):**  They plow their soils every single year, whether it's corn or soybeans, compacted layer there.  The roots could not get to the moisture six inches below where the roots were.  There was more soil there, but they couldn't reach it because of that compacted area.  So compaction is a major problem.  It can last for multiple years.  
**[0:12:33-0:12:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:12:33):**  We have seen in research studies where we compacted the soil, it can last easily nine  to ten years if you don't do something to remediate that.  The best way to remediate it, it's slower, but it's used roots.  Roots is what's going to heal our soils, but that can take two to three years to break  up those compacted layers.  
**[0:12:53-0:12:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:12:53):**  So from a single tillage, you can see that plow pan last nine to ten years?  Wow.  A single tillage, but in our research studies, what we did is we took zero, ten, and twenty-ton  loads.  This was started way back in the 70s, and so they used the same methodology.  
**[0:13:16-0:13:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:13:16):**  We had no-till fields, and then we had conventional fields.  I can tell you that conventional fields had poor soil structure and more compaction than  the no-till fields.  And what I'd really like to do now is do no-till with a cover crop, but these were set up 50  years ago.  
**[0:13:36-0:13:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:13:36):**  They're not going to change them very quickly.  These are ongoing, long-term research studies that are being done by Ohio State.  But all I'm telling you is that it's a combination of tillage.  The wheel compaction is a big issue, especially on some of our big farms now.  We have grain carts that can hold two semi-loads worth of grain.  
**[0:13:56-0:14:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:13:56):**  Why you would want to put that much grain on that many axle loads going across your  field makes no sense to me whatsoever.  But on really big fields, yes, we're going to get wheel traffic.  But a lot of poor soil structure is due to excess tillage.  The tillage is causing that when you go down and you dig in the soil and you go down two  
**[0:14:16-0:14:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:14:16):**  inches, I can tell you that probably some type of vertical tillage, anywhere from two  to four inches, they'll go down and you can find those layers in the soil.  You can find where the tip of that tillage tool went because there's almost like a perfect  break in the soil, especially when it's dry right now.  You might not see it as much when it's wet, but when it's dry right now, you can dig in  
**[0:14:40-0:14:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:14:40):**  the soil.  You can see exactly where you tilled either last year or the last couple of years.  It'll break perfectly on an even plane across that whole field.  I can dig almost anywhere in that field and I can find that same level.  So, again, tillage is a major, major part of the problem that we're having with poor  
**[0:15:00-0:15:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:15:00):**  soil structure, what we call soil compaction.  One of the big principles of soil conservation is minimize soil disturbance.  So when it comes to no-till, or quote no-till, are there degrees of tillage that you think  are more harmful than others?  There's a lot of proponents of vertical tillage, at least maybe in the conversion process of  
**[0:15:24-0:15:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:15:24):**  going from conventional to no-till.  And then you have going back to a moldboard plow, which is going to do complete inversion  to on a smaller scale, we see a lot of people using tillers, which are doing inversion.  How do you view tillage on a curve of severe to extreme and are they going to lead to the  same types of results?  
**[0:15:45-0:15:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:15:45):**  Oh, yes.  Tillage is going to be harmful, but if I was to start with the one that I would give you  the best results would probably be your strip till.  Because what you can do is you can take maybe a couple inch zone that you're going to till,  that will dry that soil out.  
**[0:16:05-0:16:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:16:05):**  Every time you do tillage, you dry the soil out a half inch to an inch.  Okay?  And that's a zone where you can get good seed to soil contact, you can get your corn, your  beans or whatever you're trying to grow, if we're talking more row crops, corn and beans  would be the big ones, but maybe cotton or something like that.  
**[0:16:24-0:16:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:16:24):**  But you could put it in that little zone, but then you've got a nice area on either  side of it that's undisturbed and that area can heal and as those roots grow out, they're  going to get into that undisturbed soil.  So for me, kind of an area where guys kind of make the transition would be on strip till.  I'm going to say all tillage is going to be bad, but strip till is probably one of those  
**[0:16:49-0:16:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:16:49):**  ways that we can transition.  And maybe at some point, you'll heal that soil enough that you say, it's almost like  training wheels.  Okay?  I need a crutch.  
**[0:17:00-0:17:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:17:00):**  My crutch is a strip till.  I'm going to do that for maybe the first five, 10 years.  Once I get the rest of the soil healed up and I get good water infiltration and I'm  getting good nutrient recycling, well, maybe I don't even need that crutch anymore.  Maybe I don't need the training wheels.  
**[0:17:15-0:17:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:17:15):**  Maybe I can throw them away and go to full blown no-till.  So I think that would be the optimal deal is to go to full blown no-till.  But no-till by itself is only about 40% of the solution.  You got to have the live roots in there, the extra roots from the cover crops.  You got to have that soil covered with living roots year round.  
**[0:17:38-0:17:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:17:38):**  That's what's going to heal your soil.  If you're just doing no-till by itself, it's going to take you a long, long time.  You're going to see those compacted layers in there for many, many years because you're  only getting one set of roots.  Whatever crop you're growing, and you might only grow that crop for maybe four months,  
**[0:17:54-0:17:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:17:54):**  five months out of the year at most, you got to have live roots in there year round.  That's just the way most of our soils develop.  Live roots is what's going to heal your soils and make them better.  And it's going to add that carbon back into the soil.  Root turnover, that's why the prairie soils, 50% of those roots turned over every year.  
**[0:18:15-0:18:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:18:15):**  That's why out in the prairies, we have soil profiles that are 10, 15, 20, 30 feet deep  with organic matter because half of those prairie roots turned over every year.  The area that I live in, in Ohio, we had mainly forested areas.  And these tall oak trees would live 100, 200 years, and there was very little root turnover.  So most of the organic matter came from the leaves and from the roots that turned over  
**[0:18:43-0:18:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:18:43):**  in the top six inches, but then our soils aren't very well developed because we didn't  have very much root turnover.  As you go out west and you get into areas that don't have trees, those prairie plants,  the roots are turning over 50%.  And some of those roots go down 5, 10, 15 feet deep in the soil, and that's how they  
**[0:19:03-0:19:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:19:03):**  get those really high levels of organic matter on those what we call mollisols soils, is  what they are.  And those are some of the most productive soils in the world, okay, is the mollisols.  And what's interesting is you can change your soil to make it act like a mollisol, and if  you want to do that, you have to have a large turnover, raise as many crops as you can,  
**[0:19:28-0:19:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:19:28):**  and have a large turnover of roots, and then you'll transition your soil to becoming more  and more like a mollisols soil.  Soils are not static.  They're changing all the time.  And you can either do management that makes them better, or what we've done in the last  
**[0:19:45-0:19:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:19:45):**  50 to 75 years is most of our soils are degraded, and we've made them worse.  We've lost the majority of organic matter from our soils.  So management is key to that, and that's why we've got to find ways to make it better.  What have you seen with your work when you look at soil cuts, going into a field, doing  an excavation in the middle of a field, and looking down across the soil profile?  
**[0:20:11-0:20:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:20:11):**  If cover crops can go in and help break up these compaction layers, why can't some of  our cash crops like corn break through those layers, and what's actually happening to those  roots and those compaction layers when you get down into the cut and look at them?  Corn is actually quite a bit better than soybeans.  Soybeans are the worst.  
**[0:20:35-0:20:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:20:35):**  For every unit of nitrogen that you're making with soybeans, you're getting two units of  acid, and soybeans also have a very low carbon to nitrogen ratio.  They don't add a lot of organic matter.  You can harvest a field of soybeans, and if you look at the residue on the above ground,  and really what we're worried about, mainly concerned about, is the residue below ground.  
**[0:21:00-0:21:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:21:00):**  We need some residue on the surface to armor it, but once you get above ground, you generally  get below ground, and the problem is on soybeans, we're just not adding enough organic matter.  We're burning more organic matter than we're gaining.  So what happens over time is your soils get harder and denser when you grow a lot of soybeans.  If you really want to add organic matter to your soils, if you were to go continuous corn,  
**[0:21:27-0:21:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:21:27):**  not that that's a good thing, but if you were, there are some guys that will grow continuous  corn.  What we see is when you look at the research, every year you grow corn, you add a little  more organic matter because it has a big root, and they're not fine, but they're very big,  and that's part of the problem.  
**[0:21:45-0:21:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:21:45):**  Those big roots can't break up the soil as well as the fine roots, so you'll get more  organic matter with corn than you will with soybeans, and you can actually build your  organic matter levels with corn.  So if you have corn in the rotation more often, you'll see it.  Now, maybe that's not good from a rotational aspect, but the way we can make up for that  
**[0:22:12-0:22:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:22:12):**  is if I'm going to grow soybeans, well then I need to put in another crop after the soybeans,  something like cereal rye or winter oats or annual rye grass, something like that that  will add the roots, and we can get more root turnover, and if I could add maybe several  things in a mixture, I want some shallow roots, I want some deep roots, I want some thick  roots and thin roots, you want all different kinds of roots.  
**[0:22:40-0:22:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:22:40):**  The more diversity you get out there, the quicker you're going to be able to break up  that compassion.  Our biggest problem with corn is a lot of times the soybeans have compacted the soil  so much that when the corn starts to grow, when it hits a compacted area, what happens?  It goes off at a 90-degree angle.  
**[0:22:58-0:23:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:22:58):**  We call those J-roots.  They go off at a 90-degree angle, and they have to wait until they can stretch out until  they can find a crack in the soil, and then they'll go down that crack, and then they'll  spread out.  Well, that takes some time, and then that generally hurts your yields.  
**[0:23:17-0:23:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:23:17):**  It's a lot better if that corn can go straight down and just really spread out and not be  restricted.  If you get a great big ball of corn roots out there that are growing down four or five  feet deep in the soil and just really spreading out, that's going to add a lot of organic  matter to your soil.  
**[0:23:35-0:23:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:23:35):**  Eventually, what they'll do is most roots are following the same path almost every year.  So when one crop's done, the next crop is going to look for the path of least resistance.  You'll either find a crack, a root hair, or some of these bigger macro-aggregates or macro-pores,  I'm sorry, macro-pores, and it'll follow those.  That's why earthworm holes are so beneficial, because the earthworm lines its hole with  
**[0:24:01-0:24:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:24:01):**  a lot of nutrients that are readily available, and the roots will just jam-pack an earthworm  hole and go down that hole, and they'll suck up a lot of those nutrients, the waste from  the earthworms.  Usually, if you have earthworms, that means you're on the path to good soil health.  If you have a lot of earthworms and you're promoting earthworms and you start getting  
**[0:24:24-0:24:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:24:24):**  some, a little bit of residue, now these earthworms will take a lot of that residue deep into  the soil and kind of mix it in, and you've got to feed your livestock.  So guys have had problems where they've had so many earthworms that they just pull all  the residue down, then they leave that top there.  But those are things that we just have to work through, and that's where you put in  
**[0:24:47-0:24:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:24:47):**  a lot of different diversity of different cover crops.  Some of the earthworms kind of like a certain residue a little bit better than others.  If you get really big chunks, they can't pull it into the soil, and that will kind of armor  your soil so that you won't have soil erosion.  Okay?  
**[0:25:04-0:25:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:25:04):**  We want to keep that soil, have a lot of different residue there.  Most of the residue in healthy soils is breaking down very quickly.  We're getting a very high turnover.  If you're in a soil, in a field, and your residue is not breaking down, chances are  maybe you're using too many fungicides, you're killing off the fungus that helped to break  
**[0:25:23-0:25:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:25:23):**  that down, or you just don't have the soil healthy there yet, and then that can create  some problems.  So you really need to look at your program.  What are you doing wrong that your residue, if your residue is not breaking down, it could  be you got compacted layers, could be the chemicals you're using.  
**[0:25:41-0:25:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:25:41):**  There's a lot of different things that you just have to look at, try to figure out what's  causing that problem.  Have you in your research come across this?  When a root dies at the end of the season, it obviously remains in the ground, and it  goes away, it breaks down and decomposes.  
**[0:25:57-0:26:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:25:57):**  Is it more like if I put my fist into the sand, when I pull my hand out of the sand,  the hole collapses, versus let's say I have packable snow that you could make a snow ball  out of.  If I punch my hand into that snow, pull my hand out, the snow is going to retain the  shape of my hand, the sand won't.  
**[0:26:16-0:26:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:26:16):**  When those roots break down, are they leaving an open cavity there in their place, or do  you find that when the roots die off, there is some kind of collapse there, but it's not  sealing itself shut?  That's a good question.  I really haven't thought about that too much, but my suspicion would be that as the microbes  
**[0:26:39-0:26:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:26:39):**  start to break down these roots, they're going to leave a lot of their waste behind.  They're going to process it, and it's a slow process.  You might have some big chunks, you might have some little chunks, it's going to decompose  at different rates.  So you're going to get some big chunks, little chunks, but you're going to have a lot of  
**[0:26:57-0:26:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:26:57):**  microbial waste.  Those are the glues and the sugars that are in the soil that causes soil to be sticky.  What's happening in a macroaggregate is you're taking all the microaggregates, the root goes  down, and as the root penetrates into the soil, it's lining up all these real small  soil particles, and it's actually compacting the soil.  
**[0:27:22-0:27:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:27:22):**  People didn't realize this, but roots actually compact the soil, but they do it with a purpose.  So what they're doing is they're lining up these particles of soil, and then they're  enveloping them with some of the root exudates, and they're forming what we call macroaggregates.  And then the microbial waste.  And then pretty soon what you get is this little pad that will crumble, and that's what  
**[0:27:49-0:27:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:27:49):**  we call good soil structure.  When you can go into soil and you look at it, those macroaggregates, the soil just crumbles  on you.  Those are macroaggregates.  When you go into a soil that's been heavily tilled, and it's just one solid mass, that's  
**[0:28:07-0:28:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:28:07):**  really just a bunch of very, very small microaggregates that are all cemented together like bricks  in a house, those are your microaggregates, the bricks would be, they're all cemented  together and it's just one big chunk that's so dense that the roots can't get through  it.  So there's a lot of things going on.  
**[0:28:26-0:28:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:28:26):**  Throughout your soil, everything is a microenvironment.  You can have just a couple millimeters away totally different soil conditions.  One can be totally saturated just a little bit away.  The pH can be at one level just a couple millimeters away.  The pH can totally change and it can be aerated.  
**[0:28:49-0:28:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:28:49):**  And that's why we always talk about soil on a micro view.  Everything is in a very, very, it changes so much within the soil.  There really is no such thing as a uniform soil condition because it's so variable throughout  the field.  And we like to just combine everything together and take kind of an average, but there really  
**[0:29:12-0:29:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:29:12):**  isn't a thing called averages in the soil.  It's all over the board, even just within a very, very short distance.  And that's actually very good and healthy to have different conditions because as the  roots going out there, it can search out different minerals and different conditions and it makes  the nutrients available.  
**[0:29:32-0:29:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:29:32):**  What's happening in most of our soils is our soils are becoming too compacted.  We're getting away from that balance.  And what's happening is we're getting oversaturated soils or soils that are just totally compacted  and then we don't have that balance.  And we've gone too far one way or the other.  
**[0:29:53-0:29:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:29:53):**  Then your plants become sick and they just don't grow as well because they have nutrient  deficiencies.  So what we're trying to do is in a healthy soil, you should have a balance of conditions  and not any one condition should be prevalent throughout that soil.  And that's actually good.  
**[0:30:13-0:30:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:30:13):**  You get more diversity when you have a balance.  Does that make sense?  It does.  It does make a lot of sense.  So thinking of that and thinking back to this idea of corn hitting a compaction layer, J-rooting,  
**[0:30:28-0:30:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:30:28):**  how can cover crops start to break up that compaction?  If you have a plant in there that is hitting a compaction layer and J-rooting, what's changing  when you introduce other plants?  Why can they break up?  You said corn has larger roots.  
**[0:30:41-0:30:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:30:41):**  Is it they have finer roots?  Is it different and more microbiology happening?  I always talk about the situation where, you know, carpenter, if you think about carpenters,  if you ever do any carpentry work, if you got to drill a hole, you'll drill a pilot  hole first.  
**[0:31:01-0:31:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:31:01):**  Okay.  That makes it easier for the bigger drill bit to get through.  So think of the corn as being a big drill bit.  And when it hits a very dense area, it can't get through.  But if you have a cover crop that has a lot of very fine root hairs, they can get in between  
**[0:31:18-0:31:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:31:18):**  some of these areas and start to break it up a little bit.  And then when the next root comes along, it can follow that same path.  And a lot of the nutrients are going to be there and better gas exchange.  And it'll follow that same path.  But it's just about like drilling a pilot hole.  
**[0:31:36-0:31:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:31:36):**  It makes it a lot easier for that bigger root then to penetrate into that.  And over time, it might take two to three years to break up your compaction in soil.  Generally, we say cover crop roots can go down about a foot each year, but there's always  going to be areas in a soil that are really, really compacted.  And it may only, it might be more, it might be better to think instead of how many feet  
**[0:32:01-0:32:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:32:01):**  that they go down or inches, it might be better to think of it in percent.  Maybe the first year they take out 10 or 20% of the compaction, the next year they take  out another 20 to 30% of the compaction.  And then by the maybe the third year, now we're up to 70, 80% of the total soil is less  compacted, and the roots can get through there.  
**[0:32:23-0:32:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:32:23):**  And then after, you know, four, five, six, seven years, that soil just literally crumbles  and you can't find any compacted layers whatsoever.  So it takes time.  It's probably better to think of soil structure and soil compaction in percentages, how much  compaction we can take out versus in depth.  
**[0:32:42-0:32:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:32:42):**  Because most of the time, the compaction, the poor soil structure is at certain levels  in the soil, and we're trying to get through that.  And maybe the first year we only take out 10% or 20%.  It's hard to say.  I've not done any studies on this.  
**[0:32:57-0:33:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:32:57):**  But just visualizing it and thinking about it as you add more roots, the next year, you're  going to start to spread out and you're going to start to break up more of that soil.  And by the third, fourth, fifth year, you're just every year you're making that soil a  little bit better place and a little bit easier to get through.  And pretty soon that soil starts to crumble.  
**[0:33:17-0:33:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:33:17):**  It smells better.  You got more biological life.  And then it's going to start to perform.  Most of our problems in no-till start with soil compaction.  Until you get your soil to be healthy, you got to get rid of the compaction.  
**[0:33:36-0:33:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:33:36):**  You've got to get good soil structure.  And until that happens, you're going to struggle to make no-till.  Corn, soybeans, whatever crop you're trying to raise, you're going to have a hard time  making that successful to you, get better soil structure.  And that may take a couple years, one, two, three, four, five years.  
**[0:33:52-0:33:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:33:52):**  Just depends on how bad it is.  So do you typically see a yield drop where somebody's producing at a high level pre-no-till  and then they go and start to transition no-till, maybe yield drops, their soil structure improves,  and then it starts getting back up there and creeping back up?  Yes.  
**[0:34:09-0:34:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:34:09):**  Yes.  And there's a couple reasons for that.  A lot of it has to do with nitrogen.  So when you have poor soil structure, I always like to think of, let's think of any natural  disaster.  
**[0:34:24-0:34:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:34:24):**  And really tillage is a natural disaster.  So the one I always think about, and I'm a little older than most people, maybe Katrina,  a lot of people can remember the big hurricane that happened down in New Orleans.  Let me ask you a question.  What was the worst day?  
**[0:34:40-0:34:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:34:40):**  Was it the worst day for the people that were down there, the actual day that the hurricane  hit?  Well, most people found shelter.  But then what happened?  All of a sudden, the lights went out and the floodgates didn't work.  
**[0:34:54-0:34:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:34:54):**  And the area started to flood and people started to get away.  But what was the absolute worst time?  Probably about four, three, four, five weeks after the actual hurricane, because things  were so bad that help couldn't get in there to make it better.  So the worst time in a natural disaster isn't when the hurricane actually hit, which is  
**[0:35:17-0:35:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:35:17):**  tillage.  Okay.  It actually takes a period of time.  Things are going to get worse before they get better.  Does that make sense?  
**[0:35:25-0:35:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:35:25):**  Yeah.  And that's exactly what's happening in our soils.  If you're going to make your soils heal, you got to figure out what's wrong.  And the big thing is, the compaction is the biggest problem.  When you have compaction, you're going to get more denitrification, you're going to  
**[0:35:41-0:35:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:35:41):**  have less nitrogen.  And because you have less nitrogen, your yields start to go down.  Until you break that compacted layer up, that's going to be a problem.  The other thing is, you've got to change your microbial community.  And that takes a little bit of time.  
**[0:35:58-0:36:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:35:58):**  It can take you one, two, three years to change that microbial community.  In a conventional tilled system, it's dominated by bacteria.  Bacteria live six hours, maybe a couple days at the most.  Fungi live many, many years.  And it can take a couple years to build those populations back up.  
**[0:36:19-0:36:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:36:19):**  So that's why we see that dip until you start to make the transition.  And then the other thing is, you got to get the air.  You got to get the pore space back in there so that you can get the carbon and all the  nutrients to recycle.  And you got to get the right biology.  
**[0:36:34-0:36:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:36:34):**  So there's a lot going on with no-till.  That's why we typically see that two to three, sometimes up to a five to seven year dip.  Now the best way to make that go quicker is to add cover crops.  Go with a multi-species cover crop the first year.  Or even better yet, put it into a hay crop where you already have the biology and you  
**[0:36:56-0:36:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:36:56):**  have already kind of broken that soil up.  It's a lot easier to go into no-till, say into a perennial crop like hay or pasture  or CRP, Conservation Reserve Program.  You can make that transition a lot quicker.  The hardest place, and this is what 90, 95% of the people do, is they try to do it on  
**[0:37:16-0:37:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:37:16):**  a corn-soybean rotation.  Just adding wheat one year and after the wheat, putting in a multi-species cover crop will  greatly increase your chances for success for no-till the next year.  You got to heal the soil and we got to find ways to heal it quicker.  And any way that you can add more carbon back into that soil and get those root accidents  
**[0:37:41-0:37:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:37:41):**  and that microbial poop and all that active carbon in the soil to heal the soil, that's  going to make your soils perform better.  It can take one, two, three years, sometimes if you're really going slow and you're doing  corn after soybeans and you didn't get rid of the compaction, it can take seven to nine  years to make that transition.  
**[0:38:02-0:38:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:38:02):**  But I just told you a whole lot of things you can do to speed this thing up.  Manure is just really, really great.  We're mimicking the bison, the buffalo.  So adding some manure and getting more roots and healthier plants out there can really  restore a soil fairly quickly.  
**[0:38:23-0:38:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:38:23):**  You'll get twice as many roots, twice as much biomass if you fertilize your cover crops  with some manure.  So it can just really help to speed up the process a little bit.  Does that make sense?  It makes a lot of sense.  
**[0:38:38-0:38:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:38:38):**  If you think about manure on a smaller scale, people add compost.  How do you view building soil from the top down versus the bottom up?  The bottom up approach is we're going to put a bunch of roots in there, get the carbon  pump going, feed the biology.  The top down approach is we're going to either bring in grazing animals, we're going to apply  
**[0:38:56-0:38:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:38:56):**  manure, we're going to apply compost.  How do you view those two as how they build organic matter?  Absolutely complementary.  If you can add grazing animals, that's the optimal because now you've got the urine,  you've got the feces, you're maybe doing some disturbance on the top, but you're getting  
**[0:39:21-0:39:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:39:21):**  a lot of root turnover.  Every time that cow or sheep goes down to graze, what happens is you've got more root  growth than you do top growth, so those roots are going to die back until they can support  that plant.  Now that's why you don't want to over graze it.  
**[0:39:40-0:39:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:39:40):**  If you over graze it, well then it can take a long, long period of time, but if you just  keep nibbling on the top, and it used to be take 50%, leave 50%, and others say take maybe  a third, leave two-thirds is more common.  But if you do that, what happens is you're going to get root turnover.  It's going to die back just a little bit, and then as it regrows, it's going to put  
**[0:40:04-0:40:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:40:04):**  out new roots.  Well, all those roots that died is adding carbon to your soil, and that's how you can  build up your soil very, very quickly by doing the grazing.  You're complementing what's going on below ground with what's going on above ground.  Other things, compost is very good.  
**[0:40:20-0:40:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:40:20):**  Right now there's char, are all things that have a lot of carbon in it.  Lawn castings are very, very high in nutrients and are extremely good at loosening the soil  and really promoting plant growth.  Any way that you can improve plant growth, again, what you get above ground on average  is what you get below ground.  
**[0:40:47-0:40:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:40:47):**  Letting that plant and not overgrazing it, letting it grow out and getting a little more  height, and then cutting it back, and then letting it grow again and cutting it back  a little bit will get you more root turnover.  Where we have a problem, it's interesting, just go to a golf course.  On those fast screens, what do they do?  
**[0:41:10-0:41:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:41:10):**  They cut that grass right down, almost, I mean, there's hardly anything sticking out  above ground.  Well, if you dig in that, you'll find that it's really, really hard.  That ground is hard because there's hardly any roots there.  Now, you let that grass grow out, say, an inch, and you go look below the ground soil,  
**[0:41:27-0:41:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:41:27):**  and you're going to find that there's a lot more roots.  If you let that grass grow out two, three, four inches, well, all of a sudden now you're  going to have a lot better root structure, or soil structure, and a lot more roots there  simply because you're letting it grow.  You're putting in more carbon, and when you graze it or you mow it, we can simulate grazing  
**[0:41:46-0:41:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:41:46):**  by doing that, by mowing, you can change the way your soil is going to perform just by  the height and how often and the frequency that you mow.  We're very closely mimicking what the cows and the sheep and the deer and the elk and  the buffalo did, and we can simulate that.  Yeah, and in a system like that, we're adding manure, we're adding compost, but we're not  
**[0:42:11-0:42:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:42:11):**  tilling.  How do you see that organic matter getting introduced into the soil profile?  Is the soil profile just raising up like that layer now becomes the new soil surface as  the soil merges up into it?  You let the critters do the tillage.  
**[0:42:26-0:42:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:42:26):**  Just let the critters do the tillage in a healthy soil, okay?  You can go out there and there'll be black ground beetles and ants and all kinds of biological  life, sow bugs and till bugs, whatever you want to call them, earthworms, you got many  different types of earthworms, even the voles and groundhogs, although we don't typically  want groundhogs out there, we want to try to keep the voles down.  
**[0:42:55-0:42:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:42:55):**  This is a year where here in the Midwest, the voles are starting to increase, okay?  But all that wildlife, all the biological life in the soil, they will mix the soil.  An earthworm will turn over, what'd they say, it's something like every 10 years, they'll  turn over the top six inches.  They're almost like a plow, incorporating the residue, especially our night crawlers,  
**[0:43:19-0:43:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:43:19):**  bringing down.  So you really don't have to incorporate it.  The wildlife in the soil, the biology will do it for you if you have a healthy soil.  Where we run into problems is where we over apply manure and maybe some of the manure  is, we put it on at very high rates and it may be a little toxic and then if it kills  
**[0:43:42-0:43:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:43:42):**  all the biological life in the soil, if it's just a little too hot, some of these rations  can get really hot if you put on too much, you can actually burn everything off.  So light rates, you gotta think like the buffalo.  The buffalo would move around, they would graze and they would deposit their manure  and go away for a couple months and then come back and regraise again.  
**[0:44:06-0:44:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:44:06):**  Think about what the buffalo did, is they spread their manure thin and that would be  incorporated into the soil and would fertilize the plants and then they would come back and  regraise it again.  So that's really what we need to do but getting there can be a little bit difficult.  When you've degraded your soils as much as we have, it can take a little bit of time  
**[0:44:28-0:44:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:44:28):**  to get that soil life back in there again.  So you just have to be a little patient or you can do things like doing multi-species  cover crops helps, mowing maybe a little bit, harvesting, grazing is really going to help.  That will speed it up faster than anything else that you can do.  But if you can't graze it, maybe you can mow it at a couple different heights and things  
**[0:44:54-0:44:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:44:54):**  like that at different times to try to get some more root turnover.  It really works well with sorghum sedan.  I love sorghum sedan.  Sorghum sedan will probably add more carbon to your soil than any other species.  Sorghum is related to the corn.  
**[0:45:13-0:45:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:45:13):**  You let it grow about three, four feet tall, mowing off high, maybe eight to 12 inches  high so it'll grow back fast.  When sorghum gets mowed off, it'll add five to 10 times more roots and it's all about  root turnover.  You can add a tremendous amount of carbon to your soils by growing some of these cover  
**[0:45:33-0:45:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:45:33):**  crops.  And if you can graze it, I don't care if you want to graze it or bale it off and feed it  to cattle or sheep or whatever you have, that's fine because I'm after what's going on below  the ground.  I would just say this at the end of the year, just make sure you leave a little bit of residue  
**[0:45:51-0:45:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:45:51):**  there so we don't have soil erosion.  Don't take it all.  Leave that armor on top of the soil so that we protect the soil from soil erosion.  Right.  And mowing is one form of grazing.  
**[0:46:01-0:46:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:46:01):**  For people that might not have access to grazing animals or want the grazing animals, you're  obviously losing the benefits of the animal byproducts, the saliva, the feces, the urine,  but you are performing that effect of taking the plant, stopping growth, forcing it to  regrow and then you're taking all that above-ground biomass and you're at least dropping that  on the soil surface.  
**[0:46:19-0:46:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:46:19):**  Right.  Right.  And most of our organic matter comes from the roots.  80-85% of the soil organic matter is actually a root.  What the residue does on the surface is protects the soil from rainfall impact generally.  
**[0:46:35-0:46:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:46:35):**  And what it does, I mean, some of this rain coming down on a hard rain, it can reach 30  mile per hour.  And I like to talk about this because I think this is really important.  What do you think the average soil erosion rate is in the United States?  The average soil erosion rate across the whole United States is 7.6 tons per acre.  
**[0:46:56-0:47:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:46:56):**  Now most people can't visualize a ton, so let's break it down into pounds.  If you take that times 2,000, that's 15,200 pounds of soil that erodes on average off  of every acre of land.  Now some soils will be 2, some will be 15.  Let's think about what the average soybean yield is in the United States.  
**[0:47:19-0:47:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:47:19):**  50 bushel.  50 times 60 pounds per bushel is 3,000.  And here's a startling statistic.  On average in the United States, for every one pound of soybeans that we produce, we're  losing five pounds of topsoil.  
**[0:47:37-0:47:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:47:37):**  Is that sustainable?  It's not.  It's not sustainable.  And even when you do the numbers for corn, just simply because we have more biomass,  on average we're losing about 1.5 to 1.7, 1.8 pounds of topsoil for every one pound  
**[0:47:55-0:47:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:47:55):**  of corn that we produce.  So even on corn it's not sustainable.  We need to get that down.  The average soil is only going to add about 1,000 pounds of topsoil.  And everybody will say, well, how do you add topsoil?  
**[0:48:12-0:48:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:48:12):**  Well, think about what soil it's made of.  It's made out of rocks, ground up rocks.  So on average, the rocks in the soil will decompose or break down into sand, silt, and  clay at about 1,000 pounds.  That's just an average number, about 1,000 pounds a year.  
**[0:48:30-0:48:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:48:30):**  That's a half a ton.  So if we want to be sustainable, if we want to talk, you know, this idea that we can lose  four to five ton an acre and be sustainable, NRCS came up with that years ago, well, that's  nowhere close.  We need to be losing less than 1,000 pounds of topsoil, that's less than a half a ton  
**[0:48:54-0:48:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:48:54):**  per acre in order to be sustainable.  And I often ask this question, is it, should we try to get soil erosion down to zero?  And the answer is no, that's not even natural either because the fish and the wildlife in  the water do need some nutrients.  So maybe 200, 300, 500 pounds loss is a sustainable level.  
**[0:49:18-0:49:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:49:18):**  Just as long as we're not losing over 1,000 pounds, we want to be below 1,000 pounds.  I don't know what the absolute, you know, the best level would be, but you do have to  have a little bit and we're never going to get it down to the point where we don't have  some erosion.  So it's not something we probably really need to worry about.  
**[0:49:35-0:49:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:49:35):**  But a lot of people think that all erosion is bad.  No, it's a balance.  Okay.  So water erosion is okay, but it's a very little, very little erosion.  We don't want a lot.  
**[0:49:45-0:49:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:49:45):**  And right now we're way over out of whack on soil erosion in the United States.  If we would just concentrate on soil erosion and minimizing soil erosion, we would fix  so many problems.  Because in order to fix soil erosion, we would have to improve soil health and we would make  nutrient availability better and we would have a lot less water pollution.  
**[0:50:09-0:50:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:50:09):**  And nutrient runoff.  If we just concentrated on soil erosion again, I think we would get there quicker than thinking  about making this too complicated and thinking about water quality and trying to improve  it.  Just concentrate on the big thing, soil erosion.  
**[0:50:25-0:50:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:50:25):**  And the things that fix soil erosion are the same thing that's going to fix your nutrient  recycling, less fertilizer needs, and you'll have a lot less nutrient runoff.  Sometimes we make things just a little too complicated.  That's what we do as people.  You know, it's a human thing.  
**[0:50:40-0:50:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:50:40):**  If you think about a thousand pounds of acre in a great system where somebody's doing quote  everything right, how much topsoil do you think you could produce per acre per year?  Okay, so the average number is about a thousand pounds.  That's mainly the mineral portion.  But when we're really talking about the portion that we really want to enhance in the soil  
**[0:51:03-0:51:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:51:03):**  is the organic matter.  So when we're doing multi-species cover crops, we can get 20, 30, even up to 40, maybe as  much as 50,000 pounds of residue.  The problem with that is most of that is going to decompose and go up into the atmosphere.  So we only keep maybe in the Midwest, we're losing anywhere from 60 to 80% of that.  
**[0:51:29-0:51:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:51:29):**  So let's just say 75% is lost.  That means a quarter of whatever we're putting above ground is what we're going to add to  our soil.  So generally what we get above ground, we get below ground.  So you can kind of do the numbers on your own and see how much you can add to your soil.  
**[0:51:48-0:51:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:51:48):**  It's going to vary by region a little bit.  The more humid you are, the higher the temperature, the faster you lose organic matter.  As you go north, it's interesting.  The soils at the equator have the least amount of organic matter.  As you go further and further north, soils have more and more organic matter.  
**[0:52:09-0:52:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:52:09):**  It all comes down to climate when it's cold and when it's drier as you get closer and  closer to the Arctic Circle, it tends to get colder and drier and you keep the organic  matter there.  Or if it is saturated, it's going to freeze and you're not going to have that breakdown.  So it really depends on where you're located geographically.  
**[0:52:36-0:52:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:52:36):**  It depends on the climate, but it also depends on how much residue you're putting out there.  So we can manipulate the residue and by growing multi-species cover crops, it's possible to  add.  I've talked to Dave Brant and his soils were down to about 2% here in Ohio.  And he has some fields that are now 8% organic matter.  
**[0:52:59-0:53:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:52:59):**  He's done that in about a 23-year time period.  But he really worked at it.  In some fields, he really went overboard trying to get more and more organic matter there.  It is possible to manipulate the system to do that.  Is there an upper limit of where you think organic matter, you start to lose value in  
**[0:53:18-0:53:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:53:18):**  it?  There's something wrong with the soil if organic matter keeps going up.  It's not breaking it down.  I've heard this statement, the whole point of organic matter is to lose it.  What do you think about that?  
**[0:53:32-0:53:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:53:32):**  I haven't seen an upper limit yet and it's going to take you a long time to get there.  So I really wouldn't worry about it.  But let's just take an example.  Our muck soils, they can be 30 to 50% organic matter.  They produce really good crops, but they have to be drained.  
**[0:53:49-0:53:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:53:49):**  In the process of draining them, what happens?  We oxidize them and they burn up.  It's just like putting wood in a stove when you open that damper up and you put the oxygen  in there, you're going to burn that carbon up.  Well, in that carbon is a lot of nutrients and they can be extremely productive.  
**[0:54:06-0:54:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:54:06):**  So instead of thinking about trying to reach what I would call really high levels of organic  matter, I would think about organic matter turnover.  That's what's more important.  So let me give you a real quick example.  Let's think about a really good sandy loamy soil that has 1 to 2% organic matter.  
**[0:54:32-0:54:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:54:32):**  And then let's compare that to a heavy clay loam soil that has 5 to 6% organic matter.  Can I produce 200 to 300 bushel corn on both of those?  The answer is yes.  But what's the difference?  The difference on the 1 to 2% organic matter is we have very fast carbon turnover and the  
**[0:54:56-0:55:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:54:56):**  corn is going to grow quickly, but we're going to get fast carbon turnover.  We need to keep replacing that carbon.  We don't want to get it down too well.  If you get it down like a half a percent, that's going to become like blow sand.  It's just not going to do very well.  
**[0:55:09-0:55:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:55:09):**  But you have a pretty good sandy soil that has 2 to 3% organic matter that can produce  just as well as a 4, 5, 6% clay soil.  Now the clay soil, the organic matter is very high, but it's turning over much slower.  So it's not so much, it's really about a combination of organic accumulation, but it's also about  organic turnover that's really important.  
**[0:55:41-0:55:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:55:41):**  Both systems we can get good crops.  You just have to know that in a sandy soil, it's going to be very hard to get 5, 6, 8%  organic matter on a sandy soil just because of the porosity that's there.  There's a lot of oxygen there.  But that doesn't mean you can't raise good crops.  
**[0:56:01-0:56:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:56:01):**  A good organic matter level on a sandy soil is going to be a lot different than a good  organic matter on a clay soil.  So you've got to understand those differences and it's really about organic matter turnover  that we're looking at and when those nutrients are available.  Both systems can do quite well for us.  
**[0:56:21-0:56:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:56:21):**  Does that kind of make sense?  It makes a lot of sense.  Hopefully I keep asking you that.  Yeah, no, I'm following along with you so you're doing a great job of explaining it.  If you think about building organic matter, one way to do that is to keep that living  
**[0:56:34-0:56:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:56:34):**  root in the soil.  You've talked a lot about multi-species cover crop.  If somebody, to try and keep it as universal as possible, I know you're in Ohio, but to  try and keep it geographically as universal as possible, how should somebody think about  putting together a multi-species cover crop blend for their land if they're in a no-till  
**[0:56:55-0:56:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:56:55):**  system, they're looking to improve the quality of the soil, build topsoil, build organic  matter?  So what we need to think about in a multi-species mix is we want that diversity.  So there's a couple different types of cover crops that we want to think about as a group.  So you have your warm season cover crops.  
**[0:57:15-0:57:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:57:15):**  It kind of depends on the time of the year.  Warm season cover crops are crops that are going to be grown in the summer.  They're going to die with the first frost.  So if you are planting them in the fall, it doesn't make a whole lot of sense to plant  a warm season.  
**[0:57:29-0:57:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:57:29):**  But if you've got, say, after a week or you can have a long growing season and you can  put in a warm season cover crop, try to do a mixture of warm season with cool season.  Cool seasons are the ones that will survive the winter and will survive a frost.  So you try to do a mixture.  So that's one way of looking at it.  
**[0:57:50-0:57:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:57:50):**  We also like to see diversity in legumes or clovers that are going to add nitrogen.  They typically tend to have more tap roots versus grasses which have finer roots and  are going to add more carbon.  So your legumes will add a little more nitrogen.  Your grasses are going to add more carbon and we want to have a balance of those.  
**[0:58:09-0:58:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:58:09):**  Then we want to throw in maybe a couple brassicas.  These can be warm and cool season just depending on your growing season.  And then there might be some what we call other ones, things like buckwheat and sunflower.  They can make really great pollinators to help us with soil health.  So you try to get a diversity of different plants.  
**[0:58:30-0:58:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:58:30):**  Some people have experimented up to 15 or 20 different species.  I would maybe when you're starting it can be a little more difficult.  You might start off with say 3 to 5.  And then if you're comfortable with that, try to go to 7 to 8 to 10.  And then you can go wherever you want.  
**[0:58:49-0:58:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:58:49):**  But just remember seed cost does become an issue as you add more and more species.  Some of these cost a lot more.  Try to put in some of the species that are both small seeded because they tend to be  quite a bit cheaper.  And if you put those in you only need maybe a quarter to half a pound.  
**[0:59:08-0:59:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:59:08):**  And they might only be just a couple bucks versus putting something that's really expensive.  If you're getting up $5, $7, $10 a pound, it can get pretty expensive.  I've seen cover crop mixes cost as little as $10 to $12 to as much as $100 an acre.  And it's a lot harder to make that $100 an acre pay for itself.  So there's a happy mix.  
**[0:59:32-0:59:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:59:32):**  Usually $20 to $25 an acre is what I try to stick with.  Most people will go that if I can go a little bit cheaper in tough times, maybe go just  a little cheaper and put in something that doesn't cost quite as much.  And anything that has a live root is going to help you generally.  You don't want to have weeds.  
**[0:59:51-0:59:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:59:51):**  The only reason I say that is if they go to seed, why then?  Then you're going to be fighting your weeds.  So try to find something that's a little easier to kill and maybe a little cheaper and can  give you the most benefits possible.  What if somebody was just fighting compaction and they weren't beholden to any sort of crop  
**[1:00:09-1:00:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:00:09):**  rotation?  Like in a perfect world they could take a few years off and just solve their compaction  issues.  Is there a species mix that you'd look at for really taking on compaction?  Probably the best ones are some of the grasses really do a good job.  
**[1:00:26-1:00:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:00:26):**  Sorghum sedan is one of the best compaction annual rye grass.  Cereal rye does pretty good and so does oats.  Kind of in that about that order, those would be the ones on the grasses.  On the brassicas, there's nothing probably better than the tillage radish or the daikon  radish.  
**[1:00:45-1:00:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:00:45):**  As you said, tillage is a particular variety, whereas daikon is the species.  So we're looking for the white radish, the daikon radish, and there's several different  varieties.  Guys are selling different ones out there.  Different companies have different varieties of that.  
**[1:01:07-1:01:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:01:07):**  So the daikon is really good.  A sunflower is really deep rooted.  That can be a good one.  Buckwheat is really shallow rooted.  So if you have shallow compaction, go with buckwheat and phacelia.  
**[1:01:20-1:01:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:01:20):**  If you have really deep compaction and you're trying to break it up, go with something like  alfalfa and your sunflower are all very deep roots.  So it kind of really depends on what your situation is.  And even better is if you can graze it or utilize that as a forage, well then that helps  to pay for that cover crop.  
**[1:01:41-1:01:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:01:41):**  You know, with something like a sorghum sedan grass, it can grow to be huge and 10 feet  tall in the right climate.  Yeah.  So what do you get, you probably hear this all the time, of reconciling the nutrient  use versus the benefit.  
**[1:01:55-1:01:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:01:55):**  Oh, that big plant, it's going to take all that biomass, it's got to produce it, it's  going to take all the nutrients out of the soil to make that biomass.  Am I not creating this problem where now I'm going to have to over amend to put all that  stuff back?  It depends on what you're doing with it.  
**[1:02:13-1:02:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:02:13):**  If you're not harvesting it, all you're doing is bringing nutrients to the soil surface,  and then the biology will pull it deeper back into the soil and recycle it.  Okay.  Now if you're harvesting it, and you're going to take it off, well hopefully if you're going  to take it off, then you've got the manure as a byproduct that you can put it back.  
**[1:02:33-1:02:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:02:33):**  Now if you go to sell it, that's where you've got a problem, then you can.  But in some places that can actually be a strategy.  So we have areas that have extremely high phosphorus, excess nutrients, water quality  issues, we can use sorghum sedan as a crop that we can harvest multiple times, maybe  three, four cuttings a year, and take that almost off like alfalfa hay, feed it to cattle,  
**[1:02:59-1:03:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:02:59):**  but we're going to ship it maybe 100, 200 miles away, away from an area where we have  water quality, and we can actually start to lower the nutrients in the soil.  So you've got to use it to your advantage is what I'm saying.  And as long as you're keeping that on the soil and you're putting the manure back, it's  not really a big issue.  
**[1:03:20-1:03:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:03:20):**  We're kind of mimicking those buffalo, and the buffalo and the bison there, they had  a real nice cycle going on, and the crops grew really well, and we just kept improving  the soil every year.  Carbon is our limiting element in the soil, so that's the one we need to give.  So I can tell you a real quick story about carbon.  
**[1:03:41-1:03:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:03:41):**  So let's say you're trying to grow 200 bushel corn.  How much carbon do you need on a daily basis to grow 200 bushel corn?  Have you ever thought about that?  Well, you need about 100 pounds.  Where does that carbon come from?  
**[1:03:56-1:04:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:03:56):**  Well, most of us have been taught it comes from the atmosphere, but if you want to all  come just from the atmosphere and no place else, you would need an area of about 32 to  33 cubic acres of air to get 100 pounds of carbon out of the atmosphere.  So when we start to think about this, where is the carbon coming from?  It's actually coming from the roots.  
**[1:04:20-1:04:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:04:20):**  The concentration in the atmosphere is around 400 to 410 parts per million.  The concentration of carbon in the root zone is about 3,000 to 10,000 parts per million.  So let's think about this just a little bit.  So what do leaves take in?  They're taking in carbon dioxide and they're giving off oxygen, right?  
**[1:04:45-1:04:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:04:45):**  What do the roots take in?  Roots take in oxygen and they're giving off carbon dioxide.  And it even gets a little bit better.  As we get to the lower night temperatures, we can raise that carbon concentration in  that soil up from about 3,000 to 10,000 up to maybe 20,000, 30,000, 40,000 parts per  
**[1:05:09-1:05:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:05:09):**  million at daybreak.  And then let's think about photosynthesis.  How effective are we on photosynthesis?  Do you realize that within about the first one, two hours at the most, we've used up  all of our carbon dioxide reserves in that soil within just a very short period of time,  
**[1:05:28-1:05:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:05:28):**  we're only about 10 to 20 percent efficient at photosynthesis.  And it's all due to a lack of carbon dioxide in the soil.  We used to have 6 to 8 percent organic matter.  We've lost 60 to 80 percent of our carbon from our soils.  We're now down to an average probably 2, 2.5, 3 percent organic matter.  
**[1:05:54-1:05:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:05:54):**  And just think about this.  Have you ever seen a farmer plow a fence row or plow a pasture?  What happens to that corn?  You can see right to the row where that organic matter is because of the higher organic matter.  That corn will be two, three feet taller and have much bigger ears.  
**[1:06:15-1:06:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:06:15):**  It's all due to the amount of carbon, the nitrogen, and the phosphorus in the biological  life that's in that soil that's healthy.  And so if we can get back to that, what I tell everybody, rather than bringing our fence  rows down to the level of our cultivated fields, we need to take our cultivated fields and  through no-till and cover crops and by improving soil health, bring it up to what the level  
**[1:06:36-1:06:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:06:36):**  of the is in that fence row.  That's the goal that we're trying to do.  We're trying to get our soils from being degraded, getting them back to being healthy again.  And most of our soils in the world are now degraded, extremely degraded.  The only way you'll know is to go out to a fence row, an area that's not disturbed, and  
**[1:06:57-1:07:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:06:57):**  just compare what you see there to what you see in the field.  And you'll see big differences.  It doesn't take a trained scientist to see that when you start digging in the soil a  little bit, you can see these differences quite easily.  It'll pop right out at you, what you're looking at.  
**[1:07:14-1:07:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:07:14):**  And you might need somebody to help you explain what's going on, and I can do that, but other  people can do that also.  So just to make sure I'm following this right, you have the roots taking in oxygen, they're  putting out CO2.  That CO2 is then being absorbed above ground by the leaves, which is helping the plants  
**[1:07:34-1:07:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:07:34):**  photosynthesize.  If there's a shortage of CO2, or carbon dioxide, under the ground, then photosynthesis above  ground suffers.  How do you get more carbon dioxide production underground if that's root dependent?  The roots need more oxygen, so what's happening underground to get the roots more oxygen so  
**[1:07:59-1:08:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:07:59):**  they can off-gas the CO2?  Well, actually, the roots will uncompact your soil and create porosity to allow that.  Roots actually act like a biological valve to let oxygen into the soil.  It's only when we do tillage and we create these compacted zones that we get really hard  soils.  
**[1:08:21-1:08:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:08:21):**  There is a really good soil-to-gas water exchange in the soil, when you have good soil structure.  But when you take that carbon out of the soil and you put it up in the atmosphere, you got  to realize we have a tremendous amount of carbon in the atmosphere because it can go  up.  I think our atmosphere goes up almost 100 miles.  
**[1:08:42-1:08:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:08:42):**  What we can do is we're pulling that carbon back down that's up in the atmosphere and  we're going to lower it back down.  If you go back in time, the carbon dioxide level was both much higher and much lower,  but probably pre-industrial period before the 1800s, we were down around 250 parts per  million on carbon.  
**[1:09:08-1:09:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:09:08):**  We have a tremendous ability through cover crops and even forested areas and things like  that.  We can pull a lot of carbon out of the atmosphere and we can put it back into ground.  The soil is the best area for storage.  What's our biggest storage area for carbon right now?  
**[1:09:26-1:09:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:09:26):**  I should probably finish my story.  We're talking about this carbon.  Let's think about this.  Where are the stomata on a corn leaf?  Have you ever looked at that?  
**[1:09:38-1:09:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:09:38):**  They're underneath the leaf.  In the spring, let's say we plant this crop, but let's say before we plant it, we till  it.  What happens when we till it?  All that carbon dioxide, let's say we till it in the fall and then we till it again in  
**[1:09:54-1:09:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:09:54):**  the spring.  What happens when we do all the tillage?  What happens to all that carbon dioxide?  Goes way up into the atmosphere, the trade winds take it, and where does it end up?  What's the biggest sink for carbon in the world?  
**[1:10:10-1:10:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:10:10):**  The ocean.  A lot of the carbon ends up in the ocean.  Now let's think about this.  When you're breaking up that carbon in the soil, what are you doing?  You're releasing nitrogen.  
**[1:10:21-1:10:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:10:21):**  You're releasing phosphorus.  What happens when it rains?  The nitrogen and the phosphorus wash off, get into our rivers and streams, and where  does that end up?  Ends up in the ocean.  
**[1:10:34-1:10:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:10:34):**  We have a broken carbon nitrogen phosphorus cycle, and that's having an impact on the  water cycle also, and it all goes back to the way we're farming currently.  If you think about the buffalo, what did they do?  We had grass growing year-round in forbs and everything else, wildflowers, and they're  recycling their nutrients.  
**[1:10:56-1:10:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:10:56):**  They're eating it.  They graze, and every time they poof, they defecate, they urinate.  They're re-fertilizing that grass, and we have a complete carbon nitrogen phosphorus  cycle, and the nutrients didn't get into the stream.  It worked out really well.  
**[1:11:16-1:11:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:11:16):**  So it's such an organic matter that's being stored under the soil surface that gets broken  down by the microbiology into CO2, it floats up in the air, the stomata then are absorbing  that.  So you're basically, when you put organic matter in there, you're really banking CO2  that you're going to need later.  
**[1:11:36-1:11:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:11:36):**  Right, right, right.  In thinking about that, I mean...  It's a lot to think about, isn't it?  It is.  It's a complicated thing.  
**[1:11:46-1:11:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:11:46):**  In one of your presentations, you mentioned something along the lines of plants produce  40% more sugars than they actually need to sustain their own plant growth, and that's  going into the soil to feed the biology.  Right.  And plants are actually figured out it's cheaper for them to feed the microbes and have the  
**[1:12:09-1:12:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:12:09):**  microbes feed them than they could by themselves.  That's how plants and the microbes kind of evolved together.  And what the plants figured out is that they were very good at photosynthesis.  And we have a tremendous...  We're only 15 to 20% efficient.  
**[1:12:28-1:12:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:12:28):**  So let's think about corn.  What is the optimum...  I shouldn't say optimal, but what's the highest level of corn production that could be possible?  The scientists have looked at this and said, we could produce 1100 bushels of corn per  acre.  
**[1:12:44-1:12:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:12:44):**  What's our current level?  Let's just say we average 200, and a lot of places don't.  Maybe it's 150, 200, but 200 is an easy number.  We're only roughly 20% efficient at photosynthesis.  In order to get 1100, everything would have to be absolutely perfect.  
**[1:13:02-1:13:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:13:02):**  And we'll probably not reach that level on average, but is it possible to reach four,  five, six, even 700 bushels?  It could be if we were to improve the soil enough.  And to get it back to where it was, you'd almost have to go back to maybe having those  virgin type soils.  
**[1:13:21-1:13:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:13:21):**  And that's kind of what we're doing with the cover crops and soil health is we're restoring  our soil.  Very easy to think about this.  Think about Brazil.  Okay.  
**[1:13:32-1:13:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:13:32):**  Brazil has what we call oxisol soils.  These are worn out soils.  They have a lot of rainfall, 60 to 80 inches, 120 inches a year.  They've really flushed out a lot of the nutrients out of their soil.  And yet today when we go to Brazil, what are their soybean yields?  
**[1:13:51-1:13:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:13:51):**  Well, they're getting 50, 60, 70, even 80 bushel soybeans off of soils that are worn  out.  How'd they do that?  Well, they took the tropics and they basically burned up the organic matter in the trees.  And within about four or five years, their soils would get harder to rock.  
**[1:14:11-1:14:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:14:11):**  When they started growing cover crops, and now what they're finding is they're turning  those oxisol soils, worn out soils, and they're becoming more and more like mullet soils every  year because of the root turnover.  Okay.  They're putting a cover crop, then they grow their next crop, and then they grow cover  
**[1:14:28-1:14:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:14:28):**  crop.  And they're even interseeding cover crops into their beans.  They have now gotten, they were starting out, they were getting 80 bushel corn.  Well, now they're going to become one of our biggest competitors on corn.  They have now raised their corn yields up to 130, 140, 150, even 160 bushel per acre.  
**[1:14:48-1:14:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:14:48):**  They're not that far behind us.  And what they've done over the last 30, 40, 50 years is they have transitioned their soils  from oxisols into more and more like a mullet soil.  Now they're not mullet soils yet, but if you look at it, they're adding so much organic  matter to their soils and they're long term no-till down there and using extensive cover  
**[1:15:12-1:15:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:15:12):**  crops.  80, 90% of their soils now have cover crops and no-till.  The guys that will do just, do conventional tillage, what they find within four to five  years, their soil will get just as hard as a rock.  Anything that happens in the tropics happens 10 times faster than what happens in the temperate  
**[1:15:32-1:15:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:15:32):**  zones.  What's happening to us?  Our soils are becoming compacted.  They're becoming like rock.  It just takes us 10 times longer than what happens in the, but that's been about a 40,  
**[1:15:45-1:15:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:15:45):**  50 year time period.  And a lot of farmers are really complaining about how their soils are degrading.  If you want to make your soils better, you got to use the four soil health principles  that we talked about.  Basically minimize soil disturbance, maximize live roots, maximize surface residue, and  
**[1:16:03-1:16:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:16:03):**  maximize your biodiversity.  Those four things, and some people like to add the fifth principle, which is grazing,  add livestock.  And if you did those four or five principles, that's the fastest way to improve the soil.  It's almost guaranteed to make it better as long as you don't do something between here.  
**[1:16:24-1:16:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:16:24):**  We can add a lot of chemicals and things like that.  We could screw it up, I guess.  But if you just kind of let the system alone, it will heal itself.  It's interesting.  We have a lot of CRP land.  
**[1:16:36-1:16:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:16:36):**  And think about CRP, Conservation Reserve.  So somebody will take their worst field, and it's low in soil fertility.  It has a lot of compassion.  It's eroding.  And they'll put it in CRP for 20 years.  
**[1:16:52-1:16:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:16:52):**  And I have guys in my area that are looking for that CRP ground.  Why is that?  Because that soil has healed itself.  Now there's two ways to farm CRP.  I'll tell you the way that it's typically done.  
**[1:17:05-1:17:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:17:05):**  Guys will go in there, and they'll start tilling it up, and within four or five years, they'll  ruin it.  But for four or five years, they'll get tremendous nutrients and tremendous yields, and then  they'll restore it back to its degraded condition in about four or five, maybe six, seven, eight  years.  
**[1:17:21-1:17:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:17:21):**  Okay?  Now what's the smart way to handle it?  Now that I've healed it, go and put cover crops back on there.  Do it in a no-till system.  Maybe start with beans for one or two years just to get a little extra nitrogen in there.  
**[1:17:35-1:17:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:17:35):**  But then go with a corn, bean, soybean rotation.  Maintain that fertility.  Keep it in that almost pristine state.  And you can get extremely good yields off that.  I had guys that were telling me that these fields that were their worst fields are now  
**[1:17:51-1:17:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:17:51):**  their best fields because after 15 to 20 years, Mother Nature healed those soils.  Okay?  So that's kind of what we're trying to do with the whole soil health thing is heal our  soils, get them from a degraded state into a very productive and healthy soil again.  That's what we're trying to do.  
**[1:18:11-1:18:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:18:11):**  Do you think the next step in the evolution is a companion planting or an inter-planting,  having your cash crop grown with cover crops?  I see a lot of things that are going on that are very interesting right now.  We can plant, you know, what they do in Brazil.  I kind of told you half the story, but another way that they do is they plant their corn.  
**[1:18:36-1:18:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:18:36):**  And in between the rows, they wait about three to five days, maybe a week.  It kind of depends on the area.  And then they'll plant sun hemp.  And the sun hemp will grow with the corn, but it'll be behind the corn.  And the corn will tassel and set an ear, and then the sun hemp grows above the corn.  
**[1:18:53-1:18:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:18:53):**  Now, the sun hemp is a big legume, and it'll have nodules that are as big as your thumb,  okay?  And it can put on 200 pounds of nitrogen.  They don't fertilize their corn in Brazil.  They just use the companion cropping, the sun hemp, okay?  
**[1:19:09-1:19:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:19:09):**  And what they'll do is they'll let the corn dry down.  They'll go through with a real high combine, and they'll harvest the sun hemp and get that  as an oil seed.  And they can use that both for feed and also for another cover crop.  But then they'll turn around, come back at a later date, and harvest their corn.  
**[1:19:29-1:19:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:19:29):**  And then they'll plant a cover crop until they plant their next crop, which is either  soybeans or maybe they go back to corn again.  Kind of depends on the area.  But that's kind of a nice system, okay?  We can do the same thing up here, but we have a little bit shorter growing season.  
**[1:19:46-1:19:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:19:46):**  So what some people are doing is they're interseeding cover crops.  Generally, what we're seeing is guys are starting to widen their rows out.  I see a lot of twin row corn now starting to be experimented with, where they'll have  60-inch rows.  And some guys are planting their corn really thick there, but they're getting more sunlight  
**[1:20:04-1:20:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:20:04):**  in there.  And if they've got a flexier on that, a variety, they can actually get bigger ears and get  the same yield, same amount of corn, and just as good, maybe even better yields.  But now they've got this wide area there that they can put a cover crop, and that cover  crop can grow real well.  
**[1:20:21-1:20:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:20:21):**  And some of them are even introducing sheep or something like that, that they'll graze  that.  I've had some where I've looked at these fields, and the corn is so close together, it almost  looks like the kale bars, okay?  The sheep would have to go all the way to the end to get through there unless they're  
**[1:20:37-1:20:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:20:37):**  going to knock down the corn.  So there's some things like that that are starting to go on that I think are really  interesting that I think is going to help us with this.  This companion cropping, we do some of that.  We let your corn get up, grow with a little bit shorter maturity in corn, and you can  
**[1:20:57-1:21:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:20:57):**  fly on or use a high boy and get your cover crops.  That's more of an interseeding top option, late, say about right now in August and early  September, we can put on the cover crop and kind of get one started and always have a  live crop out there year round.  That would be the absolute goal.  
**[1:21:16-1:21:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:21:16):**  So there's a lot of different ways to go with this.  Some of them are using, I see some research going on on cura clover.  Guys are actually putting a crop down, and they'll stunt that clover a little bit, and  they'll plant their corn into it, and that's supplying their nitrogen.  And then as the temperatures get a little cooler and the corn's drying down, sunlight  
**[1:21:36-1:21:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:21:36):**  comes out, the cura clover grows the best in the spring and in the fall.  And then the next year, they'll go right back to corn.  They'll let the cura clover grow through the winter, and then they'll plant another crop.  So I think there's a lot of different ways to slice this and try a lot of different things.  Yeah, a lot of innovation out there.  
**[1:21:58-1:22:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:21:58):**  What have you seen in systems that have really healthy soil in terms of plant health, pest  resistance?  Do you notice a correlation between soil health and plant health?  That's something that a lot of people claim.  There's mixed feelings.  
**[1:22:12-1:22:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:22:12):**  What are your thoughts?  Yeah.  Where you have healthy soils, one of the reasons, one of the things that I've studied some is  pest suppression.  Most insects go after unhealthy plants.  
**[1:22:30-1:22:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:22:30):**  And unfortunately, when you raise crops on degraded soils, do you think you get healthy  plants?  Well, you get incomplete photosynthesis.  And when you have incomplete photosynthesis, you get a lot of nitrates in your plants,  and you don't get full protein synthesis.  
**[1:22:49-1:22:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:22:49):**  Insects love nitrates.  And when they sense that a plant is unhealthy, they'll attack it.  And that's why most, a lot of our plants, since they're unhealthy, the insects, we see  a lot of insects.  But if you have a healthy plant, the insects can sense that, that you have full protein  
**[1:23:06-1:23:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:23:06):**  synthesis, you'll have higher protein content, you'll have higher test weights, you'll have  more dense food, and the insects will leave that alone because they cannot digest the  amino acids and the full proteins in there, as well as they can the nitrates.  So a lot of our plants, even though maybe we're getting pretty good yields, the nutrient  density is a lot lower, the protein content is lower.  
**[1:23:36-1:23:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:23:36):**  We've kind of assumed that high yields, all crops are the same, that the yields are all  the same.  But really, we should be talking yield wise, we should be thinking about total pounds of  protein versus just yields.  Yield is one of those things that, you know, I can have 300 bushel corn, and let's just  
**[1:23:57-1:24:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:23:57):**  say it has 5%, let's keep the numbers even, 5% crude protein.  Okay.  Well, let's compare that to say 200 bushel corn, or let's just make, yeah, say 200 bushel  corn.  What if I had 200 bushel corn?  
**[1:24:15-1:24:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:24:15):**  And just to make the math easy, generally it'd be maybe 8%, 9%, but let's just say it's  10%.  Take 200 bushel times 10 to 10% crude protein and then take 300 times 5% crude protein.  You can see that the 200 bushel corn actually has more protein in it.  And if you feed that to a cattle or to a hog or to a chicken, they will eat all of the  
**[1:24:42-1:24:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:24:42):**  high density food that is, and it's probably more complete and it's going to be healthier  for them, they'll eat all that first before they'll eat the low density.  So we really ought to be talking about nutrient density and even human health.  They're all related.  A lot of these, you know, if you look over the last 40, 50 years, there's a much higher  
**[1:25:02-1:25:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:25:02):**  incidence I happen to be diabetic.  So diabetic, autism, all these diseases, yes, yields have gone up in the United States,  but with that has come less nutrient density.  And some of this could be related to human health, some of the problems that we have  with human health.  
**[1:25:20-1:25:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:25:20):**  Think about all the people with arthritis and all the aches and pains.  Now it is true, we're living a little longer, but the quality of life in a lot of cases,  if you look at our bone density and some of the things that are going on, we're not as  maybe healthy as what we could be if we were eating better food.  So I think it's all related.  
**[1:25:41-1:25:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:25:41):**  It's very interesting to study.  I think there's a lot of new innovations out there, things that are, we're starting to  make these linkages together and slowly but surely the other professions are starting  to look at this.  I mean, we all know good food when we eat it.  
**[1:26:00-1:26:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:26:00):**  You can taste the difference.  And those are the flavonoids.  And our bodies, we're just like, in that sense, we're like a cow.  If you give a person a bad, let's say a nutrient-dense tomato and one that's less nutrient-dense, if  you bite into the one that tastes good, you'll eat all that one first.  
**[1:26:22-1:26:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:26:22):**  And if you're still hungry, you might go after the other one, but you'll say, man, this one  just doesn't taste as good.  We can sense the difference.  We're just not quite as good at it as maybe the cow can smell it.  We have to actually eat it or taste it before we're probably going to be able to tell the  
**[1:26:36-1:26:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:26:36):**  difference.  You might be able to weigh it, but there are new machines out there.  I don't know if you've heard about this, but they have now come up with one that's probably  going to hit the supermarkets here pretty soon.  It costs a couple hundred dollars, but you can actually test your produce now to tell  
**[1:26:54-1:26:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:26:54):**  you how nutrient-dense it is.  So that's kind of a new innovation that's coming out that I think people will start  to get into this nutrient density a little bit more.  And that may have an influence on us and how we're going to be producing our produce in  the future.  
**[1:27:08-1:27:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:27:08):**  So...  Is it really come down to then, I know there's no absolute answer to this, and I don't think  anybody knows, but is a healthier plant just lacking photosynthesis?  It's not photosynthesizing at its full potential.  The nutrients, the minerals might be there in the soil.  
**[1:27:26-1:27:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:27:26):**  It just can't get access to them.  What's causing the plant to be healthier?  This goes back to that yield thing of 200 bushel corn versus 1100 bushel corn.  What could tip that limit?  How do you get better photosynthesis?  
**[1:27:41-1:27:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:27:41):**  How do you get healthier plants?  You got to have the microbes.  It's all about that soil environment.  When we start to till the soil, we get imbalance of microbes.  We're mainly bacteria, not enough fungus.  
**[1:27:56-1:27:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:27:56):**  We want to have that balance.  So the soil compaction is going to have an impact.  You're going to have more bacteria.  So now you're going to have that imbalance.  You're not going to have the right nutrients.  
**[1:28:07-1:28:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:28:07):**  And if you don't have the right nutrients, you might have the nutrients there, but it  may be in the wrong form.  And if it's not plant available, then we're going to limit photosynthesis.  So it's all these things combined.  You got to have the right soil environment.  
**[1:28:20-1:28:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:28:20):**  You got to have the right microbes.  And then a lot of times the nutrients are there, but they're in the wrong form.  You got to have the right microbes to transform them into the right form so that they're plant  available.  And then that whole system then will add more carbon into your soil.  
**[1:28:38-1:28:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:28:38):**  Over time, you'll build up that carbon in your soil.  Now you're at full production.  But think about this.  If we overuse fungicides, we start overusing the chemicals.  Glyphosate is one of those examples.  
**[1:28:50-1:28:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:28:50):**  So we know that glyphosate is a key later.  So it ties up a lot of micronutrients, especially manganese and a couple other things.  But one of the things that we're seeing on almost all of our soybeans and a lot of our  corn is it's manganese deficient.  Well that's going to limit photosynthesis.  
**[1:29:12-1:29:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:29:12):**  And so the theory used to be that a lot of people would talk about the staves in a barrel.  And they say whatever element is limiting, that's the one that's going to limit your  photosynthesis, limit your yield.  But what has happened over time is because we put on so many nutrients, sometimes we  have an excess nutrient.  
**[1:29:38-1:29:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:29:38):**  So the barrel stave idea is the law of the minimum.  Now we're starting to concentrate a little bit more on the law of the maximum.  And what does the law of the maximum say?  Every nutrient has an effect on other nutrients.  So if you get too much of one nutrient, it can tie up some of the other nutrients.  
**[1:29:59-1:30:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:29:59):**  So maybe by actually cutting back, we tend to overapply nitrogen and phosphorus and even  potash a lot or potassium.  If we're overapplying them, we could be tying up some micronutrients.  So maybe if we put on a little bit less of some of these and maybe we add a little bit  of the other ones but we also improve the biology, all of a sudden we get things back  
**[1:30:24-1:30:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:30:24):**  into balance and all of a sudden our barrel, all of a sudden the staves are a little more  even and we can hold more water in that barrel, which means we're basically generating more  yield.  So maybe not only more yield, but maybe more nutrient dense and healthier food at the same  time.  
**[1:30:42-1:30:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:30:42):**  So it all works together.  We got to understand it.  That's why it's been a little bit complicated.  We haven't understand how the pieces all move together and how they all fit together.  We're starting to get a little clearer understanding on what we need to do to make this system  
**[1:30:55-1:30:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:30:55):**  work better.  So again, glyphosate, what it does is it creates conditions that chelate manganese.  Manganese is used by the plant to split the water molecule in half and if you don't have  enough manganese, you're going to have incomplete photosynthesis.  Glyphosate also causes more fusarium in the soil.  
**[1:31:21-1:31:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:31:21):**  So now we're getting this disease organism there.  One good way to overcome glyphosate is actually oats.  Oats does the exact opposite.  It promotes manganese, makes manganese more plant available and it reduces some of the  fusarium in the soil.  
**[1:31:39-1:31:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:31:39):**  So we can use cover crops.  I would suggest that people who have really overused Roundup try to use like crimper rollers  and maybe try to limit how much you use.  If you're going to use Roundup, try to instead of using it three, four times a year or five  times like they do in cotton, maybe try to use it only once or if you can get away without  
**[1:32:01-1:32:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:32:01):**  using it at all, use a crimper roller, use Gramaxone.  We actually find with Gramaxone, we don't see a dip in soil health.  Every time that we use Roundup, we'll actually see the soil health go down in the soil for  a couple weeks until that soil recovers.  But we really want to keep our microbes happy all the time.  
**[1:32:20-1:32:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:32:20):**  And I think glyphosate is starting to reach its economic life.  There's a lot of lawsuits out there and we've overused it.  And I think over time, we're probably going to have less reliance on glyphosate just because  of the economic forces now and the resistance to the overuse of glyphosate.  So we need to start thinking ahead of what are we going to use to replace that glyphosate  
**[1:32:48-1:32:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:32:48):**  and see if there isn't something else.  I'm not saying we have to totally get rid of it.  I'm just saying maybe we've overused it.  Maybe we can cut back a little bit and we'll find out that maybe it actually improves our  soil health a little bit more.  
**[1:33:02-1:33:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:33:02):**  It also has an impact on phosphorus.  But that's pretty hard to talk about.  I know just enough to be dangerous on that, so I prefer not to talk about it, but it can  have an impact on that.  I think one of the knocks on Big Ag is it's unsustainable.  
**[1:33:20-1:33:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:33:20):**  Corn and soil rotation, two crop rotations that, you know, seven tons of topsoil going  off per year, you're using sprays, you're using all these inputs.  Do you, based on what you know, and kind of intuiting the rest, do you think we could  get to a day where we could keep the same amount of corn and soil production, only we  could remove all inputs from the system, fertilizer inputs, by just cover cropping in there?  
**[1:33:51-1:33:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:33:51):**  So we're removing inputs.  We replaced that with cover crops and our yields are near where they are now.  Great question and we're headed down that road.  So if you look at organic production and the interest in organic, there's like 10 times  the demand for organic production.  
**[1:34:14-1:34:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:34:14):**  But what's the problem with organic?  It's really not as organic as it sounds because we're doing tillage.  So we're ruining soil structure with that.  Now if you look at another road, if you look at the no-till and the cover crops, you know,  we're still using chemicals, some herbicides and some fungicides and things like that,  
**[1:34:35-1:34:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:34:35):**  but more and more the no-till and the cover crops and that we're using less and less fungicides,  less and less herbicides.  I think the organic road and the no-till and the cover crop road are converging.  The no-till and the cover crop guys are becoming more and more organic.  The organic guys haven't quite figured it out yet, but they're starting to figure out.  
**[1:35:00-1:35:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:35:00):**  And there's one guy that kind of embodies this and that's Rick Clark.  Rick Clark farms about 7,000 acres.  He's long-term no-till, he's cover crops and he's now organic.  Seven thousand acres, corn, soybeans and wheat.  And what he's doing is he starts with maybe a hay crop and then he'll plant his corn into  
**[1:35:25-1:35:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:35:25):**  the hay, usually maybe used as an under cutter or terminates the hay, plants his corn, lets  the corn come up.  After the corn comes, he'll use a short season corn and then he'll plant two to three bushel  of cereal rye into that.  He'll roll that and plant, well first of all, he'll plant his beans into it, planting green.  
**[1:35:51-1:35:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:35:51):**  And then after the beans come up, maybe four or five inches tall, he'll roll it and now  he's conserving moisture and he don't have to use herbicides.  Now he has a few weeds, but he says after a couple years, he says we have very little  weed seed.  And then after the soybeans, he goes to wheat.  
**[1:36:08-1:36:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:36:08):**  After the wheat, he plants a 10-way mix of cover crops and then he'll plant his corn  green into that and then he'll roll that and he's using hardly any herbicides.  He's got hogs and he's got some cattle.  There's his manure, there's his fertilizer, so he's not putting on a lot of fertilizer.  He's not using treated seed and he's not using fungicides.  
**[1:36:33-1:36:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:36:33):**  And he will tell you that my yields are average, but my prices are way above average.  I can live with average yields, but I'm making a lot more money by going organic because  he's getting organic prices on that.  And his nutrient density is going up, he's got better quality feed.  So maybe if you think about it from a yield aspect, maybe he's getting average yields,  
**[1:37:00-1:37:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:37:00):**  but when you're looking at pounds of protein harvested per acre, he's probably actually  outdoing some of the other guys that have slightly higher yields.  But again, his price is compensating for that.  He said farming has now become fun again because you don't have to worry about all the chemicals.  So is it possible?  
**[1:37:18-1:37:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:37:18):**  It's already a reality.  Do you know where his input costs are relative to a conventional farmer on the same amount  of acreage?  His input costs are so low and his prices are so much better, double what the other  ones are that, yes, he's quite a bit more profitable than anybody else.  
**[1:37:41-1:37:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:37:41):**  That's really what it's about.  Profitability per acre, he's sustainable, he's profitable, and he has nutrient-dense  good food.  I mean, he's hit the jackpot.  Like I said, this is reality.  
**[1:37:54-1:37:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:37:54):**  It's already here.  We're starting to go down that road.  Now does he have a few problems now and then?  Yes.  But we have a lot of ways to work with this.  
**[1:38:02-1:38:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:38:02):**  We have leaders now that are gas-powered little robots that can go up and down the road and  take out with electrical charge, take out weeds.  We have the propane.  You can go up and down the roads with propane and burn off some of the weeds.  And if you have healthy plants, you're not going to have as many insects and things like  
**[1:38:26-1:38:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:38:26):**  that.  He has less disease.  He might have to work on his genetics and things.  And that doesn't mean that once in a while he doesn't have a blow-up.  There might be years where things don't go so well, but you know what?  
**[1:38:38-1:38:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:38:38):**  He's got pretty good profit margins.  He's banking some of that money.  He can take a hit once in a while.  And like he says, farming now has become a lot more enjoyable than what it was just five,  10 years ago when he was trying to really push yields.  
**[1:38:54-1:38:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:38:54):**  We really should be talking about optimal yields, not maximum yields.  And maybe for him, optimal is just having average yields but having really good nutrient  density.  When we look at the protein levels again, that might actually be better.  And it's much, much more profitable for him.  
**[1:39:11-1:39:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:39:11):**  His margins are low.  Well, the most always doesn't equate with better.  That's right.  That's right.  And a lot of people listening to this, they're working on one seven-thousandth of the land  
**[1:39:25-1:39:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:39:25):**  he is, and it works for him.  So I know you work big ag, but for somebody growing on a small scale, like intensive vegetable  production, how would you think about some of these principles if you were trying to  integrate them into that?  Is it the same thing, just try and continually cover crop, keep fields covered when they're  
**[1:39:42-1:39:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:39:42):**  not in use, maybe companion plant alongside or interplant tomatoes, but you have a cover  crop alongside them.  When you think about growing small scale vegetables, what do you think?  Yes.  So for vegetable production, what we see is cereal rye works really well.  
**[1:39:58-1:40:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:39:58):**  You can grow cereal rye and then you can roll it.  And then after you roll it, you can transplant tomatoes, you can transplant melons, watermelon,  muskmelon.  It works really well with beans and peas.  You can just plant the peas and the beans in there and then let them come up.  
**[1:40:17-1:40:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:40:17):**  A crop roller works really well because we're actually finding out with the crop roller  that you let those beans or peas get up just a little bit.  And when you nick them a little bit with the crop roller, it sends a hormonal response  to them.  They actually put on more pods per plant.  
**[1:40:37-1:40:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:40:37):**  So we're finding out that it now helps with weeds, that keeps the ground cooler, it conserves  moisture, but it also gives you a little bit of a yield increase.  There's a lot of ways of doing it.  I think something else that people need to be looking at is some of the inoculants.  I'm doing some little bit of research with worms, red worms.  
**[1:41:04-1:41:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:41:04):**  It takes three tons of, let's say, carbon straw or leaves or anything that's made of  carbon will decompose with the worms down into about a ton of fertilizer.  And so three to one is generally the ratio.  That ton of fertilizer is worth about $400.  And so you can put out some rows of just leaves that you get from the city if you wanted to.  
**[1:41:33-1:41:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:41:33):**  And you can put your worms in there and let them do the work for you.  Takes about a year for that all to decompose and go and it's so rich in nitrogen, phosphorus,  a lot of the micronutrients, and you can just keep adding to it a little bit.  And then when the time comes, you can spread that out on your field and that makes a really,  really good compost.  
**[1:41:54-1:41:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:41:54):**  I mean, the plants just absolutely go nuts on it because it's a highly enriched organic  fertilizer and you can do it on your own.  You don't have to pay someone.  You got trucking involved, but unless you're growing it yourself, but most of the time  you're probably going to get it from maybe another source.  
**[1:42:11-1:42:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:42:11):**  I'm looking into that myself, getting some leaves and maybe a straw or you might even  if you're growing the sorghum, you can take the sorghum back if you wanted to cut some  of that up and bale it.  You could turn that into organic fertilizer that you could reapply maybe to other fields.  Maybe you have one field that's a little high in nutrients, you can transfer some of those  
**[1:42:32-1:42:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:42:32):**  nutrients to another field that way.  There's a lot of different ways to work this.  Just depends on your situation.  What about above ground amendments?  You go to any ag trade show and you go to an exhibition hall and it's loaded with companies  
**[1:42:45-1:42:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:42:45):**  that have stuff that you can apply above ground.  Micronutrients, enzymes, biostimulants, you name it.  I think people love that stuff because it seems like a quick fix.  It's easy, I can buy it, I can put it on and I feel like I did something.  Do you feel like that's a down the line approach?  
**[1:43:06-1:43:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:43:06):**  You look at that stuff after you've minimized tillage, after you got a continual cover over  the soil, after you have a lean root, then look at that stuff.  I would agree with you.  You're just going to put it on the first year.  If you still have compaction, if you don't have the right soil environment, you're probably  
**[1:43:26-1:43:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:43:26):**  wasting your money.  You've got to make the first investment.  You need to at least start to heal your soil a little bit because if you have anaerobic  conditions out there, saturated soils, compacted soils, that's not the ideal environment for  a lot of these aerobic type of bacteria, fungi and whatnot.  
**[1:43:48-1:43:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:43:48):**  Probably the best thing is at least get into it a year or two and then you can start to  experiment with some of the microbes.  You've got to start to heal your soil compaction.  The first thing I tell everybody, at least here in the Midwest, now this isn't going  to apply everywhere, but the first thing you need to do is make sure you've got good drainage.  
**[1:44:08-1:44:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:44:08):**  If you don't have the tile, we need to have a soil.  If it's saturated and you've got standing water, about the only thing that, at least  here we can't even grow rice, so we're too far north, but you can't have saturated soil.  You've got to have an outlet for your water.  Once you get your soil in shape, if you're going to land level, do all that first.  
**[1:44:28-1:44:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:44:28):**  Soil test it, see where you're at, and then start growing, try to get wheat in the rotation  and after wheat, put in multi-species cover crops.  That will do a lot to healing your soil.  If you're going to do grazing or something or other, that's fine.  Go on some of those fields, maybe rotate it out and then start your no-till and then maybe  
**[1:44:49-1:44:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:44:49):**  do some testing, figure out what you're lacking.  That's our biggest problem right now.  We don't know, for example, on mycorrhizae, there's like 250 species of mycorrhizae.  Our problem right now is we don't really know what we have and we don't know what we need.  We don't know if the product that we're buying has what we want.  
**[1:45:10-1:45:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:45:10):**  A lot of times it doesn't.  Now there is one product I know that does pretty good.  I'm not trying to make a pitch for them, but I have used it and it works.  The reason I know it works is I did some research on it between Christmas and New Year's a couple  years ago and I looked at all the different species of mycorrhizae and I found one that  
**[1:45:31-1:45:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:45:31):**  gives about a 10% yield increase on soybeans.  Well, it just so happens that this company, it's Valen, it's their endo-prime.  What's interesting, the reason I like that product is they give you a money-back guarantee  that you'll get a yield increase.  If you don't, now you have to go to the extra work, you put out a control plot where you  
**[1:45:52-1:45:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:45:52):**  don't and then you put out the rest of your field, you can use it.  It's about 12 bucks an acre, but when you put that on, about 80% of the time they'll  more than pay for the product.  About 10, 15% of the time they'll get a yield increase, but they may not quite pay for it.  I suspect the reason they may not quite pay for it, it's either one or two things.  
**[1:46:14-1:46:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:46:14):**  For example, on Dave Brant's, they tried it on his, Dave already had the microbes.  Either you have the microbe or maybe you just don't quite have the right environmental conditions  and it might take you two or three years until that will fully work for you.  What they're finding out is these products work on these no-till fields with cover crops  maybe two to three years after that you've been totally inoculated your field and you  
**[1:46:40-1:46:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:46:40):**  don't even need the product anymore.  So it's a money-back guarantee.  I think if they're going to give you a money-back guarantee, you have nothing to lose, I think  then you can go ahead and try it.  And what they like is the guys that do like strip-till, guys will put it on, they'll see  
**[1:46:55-1:47:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:46:55):**  enough of an economic advantage that they want the product, but they're going to need  it every single year because the species that they have in there are so sensitive to tillage  that they're killing them off every year.  But they're still getting enough of an economic response that they're going to go ahead and  buy it.  
**[1:47:13-1:47:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:47:13):**  And the other guy loves those guys.  They don't like the long-term no-tillers and cover crops quite as much because they say,  well, we can only sell them a product for two or three years and then we got to go find  somebody else because now their fields are inoculated and they find out they don't need  it anymore.  
**[1:47:27-1:47:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:47:27):**  So I do think some of these products can be good.  The problem is there's just so many of them.  And unless you do the trials, a lot of times they're not so good at telling you what's  in their product and you have to do the research on your own.  So I pull my hair out trying to figure out and I can read the label and unless they give  
**[1:47:50-1:47:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:47:50):**  me the species name, I really don't know what I'm buying until I try it.  Even then, unless you got a lot of money and you want to have it tested, that can be very  expensive.  It's like the wild, wild west right now with inoculants.  It really is.  
**[1:48:09-1:48:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:48:09):**  But a couple things you can do is some of these inoculants you can do yourself.  You can make them yourself.  So I'll give you an example.  A couple years ago, I went out and I really was researching mycorrhizae.  So I found out that there was a recipe for making your own mycorrhizae.  
**[1:48:28-1:48:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:48:28):**  I went out and got eight virgin soils, brought back about a barrel of each, mixed them all  up and then put them in this medium.  I had about a 16 foot by 12 foot area that I made my own little mixture, put this in  there and started growing my own mycorrhizae and then growing oats and sorghum, sedan and  some vegetables in there.  
**[1:48:53-1:48:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:48:53):**  After about two, three years, I got the inoculant level pretty high and then you can broadcast  that on your own fields.  Now, you can't sell it because in order to sell it, you'd have to sterilize it and that  kind of defeats the purpose, but you can do this on your own.  You can do that.  
**[1:49:08-1:49:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:49:08):**  The other thing you can do is with the worms, there's what we call David Johnson is doing  the static compost and he's finding out that he's doing that and getting really good levels  of healthy bacteria and different fungi in the soil, not the mycorrhizae, but other fungi  and getting really good results with that.  So I actually think that maybe rather than buying a lot of these things, maybe we ought  
**[1:49:32-1:49:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:49:32):**  to be looking at trying to grow things on our own.  I totally agree with that.  Companies don't like that.  Yeah, yeah.  It's a lot easier.  
**[1:49:40-1:49:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:49:40):**  I mean, I shouldn't say it's easier.  It's actually a little more hard.  There's a lot of labor involved, but if you have a low budget, you can do these things  on your own.  I'm experimenting with the worm compost right now and doing some things and they are finding  
**[1:49:55-1:49:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:49:55):**  out.  I think these worms are just little inoculators.  They've got all these different species of bacteria that they're inoculating the compost  with and it's not only, you know, as I look at my worm piles, I'm not only finding worms,  guess what else?  
**[1:50:10-1:50:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:50:10):**  There's all kinds of pill bugs and spiders and every critter imaginable.  Matter of fact, the other day I was putting a little extra water on my compost pile and  out jumped a real little baby possum.  And you know, most people would have said, well, let's just compost the possum.  But I'll tell you what, I left him go.  
**[1:50:27-1:50:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:50:27):**  I put a board in there so he could get out.  Why did I do that?  Because possums are very good at eating ticks.  And I have a lot of deer ticks around my farm and I thought, you know what, I'm gonna let  that little sucker go because hopefully he's gonna eat up the deer ticks.  
**[1:50:42-1:50:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:50:42):**  I don't really like to be pulling off ticks all the time.  So, you know, we got to learn to live with mother nature.  Sure thing.  Yeah.  No, I love a lot of the suggestions, insight you've brought in this episode.  
**[1:50:54-1:50:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:50:54):**  Is there anything you'd like to leave the listener or viewer with, some final words  to say, hey, if you're out there farming, give this a try or do this or anything else?  Well, there's one thing that I found interesting.  I probably should have added it on the other one.  But, you know, on nitrogen, we know that compacted soils hurts us with denitrification.  
**[1:51:22-1:51:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:51:22):**  Okay.  So we're losing 60 to 80% of our nitrogen from the soil in the Midwest from denitrification.  Okay.  Saturated soils, when we get those soils, they warm up, we can lose 60 to 80% of our  nitrogen.  
**[1:51:39-1:51:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:51:39):**  That really hurts us on corn.  Well, you know, I got to thinking about that and I was doing some research and does compassion  have an impact on phosphorus?  Does it have an impact on potassium?  Well, I got to looking at it and I've done some research on phosphorus and we're finding  
**[1:51:56-1:52:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:51:56):**  out that under saturated soil conditions, phosphorus becomes more soluble and it flows  with the water under very saturated soil conditions.  And that's due to the fact that a lot of soils are high in iron and under saturated soil  conditions, iron releases phosphorus.  So let's think about this for a minute.  
**[1:52:17-1:52:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:52:17):**  As your organic matter levels go down, you have to use aluminum, iron and calcium to  tie up your phosphorus.  One of the reasons that we have a lot of water quality problems in the Midwest and around  the world is because we've lost a lot of the organic matter from our soils.  The other thing that's happened is in the 1980s, we started the Clean Air Act.  
**[1:52:42-1:52:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:52:42):**  And what happened?  We used to talk about acid rain.  Nobody talks about acid rain anymore, but the pH of the water coming down was about  four and a quarter.  And over time, we've cleaned that up and it went to five and a quarter.  
**[1:52:55-1:52:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:52:55):**  And now it's at six and a quarter.  Well, guess what?  Under very acid conditions 20 years ago, we didn't have all this soluble reactive phosphorus  in Lake Erie causing the harmful algae blooms, but we had acid rain, iron under those acid  conditions when that rain would come down and hold on to that phosphorus very tightly.  
**[1:53:14-1:53:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:53:14):**  But now as we've lost organic matter, and we've got a lot of iron in our soils, and  now the pH is two points higher, that's a factor of 100 times more alkaline.  That means the iron is holding on to that phosphorus less tightly, and it's being lost.  Well, what's that got to do with soil health?  The factor is we don't have the organic matter.  
**[1:53:38-1:53:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:53:38):**  And a lot of people here are doing the vertical tillage.  So what happens now is we got a compacted layer about an inch, two inches deep.  When it rains, all the phosphorus is at the surface.  And now it's either going to go right down a crack to our tile line, or it's going to  flow off right into our soil.  
**[1:53:54-1:53:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:53:54):**  If we had the organic matter in a cover crop, we would get that to go down into the soil,  and then the roots would take it up.  What do roots absorb?  Soluble nitrogen, soluble phosphorus.  So now we see a relationship between soil compaction on nitrogen and phosphorus.  
**[1:54:11-1:54:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:54:11):**  Hmm, do you think there might be a relationship to potash or potassium?  Interesting thing, we've done some research in Ohio, Steve Coleman, last three years we  updated our fertility guide, and they were looking at potassium, and they said something  strange is going on with potassium, we don't understand it.  The last three years, they went out and they soil tested, and they had, let's just say,  
**[1:54:36-1:54:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:54:36):**  a level of potassium, and then they would fertilize it, and then they would test the  soil again.  So let's say you put on 100, 200 pounds of potassium fertilizer, what would you expect  the soil test to do?  Should it go up?  
**[1:54:51-1:54:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:54:51):**  Should it stay the same, or should it go down?  It should go up, right?  Every time it went down.  They said, what's going on here?  And I just happened, when Steve was talking about this, I was sitting in the back row,  
**[1:55:03-1:55:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:55:03):**  so I went up afterwards and I said, Steve, I said, did you apply that in the fall?  Yes.  I said, did you broadcast that?  Well, yeah, Jim, you know, that's typically how we put on potassium.  And I said, did you vertical till it in?  
**[1:55:18-1:55:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:55:18):**  And he said, yeah.  I said, well, you know that under saturated soil conditions, when you vertical till that,  and we've had three wet falls in a row, what happened is you get potassium induction.  And he said, what's potassium induction?  Well, with our clay soil particles, what happens is, potassium is a very small ion, and under  
**[1:55:40-1:55:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:55:40):**  compacted saturated soil conditions, the clay opens up, it swallows up the potassium.  That's why when they would soil test, and after they broadcast it, and they would work  it into the ground, and the soil was saturated a little bit, it would tie up the potassium,  and it would make the potassium unavailable.  I went back and looked at a lot of our soil tests, and in very dry years, when we have  
**[1:56:07-1:56:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:56:07):**  more oxidation, we would find pretty good levels of potassium.  I looked at a soil test that was taken three years later on these same fields, and it dropped  by almost 200%.  I mean, it went down that much, just because we've had saturated soils, it's tying up our  potassium.  
**[1:56:26-1:56:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:56:26):**  And again, that goes back to the compaction and the lack of soil health.  Once you get your soil in good shape, and you have soil health, you're going to have  better nutrient availability, you're going to have healthier crops, more nutrient dense,  and everything's going to work a little bit better, you're going to make more money, because  you're going to have less input.  
**[1:56:45-1:56:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:56:45):**  So trying to get there, though, that's the hard part.  And again, I would probably just tell people, you've got to start, you can't wait, don't  wait too long, because it's not going to get any better.  It's only going to get worse unless you take an active interest in it.  Try to keep live roots out there year round as much as you can.  
**[1:57:05-1:57:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:57:05):**  And if people want to learn more about the work you're doing, where can they go?  Yes.  So let me tell you a little bit about myself.  So I worked for Ohio State University for 24 years.  I'm retired from there.  
**[1:57:19-1:57:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:57:19):**  Then I worked for the Natural Resource Conservation Service for three years as the soil health  specialist.  I more or less quit that job.  And now I have my own company.  It's called Horman Soil Health Services.  
**[1:57:33-1:57:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:57:33):**  I'm working on a number of grants, I do consulting, I sell some cover crop seed.  I also sell some crimper rollers.  I'm getting into that a little bit and doing a lot of different things.  So if you want to get a hold of me, go to Horman Soil Health Services.  That's S-E-R-V-I-C-E-S, all one word, Horman Soil Health Services at gmail.com.  
**[1:58:01-1:58:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:58:01):**  That's my email.  And if you want to go to my website, it's HormanSoilHealth.com.  And if you go there, I've got all kinds of resources on a lot of fact sheets that I've  written over the years, bowls and slugs and biology of soil compaction, have a lot of  different PowerPoints.  
**[1:58:20-1:58:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-02-JimHoorman-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:58:20):**  And I am also available to speak.  I am available to help farmers and anybody who wants to.  And these COVID times, it's been a little bit difficult.  We're doing more webinars and staying home a little bit more.  Much much.  