### In Search of Soil  (2020-00-16)
**[0:00:00-0:00:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:00:00):**  So, we meet again.  Compost  It's something that we all use and we love.  But how good is our compost?  Have you ever thought about that?  
**[0:00:29-0:00:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:00:29):**  Are you using really high quality compost or are you using poor quality compost?  Do you even know?  Well today to answer that question I'm going to someone who makes a lot of high quality  compost.  It's Randy Ritchie.  
**[0:00:43-0:00:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:00:43):**  He's the CEO and founder of national composting brand Malibu Compost.  Randy's goal for Malibu compost is to create the best commercial compost that you can buy.  Using high quality ingredients and his strict adherence to quality control, Randy's been  able to do that.  And along the way he's learned a thing or two about good compost and bad compost.  
**[0:01:08-0:01:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:01:08):**  Today he's going to share some of the lessons that he's learned about compost to help you  make better compost or buy a better compost if you want to go that route.  So let's jump right into it with the CEO of Malibu Compost, Randy Ritchie.  This is In Search of Soil.  So Randy what initially got you into the composting business?  
**[0:01:31-0:01:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:01:31):**  Well I was a landscaper and I had a design and build business, probably one of the first  ones that was environmentally conscious in Los Angeles.  And I had trained with a bunch of great old guys who were incredible at what they did  but they really weren't too into the environment at that point.  Back in the early 80s we had customers starting to ask us about natural and holistic landscaping  
**[0:01:58-0:02:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:01:58):**  which to these guys was like, what?  What are they talking about?  So I had a lot of people that were putting me in charge of these projects and a lot of  guys I served with were agents at film businesses and companies and management companies.  And I started getting a lot of entertainment clientele and these guys were asking for this  
**[0:02:19-0:02:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:02:19):**  kind of stuff.  And so I ultimately realized that we needed to get, we had no good compost.  There was not good soil out there.  There was just the stuff you could pick up in bulk at the soil yards.  And I realized that I had to find a different solution and I ended up meeting a guy named  
**[0:02:37-0:02:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:02:37):**  Alan York who was at Benziger Vineyards and he was an incredible biodynamic mittner and  he kind of turned me on to really good compost.  The first time I put my hand in his compost versus all the stuff I'd used for years as  a landscaper, I literally paused, held this compost in my hand, felt the life in that  thing and I had this overwhelming sense of your life is about to change.  
**[0:03:08-0:03:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:03:08):**  And I had no idea what that meant at the time but it was a huge thing.  Those kind of things that like stop you in your tracks.  I'm looking at this incredible compost pile, a finished beautiful, which I didn't really  know what biodynamic was at that point, compost.  And I'm just going, you know, and he had a big grin on his face like, gotcha.  
**[0:03:30-0:03:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:03:30):**  What is it about good compost versus poor compost?  And I think we could use maybe a tomato as an analogy.  A lot of people, they picture tomatoes for that store-bought, hard, dense, lack of flavor  tomato and then they taste a real tomato and they see, wow, what a difference.  If you think about that in compost, the stuff that you had available at the soil yards,  
**[0:03:54-0:04:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:03:54):**  what visually and what maybe even physical properties did you not like about that and  why was seeing Alan such a mind blower?  When you look at compost that you can go get at a soil yard or mostly like what's in a  bag, what we have all historically seen as compost in America, it looks very woody and  very fibrous in its makeup.  
**[0:04:14-0:04:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:04:14):**  It doesn't look like soil.  It doesn't look like something that's really broken down.  It doesn't have that quality or that characteristic.  So just like when you go to a store and you see one of those kind of fat, pinky, red tomatoes  at a conventional market, you look at it and you go, that just doesn't look right.  
**[0:04:36-0:04:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:04:36):**  Versus if you go out into my backyard or your backyard and take one of our heirloom tomatoes  as it's ripening on the vine and you go, now that looks like a tomato.  So when I saw Alan's compost and I saw that it was finished, and even at that point he  didn't screen the compost, but the breakdown and the consistency where it looked much more  like soil with very fine particulate of some wood or some straw, you could barely make  
**[0:05:05-0:05:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:05:05):**  out like really, whereas what I do is I take it another step further.  I screen compost now really fine so that it looks almost like in some instances coffee  grounds you can still see.  And compost is different from our California farms and Oregon farms, but I'm looking for  something that looks much closer to something that resembles soil instead of resembles mulch.  
**[0:05:34-0:05:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:05:34):**  Yeah.  And I've had that experience down here.  We have a municipal soil yard and I've gotten compost there in the past and I was going  to say like it definitely looks more like mulch than compost.  Why is that that you see that in a lot of municipal yards?  
**[0:05:48-0:05:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:05:48):**  Why are you seeing the coarser chunkier materials in there?  It's because of what their inputs are and then also what they're doing in terms of the  composting itself.  So even though they have standards that they have to adhere to in terms of pathogen reduction,  I don't feel like in municipal composting that we're getting the kind of breakdown of  
**[0:06:16-0:06:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:06:16):**  the material that we really need.  And the other thing for me, which gets into a whole other world, are levels of toxicity  because there's not testing for that and there's not testing for GMOs and there's not testing  for a lot of stuff that I think is important.  So when you can do a compost at home and you can control your inputs and even if you do  
**[0:06:39-0:06:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:06:39):**  a thermophilic or you do a static pile, if you're doing static, you can let that go for  eight months, 10 months, a year at the bottom of your compost bin or your compost pile,  have something that's actually amazing that does resemble soil.  Whereas I just think that when you have on mass scale a turnover of material that you  have to turn over and turn over and turn over and you're under the gun all the time to get  
**[0:07:06-0:07:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:07:06):**  this stuff done and create new room and new space and get this stuff out.  And so I've seen some really bad compost on – unfortunately at school gardens and community  gardens and stuff where I've gone like, honestly guys, that's not something that I would personally  use.  I would prefer you guys compost yourself and then learn to vermicompost, do some other  
**[0:07:33-0:07:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:07:33):**  composting.  And if you have to augment that compost, get a decent compost to inoculate your compost  with.  Yeah, I'm just thinking about the green waste that ends up at the yard by us where they  make that compost.  
**[0:07:45-0:07:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:07:45):**  And a lot of those inputs are woodier type materials, tree prunings.  And if you think about the process of breaking those down, even if you grind them up fine,  you need fungi, which means time.  And no amount of turning is really going to speed up the breakdown of the woody materials.  And you're right, when you have an inventory management problem where the flow basically  
**[0:08:07-0:08:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:08:07):**  keeps coming in because you have a government contract to take all their tips, where do  you put it at the end of the day?  So is it just sending it back out the door finished?  It's almost like that compost has to be recomposted when you get it before it becomes effective.  Well, it's what you said too.  
**[0:08:24-0:08:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:08:24):**  It also then when you put it into your yard, let's say you take that compost, then what  you're asking the biology and your soil to do is work on breaking that down.  And then also I look at when you look at that kind of stuff, so if you're going to do that  rebreakdown that you're talking about, which is correct, what is the nutrient density of  that material?  
**[0:08:45-0:08:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:08:45):**  What kind of breakdown are you going to get when the microbes mineralize that material?  So I'm always looking also for really good, clean, organic matter that once you do a soil  analysis on it and you can see like, hey, what is my nutrient spectrum on this?  Do I have all the majors?  Do I have the minors?  
**[0:09:04-0:09:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:09:04):**  Where am I?  I think a lot of stuff that doesn't, and then you get stuff that's sprayed too, so you get  all kinds of that whole type of thing too.  So it gets very sticky in terms of if you're growing food or if you've got somebody in  your family who has cancer or a child that has any kind of illness.  
**[0:09:28-0:09:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:09:28):**  And especially in today's world where we have a lot of compromised immune systems, you've  got to be really careful because I use that example.  I think we talked about it briefly that I always have neighbors that love to spray Roundup,  herbicides, pesticides, and what they do unfortunately is when their stuff kicks the bucket, they  clean it up, sweep it up, and it all goes into the green bin.  
**[0:09:58-0:10:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:09:58):**  That becomes part of what is in the green waste stream of compost.  Not everybody does that.  There's a lot of people that are conscious out there that really grow organically or  do their best to grow organically, but there's a lot of people that just take all that stuff  and throw it in there.  
**[0:10:14-0:10:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:10:14):**  And if you're not composting correctly, you're not giving it enough time, you're not letting  – and the tough part is even with that stuff in there, until it gets into the soil and  you have the ability for the microbes to break stuff down and then flush that into the aquifer,  you still have that toxicity, that residue.  For me, that's a scary thing.  
**[0:10:37-0:10:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:10:37):**  This is a big thing in the composting world right now.  I saw a video where they're – I think it's like the National Composting Council is promoting  this removal of these persistent herbicides in compost.  Do you think that's a pretty widespread problem with a lot of municipal compost?  Would you bet that most of that – not most, but some of that compost is going to have  
**[0:11:00-0:11:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:11:00):**  persistent herbicide in it and you're probably going to have problems if you bring that onto  your property?  Absolutely.  And if you – when you're researching, you look at stuff, of course, you see people that  have said, I bought a truckload in and I had this compost, I got a dump truckload and I  
**[0:11:16-0:11:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:11:16):**  was so excited to spread it around my yard.  And then all of a sudden, you start to see different types of disease come that you never  had before.  You start to see in some of your food crops where stuff doesn't grow, seeds don't germinate,  all kinds of stuff.  
**[0:11:31-0:11:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:11:31):**  And I've heard a lot of horror stories and not everybody, not every place is a bad composting  place.  It depends on degree of inputs and depends on degree of consciousness of the operators.  We did a thing, oh, I think two or three years ago now for the National Composting Council  in downtown Los Angeles and they wanted to – they had us come because we have a real  
**[0:12:04-0:12:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:12:04):**  broad spectrum of people that use Malibu compost and they wanted us to talk about using compost  to grow cannabis because they thought it was going to be a cash cow.  And the room was packed.  You couldn't fit another body in there, which is great.  But people really thought, okay, and there was a lot of big players in the composting  
**[0:12:26-0:12:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:12:26):**  world were there.  And what we talked about was exactly what you and I are discussing right now.  How do you eliminate those things that we don't want to get into people's bodies and  that we don't want to get in people's lungs and we don't want that to get in people's  guts?  
**[0:12:43-0:12:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:12:43):**  And everybody was kind of like – I think there was a lot of excitement and the air  kind of dropped out of the room because we hit them with a dose of really heavy reality.  So I think a lot of these guys knew what we were talking about and knew that, wow, to  do that is going to cost us a ton of dough to fix this problem.  So they know.  
**[0:13:05-0:13:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:13:05):**  Yeah.  What are your thoughts on this?  Somebody has access to municipal compost or soil yards compost and maybe it's not the  best.  Let's say yours is a 10 out of 10 and somebody finds a six out of 10.  
**[0:13:20-0:13:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:13:20):**  They might not know what's in it.  It doesn't look fully broken down.  They need quantity, so they need volume, and they're trying to start soils off.  Do you think in the beginning subpar compost is better than no compost or better than less  compost or you're better off spending money and using less?  
**[0:13:41-0:13:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:13:41):**  Yeah.  This is a tough one for me because I don't want to come off like I'm in any way elitist  about our compost or arrogant about our compost or whatever that we do.  We make farm-made compost and we're very particular about what we do.  I always – in the classes I teach on gardening and stuff that I talk about, I'm always telling  
**[0:14:06-0:14:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:14:06):**  people I would rather have you start out with something really good and then have to fix  problems down the road that sometimes using bad compost or bad soil can create, especially  for novice gardeners that haven't seen a lot of problems.  We have a lot of brand new gardeners now since the whole COVID thing.  I would hate to see them get into a situation where they're like, oh, wow, man, this is  
**[0:14:34-0:14:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:14:34):**  just way harder.  This is not what I set out to do.  I thought it was going to be really fun and great and good for my family and whatever.  I think people are better off starting in small doses and if they've already created  a garden and they did it in a way that might have some toxicity in it or whatever, utilize  
**[0:14:56-0:15:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:14:56):**  some of the people that are out there that can talk about how do you remediate soil,  what do you do, what are some of the ways.  A lot of times people get scared when I say, hey, there's toxins in soil, why we test for  GMOs.  When I run down this list and people get very scared and I go, here's the good news, the  
**[0:15:18-0:15:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:15:18):**  biology.  If you feed the biology in your soil, it's going to remediate these problems.  If you keep on it and you start using flushes and compost teas and things that are not historically  good, every garden center or garden expert will teach you, you're going to be okay.  Then they relax with that.  
**[0:15:37-0:15:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:15:37):**  Because otherwise, I'm a person that I don't want to just keep perpetuating the same problem,  which is saying, oh yeah, buy the cheap stuff and throw a little bit of our compost in there  and fix it.  If you can just work with your soil that you have and add compost to it or take a really  basic mix, if our potting soil is too expensive for somebody, you can get some different bales  
**[0:16:06-0:16:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:16:06):**  of coir or peat.  Add some perlite into those things, add some castings, add our compost at a different ratio,  like a 25% for your organic matter.  Start building some soil in your beds and start feeding, start top dressing a lot with  the  
**[0:16:30-0:16:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:16:30):**  adding some mineral, especially in the raised beds because we need to mimic nature there.  I always say, I try to start out with what's good.  When people ask me, what do you do?  This is what I do.  It's how I do it.  
**[0:16:44-0:16:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:16:44):**  One thing I found interesting, and I hadn't thought about this before, and this might  be a lot of gardeners and growers, we'll look at the package that we're eating of something,  we look at the ingredients and we go through it and say, oh, what did they add here?  We assume there's no toxins in there.  The food system has made sure there's no lead and bad stuff in there.  
**[0:17:04-0:17:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:17:04):**  When it comes to a lot of garden amendments, I think a lot of people are pouring and dumping  with blind faith, even if it's organic and compost.  They're not thinking about what could be in there, but you guys run toxicology reports  on your compost.  Why do you feel that's important?  
**[0:17:25-0:17:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:17:25):**  Do you think outside of pesticides, there's other potential toxins out there in compost  that people can buy?  Yeah, good question.  We run toxicology panels looking for the compounds that are found in pesticides, herbicides,  and fungicides just because we're in farming areas where we make our compost.  
**[0:17:49-0:17:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:17:49):**  Even though the farms around us are organic and we're in no spray zones, you never know.  Drift can go far, depending on what's going on.  We started testing because of that to make sure that what we were putting in the bag  was clean.  Our tests for the last 10 years have been wonderful.  
**[0:18:13-0:18:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:18:13):**  What that does is it allows us to relax and know that what we're bagging is good.  On the other side, we're the only soil company that I know of that tests for GMOs.  We test for GMOs.  We run genetic IDs because in a lot of that stuff that people buy, especially in terms  of fertilizers, I know a lot of gardeners that I've met that they love their bone meal,  
**[0:18:40-0:18:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:18:40):**  blood meal, feather meal, cottonseed meal.  Especially on the bone meal, blood meal, and feather meal, I don't use it because the animals  that that is sourced from are fed GMO feedstocks.  Those GMO feedstocks, corn, soy, alfalfa, are all sprayed with glyphosate.  That residue gets into – I don't care what they do – it gets into it.  
**[0:19:08-0:19:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:19:08):**  You see it.  It's in all kinds of products.  That's why we even see it in food stuff that we buy, packaged food things.  They have the whole thing with – I think it was a couple of General Mills foods that  had glyphosate residue in it.  
**[0:19:24-0:19:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:19:24):**  It's been all over the place.  For me, I tell gardeners, hey, if you're growing organic, then you don't need those things.  If you top dress a lot, if you add other things, there are things that you can add to mineralize  and you can get away from these things that historically everybody's been told to use  because they do have levels of toxicity.  
**[0:19:45-0:19:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:19:45):**  No one's testing.  I mean, we test, but I don't know anybody else that tests.  One of the things you used as a main input in the compost is manure.  It's coming from an organic farm.  We were talking about this yesterday of the organic standards are kind of crazy in the  
**[0:19:59-0:20:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:19:59):**  sense of you can have conventional manure go into, through a composting process, come  out the other end and it's organic compost.  If you look past the regulations, what are your thoughts on using manure out of a conventional  system in compost?  Do you think the composting process is dealing with those residues or I'm thinking based  
**[0:20:24-0:20:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:20:24):**  on the whole toxicology thing, it's not okay?  I personally feel like you're getting a lot of stuff in conventional compost.  If you're buying conventional compost and it's not organic, you're kind of getting what  you figure you're getting.  Where it gets tricky for me is when stuff is labeled organic and that's when people  
**[0:20:54-0:20:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:20:54):**  because it says organic across the back or with a little thing on there, a little stamp  on there, whatever, people think, oh, it's tested, it's safe, it's fine, I'm all good.  That's how I believe it should be, but unfortunately it's not because there's different levels  of organic and organic certification in this country and even just different levels of  how different certifiers even check on companies that are making stuff labeled organic to see  
**[0:21:21-0:21:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:21:21):**  if it is.  A lot of times conventional waste will get into the organic stream.  For me, I guess I just become more of a purist over time and I think also I look at my own  family, I look at myself and I look at how we try to utilize growing healthy food, eating  healthy food.  
**[0:21:48-0:21:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:21:48):**  We try to not have poisons in our gardens and I was around a lot of poison growing up  being a landscaper and I think I had some different tests and stuff done on me and my  exposure was a little scary and I had to do a lot of things to fix some stuff in my body  about that.  So I'm even a little bit more hesitant to just say, oh, go ahead and use it because  
**[0:22:19-0:22:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:22:19):**  I've already had some things happen because of being around toxins.  As a business owner, somebody producing compost, when it comes to business, there's a bottom  line.  Would it be financially beneficial for you to take conventional manure if you could?  Can you get more of that cheaper than you can organic manures?  
**[0:22:43-0:22:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:22:43):**  Yeah, typically how that works is for companies that they get paid tipping fees to take stuff  away from conventional farms and then you get that product for free.  Whereas the way we work it is we, on our farm in Oregon, we're across the street from an  organic valley dairy and one down the street from us.  So what we do is we supply them with woodchips that we buy from the Forest Service that they  
**[0:23:15-0:23:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:23:15):**  use in the loafing sheds for the cows to sleep on.  It's comfortable.  It drops the incense of mastitis with the cows.  It's a very holistic animal care program, which is great.  So for us, there's a cost.  
**[0:23:28-0:23:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:23:28):**  It costs us money and then we have the cost of bringing the manure in across the street  from our farm and doing the manure management that way on our property.  In California, we compost on the site.  So there's some of that trucking fee that's out of there.  But for us, as a business, I'm the CEO of Malibu Compost and I'm the person that started  
**[0:23:54-0:23:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:23:54):**  it with my other partners.  I don't think that cutting corners or saving money, we make a premium product, which is  a real premium.  You hear that word premium and it means a lot of times it's crap, but it's called premium.  We make what I consider the best compost you can buy in a bag.  
**[0:24:20-0:24:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:24:20):**  It takes a lot of time.  It takes a lot of energy.  It takes six months before our stuff actually, at a minimum, gets put down, gets composted,  goes through the thermophilic base and then gets screened and bagged and shipped off.  For me, it's not so much about the money.  
**[0:24:40-0:24:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:24:40):**  It's about doing the right thing.  That's how our whole company feels and how our board of directors feels and all of us.  We feel like if we do the right thing at every turn, and we've had lots of opportunities  for people who said, hey, come in and compost our conventional waste and put preps in it.  We're like, no, we're not going to do that.  
**[0:25:02-0:25:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:25:02):**  We're not going to bastardize the process.  We're going to do what we do and either people are going to accept it and go with us or they're  going to reject us, which is what I love about the free market system.  Along the similar lines of tipping fees and potentially questionable inputs, what are  your thoughts on compost made with biosolids?  
**[0:25:26-0:25:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:25:26):**  Wow.  Not a fan.  Not a fan.  In a country where prescription drug use is massive and in a country where people eating  diets of horrific food, fast foods and all kinds of stuff, and in a place where even  
**[0:25:54-0:25:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:25:54):**  if you're going to use that and they sterilize it, then what do you have?  To me, I get it, but it just seems...  Doesn't jot up your ethos of who you are.  No, not at all.  And the problem is when you put stuff out there, there's companies that use that and  
**[0:26:15-0:26:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:26:15):**  put it out and everything like that.  People think, oh, it's okay.  We all have different experiences in my view.  If you're in a jungle and you're doing pits and you're living having a pretty clean diet  or you're in somewhere that you're out on a farm where you're eating what you grow,  
**[0:26:39-0:26:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:26:39):**  it changes the spectrum.  But when you're living in a modern society where people fix a lot of stuff or try to  with drugs and have historically bad diets over the last 50 years or 40 years, there's  a lot of variables that you can't control with that.  Yeah.  
**[0:27:04-0:27:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:27:04):**  Similarly, what about manures?  You use dairy manure, so it's coming from cows.  Do you think all animal manures are created equal?  Would you derive any benefit from getting other organic manures blended in?  Well, we use the organic dairy cow manure because for us, we have to use that in our  
**[0:27:38-0:27:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:27:38):**  binomial production that we do.  It's also a really good clean source in those animals because we run the genetic IDs.  We know the grasses and hays and even corn that they're eating, where it's grown, where  it comes from, how it comes back and how it tests.  So we follow the inputs.  
**[0:27:58-0:28:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:27:58):**  But there's a lot of other animals that I think – alpaca, sheep, goat – great, great  manures.  Rabbit manure can be great.  Dairy manure, if you're controlling their inputs, what they're eating, if they're using  an organic mash or eating your vegetables with an organic mash out of the garden, great  
**[0:28:20-0:28:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:28:20):**  stuff.  But the problem is you get into other things where I have a lot of friends that I've owned  horses and people are like, oh, I've got horses or I've got a horse down the street or whatever.  And horses, for me, my horses, I always had to worm them.  And I used ibimectin and ibimectin is a flagell.  
**[0:28:42-0:28:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:28:42):**  It's an antifungal.  So not good in their gut.  And also a lot of horses, depending on what happens, they get put on a lot of different  antibiotics.  I had a couple of my horses that were very susceptible to different illnesses and treating  
**[0:29:00-0:29:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:29:00):**  them holistically didn't work.  So we had to go the antibiotic route.  So for me, I'm not a big horse manure fan.  I'm not a big bag chicken manure fan because of where it comes from.  I definitely never use steer manure because of where it comes from.  
**[0:29:22-0:29:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:29:22):**  And also it has really high ammonia levels and can have high concentrations of salt in  it.  But other things, I have a lot of friends and on our farm in Oregon, we have different  parts of the farm.  We've got guys that have sheep running around.  
**[0:29:44-0:29:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:29:44):**  We've got some goats on the farm.  They're great.  The goats are hysterical.  We keep them out of our compost area.  But in the areas where they are, they're great and they use those manures to grow some of  
**[0:29:55-0:29:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:29:55):**  the stuff that they're growing crop wise on the farm.  Yeah, a long line of salts.  That's a good point.  Do you experience any issues with that using dairy manure?  Is that something you have to rectify on your end through the process?  
**[0:30:08-0:30:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:30:08):**  No, we don't because of what the cows are eating.  Basically we're getting a really, we don't have the salt issue that you get with the  different feeds that animals eat and the confined animal systems.  So we don't have high salt content in our compost and never have.  Now I know you're making biodynamic compost, so the manure part kind of comes part and  
**[0:30:38-0:30:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:30:38):**  parcel with that by definition.  But if you didn't have to be biodynamic, do you think that manure is a critical input  to making good compost?  There's some people that believe it is and then you get this other side that is kind  of that veganic route.  
**[0:30:54-0:31:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:30:54):**  They want just plant based compost that was never near any manure.  What's your thought on that?  Yeah, we have a lot of vegans that reach out to us.  I'm a vegetarian, I'm not a vegan.  I personally believe that we, I make a lot of green waste compost on different farms,  
**[0:31:22-0:31:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:31:22):**  different urban farms, different larger scale farms.  At our own home farm I do that.  What I always find is I don't feel that I get quite the kick that I'm looking for from  a straight compost that's green waste.  So I find myself adding, I'll supplement with rock dust, I supplement with snips.  
**[0:31:50-0:31:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:31:50):**  I do a lot of, we do castings at our house and we do them at some other farms that we  work on and consult on.  I'll add castings, which even some people that are veganic are like anti-casting.  I've heard that side of the argument too.  But for me, I always find that adding a little bit of compost to your mixes, and I do for  
**[0:32:16-0:32:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:32:16):**  my soil mixes, I go that old school 25 to 33% good organic matter, like a finished compost.  I might have a combination of 25 or 28% compost and then 3% or 5% castings, but that's always  a base component.  But I feel like making good green waste compost, especially where you can control the inputs,  you're basically re-inoculating with the biology that's on your property back into the soil  
**[0:32:57-0:33:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:32:57):**  and it works really, really great.  I've had people that have done that very successfully.  For me, I always find that, especially some of my heavier feeders like tomatoes and other  things like that, where you've got stuff that on my food crops, a lot of the time, I feel  like they have such an initial hit because the uptake of nutrient is so quick and so  
**[0:33:19-0:33:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:33:19):**  strong.  Most of them are short crops and they have a short time span that they're spent producing  that I feel like I get a better result with adding some of the compost manure into my  mix.  Along the lines of nutrients within compost, do you provide a soil analysis on the compost  
**[0:33:43-0:33:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:33:43):**  where you get NPK, those types of values?  And do you think somebody who's buying compost should always ask for that?  Are most bulk composting makers going to have that data available so you know what you're  actually getting and adding?  That's a tricky one because we don't put NPK on our compost because I registered as an  
**[0:34:04-0:34:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:34:04):**  amendment and not as a fertilizer.  We run a ton of soil analysis so I know what nutrients are in there and I know what minerals  are in there.  They don't allow you to post your results on your website and use it because they consider  it a marketing material.  
**[0:34:31-0:34:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:34:31):**  So there's a whole issue where the government tries to control guaranteed results and it's  really tricky.  This is an area where a lot of times if you happen to know the company, I don't as a habit  just shoot out test results to people.  I want to know who are you, what are you doing, what do you need to know, is there something  
**[0:34:53-0:34:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:34:53):**  I can translate to you?  So sometimes it's about trusting who's making the compost that you're buying.  Is there a dialogue, is there an openness about it?  I get all kinds of stuff where I get people like, yeah, can you send me all your analysis  on your compost?  
**[0:35:07-0:35:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:35:07):**  And I'm like, and who are you?  And why do you need this analysis and what are you looking for?  And how familiar are you with different types of labs?  Because I get a lot of people from the classes I teach at nurseries and stuff on organic  gardening, people that are even master gardeners and master composters, they send me all kinds  
**[0:35:30-0:35:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:35:30):**  of questions about compost.  And also even when I recommend to people, you test your soil, they hit me up with a  zillion questions on, hey, what am I looking at?  What do I need here?  This tells me I should put down all this lime, would you do that?  
**[0:35:44-0:35:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:35:44):**  And I'm like, absolutely not.  And we get into a dialogue.  So the testing part of it is tricky.  Everybody should test.  And if somebody has specific questions, you should be able to answer that fairly easily.  
**[0:35:59-0:36:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:35:59):**  But a lot of companies just do the basic bare minimum to get through whatever the standard  is.  So I know compost is, I think it's even typically viewed as an amendment, not a fertilizer by  most users, but I don't want to get you in trouble.  I mean, given your experience, do you think that most well-made compost are going to have  
**[0:36:23-0:36:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:36:23):**  a few percent NPK in them?  Are they going to have like point something percent?  Are they going to have over five?  How much fertilizer kick do you think a good compost would have in it?  Is it enough there to even think of it like a fertilizer or you having seen all the tests,  
**[0:36:42-0:36:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:36:42):**  is it it's there, but it's an amendment?  I guess the best way to answer that, which is a great question.  You're not going to get me in trouble.  I look at it like we're on these farms and we're on some really big properties and we're  on some, you know, let's say even a 10 acre parcel.  
**[0:37:06-0:37:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:37:06):**  Which is a lot bigger than most people are gardening on at home.  Or even small farms.  A lot of them are five acres or less.  We don't use any fertilizers.  We use compost.  
**[0:37:18-0:37:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:37:18):**  We use compost tea.  Occasionally I'll use an organic alfalfa mush.  Occasionally I'll use a little bit of liquid kelp that's really good from North Atlantic.  And sometimes I'll use some different mine minerals.  And that's it.  
**[0:37:38-0:37:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:37:38):**  Pretty much.  That's pretty much it.  I know if I ever need some additional biology to break stuff down because I've got a good  source to mineralize from, I might add a little bit of EM1.  I might add, there's a product that I love called root wise soil dynamic, which is another  
**[0:37:54-0:37:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:37:54):**  great inoculant.  So I'm always looking for the biological additives, which compost, a good finished compost should  be a great biological additive or amendment.  And that's where we go back to what we were starting to talk about earlier.  The more broken down it is, the more complex it gets in terms of breakdown, in terms of  
**[0:38:17-0:38:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:38:17):**  how much time it's had to actually get a diversity of biology in it, the better it's going to  be as an amendment because it'll do what you want it to do.  And it'll do what nature does in nature.  I think it's safe to say based on that, that there is some fertilization value in good  compost.  
**[0:38:34-0:38:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:38:34):**  You're feeding the microbes.  But on the flip side, compost can be also a bad thing.  It can be an anti-fertilizer if it's unfinished.  And I've heard some horror stories from growers who have added poor compost to their soil  and had very poor results because now what nutrition they did have in the soil is being  
**[0:38:52-0:38:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:38:52):**  used by the microbes to break down the compost that they added.  Do you think this is also a big problem with unfinished or poor quality compost is sometimes  you are doing more harm than good?  Yeah, I think that any time that we make the soil work harder than it has to.  It's the same thing with, I mean most people don't think about this or talk about it, but  
**[0:39:24-0:39:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:39:24):**  there is a stress on the soil, on the biology when you add something that's not finished  or maybe has toxins, something that could kill off biology.  Adding stuff also that leaches even moisture out of there that the microbes need to survive  and thrive.  So a lot of times when you have woody stuff too, it really sucks moisture out of the soil  
**[0:39:51-0:39:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:39:51):**  sometimes if you're not on top of your watering game, which is a huge problem for a lot of  people.  There are just a lot of different things that can happen by using unfinished compost versus  using a finished compost.  I always tell people, even at home, get a screen, screen that stuff, make a little 3x3  
**[0:40:12-0:40:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:40:12):**  screen at home and screen your own compost that you're taking out of the bottom of your  bin and then you take the soils and throw them back in there and keep that going to  inoculate.  But try to get your compost as fine as you can in terms of particulate and sieve size  so that it can do the most good as quickly as possible.  
**[0:40:31-0:40:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:40:31):**  Is that why you guys screen?  You just don't want it to have the chance of leaving unbroken down stuff in there and  just to have it more bioavailable, smaller means more surface area?  Yeah, good question.  RCEP is, when I say it's 100% finished because we go through the thermophilic phase, so we  
**[0:40:53-0:41:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:40:53):**  have that portion where you're between 131 and 160 for 15 days, we generally well exceed  that, which is great in terms of what's going on.  So RCEP is actually completely processed.  And then as it goes through the breakdown period, when it comes out of a bacterial phase,  which is that phase where it's hot, and starts to cool down and then the breakdown happens,  
**[0:41:25-0:41:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:41:25):**  you get to a point where once the temps are 80 degrees, 90 degrees, even 100, you get  other biology that comes up into our compost bottles.  We just kind of let them sit when they get to that phase.  We're screening because you still always have certain amounts of some wood particulate that  might be on the crust of the windrows, and since they're long windrows, we're screening  
**[0:41:53-0:41:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:41:53):**  that to make sure we're screening everything out.  And the other thing too is as you're doing the turning process, we try to not disturb  the windrows too much, so we use our compost turner to turn, and you'll get stuff.  For us, we're farm-made, so you'll get things like occasionally some baling wire that we'll  pull out, or the twine that's used on bales of hay, that kind of stuff, depending on the  
**[0:42:20-0:42:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:42:20):**  season when it is, and we pull that stuff out.  We're also screening to get any of those types of things out.  You'll even get occasional, a tag from one of the cows that falls off and it's there,  or you'll get, we do on the farm in Oregon, we do a lot of acupuncture on the cows.  The same kind of acupuncture needles that they use on us, it's a little bit bigger than  
**[0:42:45-0:42:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:42:45):**  what they use on us, but we use them.  Occasionally, the vet really does try to do a great job of trying to get all that stuff.  Whereas out of there, but in conventional farming, they literally come down and just  keep shooting and then just drop in the needles.  You're like, whoa, but we're trying to screen to get as much of all of those imperfections  
**[0:43:07-0:43:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:43:07):**  out.  We go through the windows every day and just pull stuff out.  There might even be some plastic that blew from the guys covering stuff or whatever,  and it blows into where we take stuff off the separator.  We're constantly cleaning stuff up and refining that process.  
**[0:43:28-0:43:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:43:28):**  But we're screening to make sure that you have that small particulate.  We use an eighth inch screener and really try to make it so that you are getting just  straight, beautiful, clean compost to work in your yard.  Yeah, I have a bag of it here that I was just making some tea with and it is really fine,  nice texture.  
**[0:43:49-0:43:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:43:49):**  I've compared that against some other brands that make things like a mend and you look  at that and that stuff is much coarser, chunkier.  I do really love the texture that you guys have.  In terms of the process, what are your thoughts on this?  The initial turning is obviously a bacterial phase because they're eating up all the food  
**[0:44:09-0:44:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:44:09):**  that bacteria can eat, the kind of lower, less mature carbon.  Then you need to let it sit, so let the fungi get in there, proliferate, expand and break  down some of the more mature carbon in the pile.  If you look at the lifespan of compost going from zero to day when it's deemed finished,  how much of that is turned aerobic and then how much of that is just letting that pile  
**[0:44:32-0:44:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:44:32):**  will cure, letting the fungi get in there, not just to break it down but also because  that's what you're trying to do with compost.  You're trying to get bacteria and fungi to breed out so you're inoculating your soil.  Yeah, great question.  It also depends.  
**[0:44:52-0:44:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:44:52):**  Seasonality depending on the farm is also really important with us because you have  moments where you have, in Oregon, it could rain 130 days a year on where our farm is.  We've had some seasons that have been that much rain.  There you're trying to, we do some other different things as we finish stuff off.  There are ways to work with the weather.  
**[0:45:21-0:45:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:45:21):**  We use really nice compost covers, the things that we do.  That also deals with temperature.  After that initial heat up, right now, for example, we just built three windrows yesterday  in Oregon.  Temperatures are already coming up.  
**[0:45:40-0:45:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:45:40):**  I would imagine there we'll have to turn those.  Usually by Monday or Tuesday, it will be up in the mid-130s.  I like to get all that raw material into a nice form where it actually starts to really  get into that thermophilic phase.  In the summertime and in the late spring, our composting cycle on the thermophilic phase  
**[0:46:05-0:46:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:46:05):**  is much quicker than it is in the wintertime when it's wet and it's cold.  Sometimes it takes a while for all of that material to, once you pull it off the separators,  to reform, get back into a shape where all of a sudden it starts to heat up again.  It just takes different periods of time depending on the cycle.  For us, we know pretty much once we've gone through our 15-day pathogen reduction and  
**[0:46:33-0:46:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:46:33):**  we start to look and see, okay, are the temps hovering at 128 after they've been through  the 135-140 cycle, are they hovering at 128?  Great, they're still in thermophilic even if they're down to 125-120.  Then is where you start seeing that breakdown of a little bit more finer material.  Then as you drop down to 110-100, you really start to see the compost inside the shell  
**[0:47:04-0:47:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:47:04):**  of the outer layer of the compost or if there's a compost tech cover on it and then the shell.  You start to really see how it starts to break down as you were discussing in much finer  particulate.  It's just interesting to watch.  Sometimes our stuff in the winter might take eight months to finish if it's a particularly  
**[0:47:25-0:47:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:47:25):**  wet winter.  Sometimes in the summer, six months is the mark.  We've had stuff where because we have so much heat and a fair amount of moisture because  you don't want stuff to get too dry either, that completely retards the process.  But we've had stuff in five months which you go like, wow, that was an amazingly quick  
**[0:47:47-0:47:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:47:47):**  for us, quick process.  But for a lot of people when you're getting the kind of woody stuff, they're in and out  in four weeks to eight weeks and it's not having that time.  If you're selling compost, is there some sort of regulation that deems this is what finished  compost must be?  
**[0:48:12-0:48:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:48:12):**  You can do whatever you want and call it compost.  What you have to do is there's certain inputs that can be called compost.  But you have to have pathogen reduction on it if you're thermophilic composting.  So they want to know that there's no E. coli salmonella serian in it.  They want to know a basic pH.  
**[0:48:38-0:48:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:48:38):**  They want to know what's in there.  And they want to know a very minor metals analysis.  And that's really the baseline of testing.  And I'm like, wow, that's just not a lot.  Which is I guess that's kind of similar to a lot of agriculture in a way.  
**[0:49:03-0:49:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:49:03):**  There's no standard to say what a tomato is or when an avocado is ready.  It comes down to knowing the company or knowing the grower or some are like, hey, we're picking  today.  These got to go to market.  And some are like, you know, these just aren't ready yet.  
**[0:49:17-0:49:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:49:17):**  They're not perfect.  We're not sending it until it's perfect.  Yeah.  And we've had that experience with our distributors.  We had one winter that was in Oregon, our stuff in the northwest, and it goes into Colorado  
**[0:49:33-0:49:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:49:33):**  and stuff.  We had freezes and rain that was so intense right around the holiday time and then into  the beginning of January that we had to literally take finished compost that was under covers  because the water table had risen so much and it was sucking back into the compost.  So I had to rent a bunch of barns from friends of mine around the area and we literally were  
**[0:50:00-0:50:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:50:00):**  hauling compost that became soaking wet again, finished.  To these barns, I put in giant industrial fans and we took our loaders over there and  we would turn this up all the time to get it to start to dry out again.  And man, that was, you know, but and I literally had to tell our distributors, I would shoot  them a picture and say, guys, this is a lot of finished compost and you're going to get  
**[0:50:26-0:50:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:50:26):**  it once the moisture content is where it needs to be and once I feel comfortable bagging  it and I'm sorry for the delay, but that's the way it is.  We're a farm based compost company.  What about that moisture content?  Is there a level that you think is right?  
**[0:50:42-0:50:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:50:42):**  And do you think there's potential exploitation of that?  I know most compost is not being sold by weight.  It's being sold by volume, but a lot of organic material expands when you get it wet.  So do you think that there's companies out there that maybe sell water in addition to  compost?  
**[0:51:01-0:51:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:51:01):**  No, I think what happens is like we'll get stuff, you know, you want to have stuff that's  27, 28, 30% moisture content, which is a really good question content.  But what happens is depending on how people take care of the compost at the distributors  and the nurseries, you know, if it's a wet time, you know, they leave the bags out there.  I'm always telling people, please cover the bags.  
**[0:51:28-0:51:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:51:28):**  Please cover your compost.  Don't leave it out there just sitting out there on pallets because it's going to absorb  moisture and we have little holes in the bags so that oxygen gets in there.  And the other thing too is it draws moisture from, so like some of my stores that are by  the coast, they literally are sucking moisture in all the time, you know, out of the atmosphere.  
**[0:51:53-0:52:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:51:53):**  So I think people would prefer that it stayed pretty standard on a compost because it makes  it tough for people to pick up bags, you know, and then there are times where people have  left it out there in the summertime where people ask me all the time, you know, is it  being in the sun going to kill the microbes in the compost?  And I'm like, if the bag's not going to get over 160 degrees, you're not going to kill  
**[0:52:20-0:52:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:52:20):**  the beneficial bacteria that's in there.  You're not going to kill it off.  But if at the same time it's out there and it's, you know, two or three weeks of 110  degrees or you're in Palm Springs, the moisture content can get to the point where you almost  have dust in there and at that point you can kill off biology big time.  
**[0:52:40-0:52:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:52:40):**  You know, one thing I think about when I think about the growing industry and I think the  cannabis trend has pushed this a lot is, and I'm envious of this as somebody who sells  stuff, is the marketing on the bags of products, of ag amendments is crazy.  Like all sorts of drawings, artwork.  I love it, but I also kind of hate it because there can be a lot of claims, puffery on there.  
**[0:53:10-0:53:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:53:10):**  Not everybody is going to be able to hear an interview with somebody who's the CEO of  a company like you, so they're not going to know what goes into making their compost.  If somebody's at a garden center or a hydroponic shop and you have a choice of soils and you  have a choice of potting mixes and compost, the bags can make it sound amazing and sound  great.  
**[0:53:31-0:53:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:53:31):**  How do you cut through the BS and really try and figure out if what is in the bag stands  up to what's written on the bag?  Well, that's a tough one, okay?  Because a lot of times it's the pretty bags, this, the, you know, farmer bill says, you  know, it's whatever.  
**[0:53:53-0:53:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:53:53):**  I always tell people in my classes, because we're in the information age, you know, and  I go, hey, how many of you guys are Googlers?  And they all raise their hand, right?  And I go, okay, so if you're all Googlers, and I, you know, even hate that I use that  term, but it's what it is.  
**[0:54:13-0:54:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:54:13):**  It's where we are, you know?  I tell people to research the companies that they want to buy stuff from and to not just  buy the initial stuff that pops up, but look kind of through there and see if there's anything  that either raises a red flag or that raises a flag where you go, wow, you know, maybe  this is a gold star, you know, and you just kind of go follow that a little bit.  
**[0:54:37-0:54:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:54:37):**  I tell people, you don't have to be a black belt in Googling right away.  But if you, the more you research what you're going to do, the better.  And you'll find those companies that you want to support and products that you believe in.  We've been very fortunate because we're pretty open about stuff.  And so we get a lot of people that direct message us, you know, or they'll direct message  
**[0:54:59-0:55:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:54:59):**  me on my own Instagram, you know, and my own Facebook.  And I answer, you know, and everybody in our company is very forthcoming with information.  And we do a lot of when we were able to, and hopefully once this is over, we'll get back  to it.  We do a lot of classes and we're out in the public lot.  
**[0:55:15-0:55:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:55:15):**  So we actually get to talk to people, which a lot of companies, and we do it in a way  where we're not trying to sell Malibu.  When I go to a nursery, I just don't have a bunch of bags of Malibu compost up behind  me and go like, here, buy my stuff.  Thank you for coming.  
**[0:55:28-0:55:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:55:28):**  It's been nice knowing you.  I'm there to talk about like what we're talking about.  Like what, you know, and if somebody says to me, well, I like using this soil product  and I've done it for years and I've had good results, you know, but I want to get away  from these chemical fertilizers.  
**[0:55:42-0:55:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:55:42):**  Like okay, so I look at that as an opportunity to not hammer somebody and preach my message,  but go, okay, let's try to see if I can bring this person a little bit further down the  organic line and then see if they have a good result with that.  And if they do, then maybe suggest a few more things.  And before you know it, they might be like me, a landscaper who used a lot of chemicals  
**[0:56:11-0:56:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:56:11):**  and fertilizers and stuff because that's what I was taught.  And when I got to the other side of it, I could never go back to that ever, you know.  So I think the more research we do, and a lot of times I also tell people too, because  this is an important piece to me, we've moved away from our intuition as a culture, as people.  We've moved away from that sense that we go, this is right, this is wrong.  
**[0:56:42-0:56:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:56:42):**  This doesn't sound good.  This feels right.  And I tell people, trust that a little bit more.  If you see something and it sounds too good to be true, then either do the research on  it, call the company up, send them a message, or just sit with it for a second.  
**[0:56:59-0:57:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:56:59):**  Put your hand on the bag, or put your hand on the stuff with the bags open and go, is  it?  Isn't it?  Do I really want this?  And make that decision.  
**[0:57:10-0:57:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:57:10):**  I think part of gardening and being in the soil and getting biology all over you, and  I love eating stuff without washing it in my garden and just getting that stuff in my  gut, you know.  We become, and it's funny, we're doing this on Skype, right, this interview, and we're  on computers.  
**[0:57:33-0:57:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:57:33):**  But I try to tell people, step back away from that and get back into who we really are,  you know, what we really are.  Yeah.  No, that's really well said.  I think that intuition part is huge.  
**[0:57:48-0:57:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:57:48):**  And I mean, here's something that comes out of my intuition is you're saying, you know,  a lot of people move from conventional to organic and they go from all these sprays  and they try and get more organic.  And I think there's a bit of a curse to that because you go in a nursery and good God,  there is a lot of products available.  
**[0:58:06-0:58:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:58:06):**  I mean, the cereal box style amendments, there's 50 of them on the shelf.  And I feel like people feel the need too much to just keep adding more and more stuff.  And you see it on bags of amendments where, oh, it's not compost, it's compost plus  mycorrhizae plus a little bit of biochar in there.  Plus there's some azomite and the list goes on and on and on.  
**[0:58:35-0:58:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:58:35):**  And I think people on the organic side get a little bit hooked on, I need 50 things to  grow.  And if I don't have this, then my soil is not going to be perfect.  And I think a lot of these problems can be solved with just good quality compost and  native soil and activating that biology.  
**[0:58:53-0:58:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:58:53):**  What are your thoughts on this being in the sector?  Do you think maybe there's too much promotion of stuff that while maybe needed for some  people in very specific contexts, isn't needed for most people in most contexts?  Yeah.  I mean, I look at that as kind of, all of us, I think, can become rain men, you know,  
**[0:59:17-0:59:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:59:17):**  like the movie Rain Man, like we could all like, you know, Wapner at three o'clock.  This is how we have to do it.  And we're told something and we hang out of that and want to do it forever.  And that may be, and even what you might need to do in the beginning to start to create  some fertility and to create some stuff while your soil is doing what it needs to do to  
**[0:59:39-0:59:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:59:39):**  get going.  But over time, I'll give you an example.  We consult on projects.  We get brought in a lot of times as consultants on soil consulting and on creating and setting  organic protocols.  
**[0:59:54-1:00:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:59:54):**  A lot of times for some really interesting sites we've had a chance to work on over the  years.  And I always do like a five-year plan with these guys where in the beginning, I may,  depending on how toxic things were or how bad the soil was, I might add some of those  things you were talking about and really do a bunch of compost teas that have a lot of  
**[1:00:18-1:00:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:00:18):**  different things in them to stimulate.  But what we do is it's based all on using the compost and based all on us starting to  teach these guys how to mimic nature.  And so in the five-year plan, our customers are buying a lot less compost from us and  buying a lot less stuff from us because they don't need it because when you start looking  
**[1:00:45-1:00:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:00:45):**  at their biological analysis of their properties, the soil is growing.  And if you feed that soil and if you continue to feed that soil and make good compost on  the property, then you can become much more self-sufficient.  And so my dad, who was a management consultant, probably would have said, like, what's wrong  with you?  
**[1:01:07-1:01:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:01:07):**  That's a really horrible business model to tell people that you're five.  They don't need as much of your stuff.  But that's the truth.  If we're mimicking nature, nature will start to take care of what's going on.  And you look at compost.  
**[1:01:21-1:01:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:01:21):**  I'm always talking about instead of adding a bunch of stuff, I just say, hey, why don't  you top dress with a sixteenth of an inch of a finished compost or your compost or my  compost or if you need a little bit more, go an eighth of an inch and then water it  in.  Every three weeks, I have people on their food gardens doing a compost tea where they  
**[1:01:43-1:01:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:01:43):**  basically do a compost tea extraction.  They don't have to aerate.  They don't have to do anything.  And basically, they're watering.  They're feeding their soil and they're feeding their plants at the same time.  
**[1:01:54-1:02:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:01:54):**  And I have people, when they have problems, we look at, we go from real basic stuff like  did you compost?  Did you do your tea?  Did you add nematodes into your soil mix when you started?  Did you, what's your watering schedule look like?  
**[1:02:12-1:02:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:02:12):**  How's your sun exposure?  How's your wind exposure?  Just start with the basics before adding all this stuff.  Keep it simple.  along the lines of like, if we're thinking insects in micro and macro flora in the soil,  
**[1:02:28-1:02:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:02:28):**  do you do any sort of microscope work with your finished compost?  Again, I get you probably don't want to label that on the bag because it's not a guaranteed  type thing.  But do you feel that that's important to know in the finished compost that there are X levels  of this, X levels of this, X levels of that?  
**[1:02:51-1:02:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:02:51):**  Absolutely.  We've been running biological analysis since day one.  And I think it's important.  In fact, my wife is a, she was in Elaine Ingham's first class.  She was the first soil food web consultant, one of the first I think in Los Angeles, there  
**[1:03:13-1:03:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:03:13):**  were two of them that were in that first class that Elaine did.  And yeah, we're very much about looking at that.  I think it's important to know.  And I think a lot of companies don't do it and they should, they should know what's in  there.  
**[1:03:27-1:03:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:03:27):**  But again, it's, I look at it more as a, I look at the whole true organic concept of  growing which includes biodynamic, biological farming, regenerative ag.  I look at a much more broad spectrum, so I don't think that the biological view is the  only view.  I think you want to look at the big picture instead of, you know, so, but I think it's  
**[1:03:53-1:03:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:03:53):**  an important component of that.  Yeah.  So biodynamics themselves, that can be a very polarizing form of agriculture.  Some people are diehard.  Some people think it's total woo woo.  
**[1:04:07-1:04:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:04:07):**  You sell biodynamic compost.  At the core, why did you feel that that was important?  Well I think, I think in life a lot of things are timing and where things are as you get  exposed to different things because none of us, you know, walk into the world and know  it all, right?  
**[1:04:30-1:04:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:04:30):**  And hopefully we're all learning as we progress over time.  You know, I always joke that in terms of my learning and growing and working and doing,  I have a retirement plan, it's called death, and I hope that I'm doing, you know, all these  things until I have, take my last breath, you know?  So I, biodynamics for us, Alan York was an important bridge to that for us.  
**[1:04:59-1:05:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:04:59):**  And when I saw his compost and then started to look a little bit deeper into biodynamics  and meet other biodynamic farmers, I was very interested because at that point in time,  it wasn't that well known in the United States except to, you know, the wine industry and  a couple of other places.  And I happened to meet a guy who became one of my co-founders of the company who grew  
**[1:05:23-1:05:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:05:23):**  up on a biodynamic farm on the East Coast.  And I found real value and then I met some farmers that we started making compost.  I started first before I met my partner at the time and I started making compost with  them on their farm in the Central Valley in California.  And I got to see an incredible process and I got to see that breakdown that became the  
**[1:05:53-1:05:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:05:53):**  impetus for us.  And using the preparations was a really interesting launch point for me in terms of another point  of growth.  So it's funny because I went to school in Los Angeles.  The guy that began the company with me, he went to a Waldorf school, was completely a  
**[1:06:23-1:06:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:06:23):**  biodynamic devotee.  I was much more that guy that was on the learning curve.  And so the impact on me was different than the impact was on him.  We just felt like it was the right thing to do.  And when we came out, it was right after when we launched our company.  
**[1:06:41-1:06:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:06:41):**  In fact, it was 11 years this week back on the night that we launched the company.  And it was right when the housing market had burst and the bubble had burst and people  were broke.  And it was a really crazy time if you remember back to that moment in time.  And people were saying to us, like, you're insane.  
**[1:07:03-1:07:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:07:03):**  Like, no one's going to buy biodynamic compost.  And at that point in time, I think stores were selling it for like 16 bucks a bag.  And they're like, no one's going to pay that.  No one's going to do that.  That's nuts.  
**[1:07:13-1:07:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:07:13):**  And we were like, thank you for sharing.  Our instinct told us differently and told us that it wasn't going to be an easy road.  But if you put it out there sometimes and it's the right moment in time, we met the  right investors for our company.  We all lined up.  
**[1:07:37-1:07:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:07:37):**  We were all from different places, but we all felt like there needed to be more than  just this kind of faux organic stuff that was out there.  And there needed to be something.  And that biodynamic was different enough and unique enough and disciplined enough that  it was an important thing to bring into our mix.  
**[1:08:01-1:08:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:08:01):**  And we always made the compost that way from day one.  So it's where our roots are in terms of this company.  It's where we started.  And it's allowed us access into a lot of other worlds by having something that has very sound,  fundamental principles besides the woo-woo aspects of it.  
**[1:08:27-1:08:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:08:27):**  But there's a lot of really good old school ancient stuff that's involved in it too.  Do you think that the process of making biodynamic is what's important to you all, like going  through that?  Or do you think it actually is the amendments themselves that make the product different?  I think it's both.  
**[1:08:54-1:08:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:08:54):**  I think the preparations are really important.  And I think composting the way we compost and the way we understand the material that  we're working with now and the purity of the inputs – which is funny to say when you're  dealing with an organic dairy cow manure, the purity of it.  But there's a truth to that.  
**[1:09:15-1:09:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:09:15):**  So I think we now know our material really well.  We know when we're putting the preps in, the timing of that.  And everybody's a little different on how they do that.  But we have – so part of what makes our compost unique to us is how we do it, is our  process.  
**[1:09:39-1:09:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:09:39):**  And I think there's a thing too that when you're making compost – I wrote a piece  on our website, on our blog called The Power of Compost.  And it describes one morning when I walk onto the farm at about 5 a.m. and I'm seeing the  heat rising off the compost and I'm literally looking out over acres of compost and I got  into a very quiet space.  
**[1:10:14-1:10:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:10:14):**  When you feel that biology, when you feel that life, when you feel and you're working  with a living soil and you get to experience that and then everybody who gets a bag – like  if you just have the compost that you have at your house and you just literally held  that compost in your hand for two or three minutes, just hold it, see how it feels, see  what you get from that.  
**[1:10:40-1:10:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:10:40):**  That experience on a huge level is what happened to me on that morning.  I just wanted to describe it for everybody, so I did.  But there's something about using living soil and there's something about being connected.  And so everybody that works in our company is like that.  And everybody gets to come into the company at different points in time and different  
**[1:11:05-1:11:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:11:05):**  points of their growth in their lives.  And I've seen people come in from kind of enamored with it or not really quite knowing  and then just getting into the reality of it and the reality of a living soil and whether  it's labeled biodynamic, regenerative, permaculture, whatever it is.  Even if I wasn't labeled biodynamic, I would still, in knowing what I do, I would still  
**[1:11:31-1:11:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:11:31):**  be using the biodynamic preparations in making any compost that I would make.  Yeah, and this is kind of in that gray area, I think, for a lot of gardeners and farmers.  I think a lot of us, we want the science, we want that, but then we also do have that  intuition, that sense of when you're doing something that you feel is important.  And I don't know that there's a right answer anywhere in there and I don't think anybody  
**[1:11:57-1:12:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:11:57):**  can pound the hammer and say, this is the right answer.  I think it's just got to fit in what you do.  You can't go overboard on one hand spending money on stuff if you're not sure it's not  going to work.  And at the same time, you don't want to starve your own kind of sense of exploration through  
**[1:12:14-1:12:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:12:14):**  this gardening and farming journey and not try things and do things that just kind of  resonate with you, whether they're fully effective or not.  And that's not to say that biodynamic isn't effective, but I think it does bridge that  gray area between science and something else where it feels right for some people and for  others it doesn't.  
**[1:12:37-1:12:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:12:37):**  And it's not breaking the bank or breaking your time bank for using it.  So if you like it and you believe in it and it keeps you happy gardening, I say, why not?  I agree.  I completely agree.  And for me, I think there's a lot of great things.  
**[1:12:57-1:13:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:12:57):**  Steiner's Course in Agriculture, that's the book that came out of his lectures.  It's a very interesting read.  It's a tricky read.  And for people that want to get more into it, it's there.  For people that just want to go like, hey, these guys make really good compost and my  
**[1:13:15-1:13:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:13:15):**  roses go insane every year when I compost with it and then use their compost tea.  And that's really all I want to know.  I just want to have beautiful.  And I'm okay either way.  It's nice to be in a situation where we can offer something that's different, offer something  
**[1:13:36-1:13:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:13:36):**  that's not run of the mill, offer something that I've had, literally I've taught now tens  of thousands of people at gardening classes.  And the responses I get back from people using the compost and when they first start using  compost tea and it makes them get closer to their soil and makes them become more observant  in their gardens and more observant on their small farms.  
**[1:14:04-1:14:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:14:04):**  That's what's, to me, is really awesome and fascinating and wonderful because then we  get closer, they get closer.  I get a lot of responses back about how people start to see that transition and that change  and what's good, what's tricky, but overall I've never really had anybody say to me, yeah,  I'm going to go back because I don't like your methods.  
**[1:14:34-1:14:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:14:34):**  I think compost tea is another one that's similar.  Some people are totally on board with that.  Some people say like, I don't want to touch that.  And I'm more lean towards, I see there's benefits to it.  Why did you guys decide to put a compost tea product together and why did you feel that  
**[1:14:52-1:14:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:14:52):**  that was necessary?  Well, for me, it happened, it made a lot of sense to me.  A couple of things happened.  When I was a little kid, my grandmother in New Jersey used to take compost at Dairy Cow  and put it into a bucket and let it soak overnight and she would feed her tomatoes.  
**[1:15:18-1:15:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:15:18):**  So I remembered that and then one of the people that taught me how to make compost in the  Central Valley, and it was a pretty long process, I had a landscape project that was a really  big, one of my last big landscape projects that was going on in Malibu.  And when I got onto this site, it was a three-acre parcel that had myoporam hedges all around  it and about a third of the myoporam hedge was dying and they were mature, big myoporam  
**[1:15:55-1:15:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:15:55):**  hedges.  And I was talking to one of the farmers one day, just as we were out on the weekend making  compost and doing stuff, and I was just saying, I got this hedge and it's like, I don't know,  I'm not really sure what I should do with this one, because to take it out and find  mature to match, to keep privacy hedge in that area is going to cost a fortune.  
**[1:16:18-1:16:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:16:18):**  And they told me, why don't you flush them with compost tea and then why don't you make  a tree paste, a biodynamic tree paste?  I was a neophyte in this thing at that point.  I'm like, okay, well, it's going to cost me a lot less money to try that to see what happens  than to go charge these customers to take those myoporam out and put a new hedge in  
**[1:16:47-1:16:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:16:47):**  and do that.  So we made tree paste and I made my first compost teas and we treated that hedge.  And it was probably two to three weeks and the dieback stopped.  And I was like, wow, that's interesting.  And we did another treatment a couple weeks after that and that myoporam hedge is still  
**[1:17:16-1:17:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:17:16):**  there today.  So I got to see it.  My first as an adult compost tea had a very dramatic effect that I could see with my own  eyes and so could the guys on my landscape crew.  They were thinking I was a little nuts, like maybe I'd gone off the reservation a little  
**[1:17:38-1:17:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:17:38):**  bit and I was like, what's this guy doing now?  What is he doing?  What is this crap we're putting out here?  And then they all became believers, just like I did.  That's a lot of things.  
**[1:17:51-1:17:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:17:51):**  And I was thinking gardening, right?  Like if you don't know a lot of it, if you're on the organic side and you're not spending  tons of money up front, it doesn't hurt to try, experiment and then see what types of  results you get and then make decisions based upon that going forward.  100%.  
**[1:18:10-1:18:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:18:10):**  100%.  And I always tell people, you can always go back.  You can always go back to what you were doing if you're not getting the results that you're  looking for or you don't see a change.  I happen to see a change and such a change, so profound that it's made me sell my landscape  
**[1:18:32-1:18:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:18:32):**  company and do Malibu compost because I felt like people needed to have this option, which  I don't think that they have had prior to us coming on.  And I think in good ways, I think we've been a disruptor from master gardeners to other  soil companies to all kinds of stuff.  For me to just say, hey, all I do is use compost and compost tea and occasionally some minerals  
**[1:19:12-1:19:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:19:12):**  and people are like, that's it?  I'm like, that's it.  That's what I do.  And they're like, but how can that work?  I'm like, well, it does.  
**[1:19:23-1:19:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:19:23):**  I'm mimicking nature.  Compost tea to me is like you have all this leaf litter and stuff drop and the little  animals come by and poop and pee and then it rains and then you've got all this stuff  that's broken down in terms of leaf litter and leaf mold and that stuff below that seeps  into the soil, seeps into the root level, into the rhizosphere and those plants out  
**[1:19:49-1:19:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:19:49):**  in the forest, out in the savanna, out wherever, absorb it.  So to me, a compost tea drench of an extract is a really simple, not stressful form of  biomimicry in a sense.  To me, it makes a lot of sense, as does composting.  It just makes a lot of sense to me.  
**[1:20:14-1:20:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:20:14):**  That's kind of what happened 8,000 years ago is that the first people to use fertilizer,  it was manure because when they started herding animals, they started to see where that manure  was dropped and they started to see fertility of soil because they had crops increase out  of those old ancient cereal crops and stuff like that were growing better where the animals  and naturally where the animals had been herded.  
**[1:20:47-1:20:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:20:47):**  And that was the whoa, the aha moment for civilization, I guess, in that time.  And from a product differentiation standpoint, so you sell compost tea like a little kit  along with bagged compost itself.  If I buy a bag of your compost and I make tea with it, am I doing anything different  than what I would get in the kit or is a kit just a more convenient option for some people?  
**[1:21:14-1:21:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:21:14):**  Well, the compost tea bags come four in a coffee sleeve.  They come four tea bags.  They're little organic cotton muslin bags.  You drop each bag into five gallons of water, let them soak overnight, and then you give  them a squeeze and a stir.  
**[1:21:33-1:21:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:21:33):**  I look at it this way.  Compost itself and composting and applying compost is much more to me like a, it's much  more of the slow release and slow breakdown where the biology is breaking that stuff down  and bringing it into the soil.  Whereas when you take a compost tea and make a compost tea, you are literally re-inoculating  
**[1:22:01-1:22:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:22:01):**  the soil with that biology.  So you're feeding it, but you're also at root level getting your nutrients at root level  for a tea.  So, with a compost tea versus other types of liquid fertilizers, a lot of that stuff  flushes right through.  
**[1:22:19-1:22:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:22:19):**  If it's not uptaken by the plant, it gets flushed through, right?  With a compost tea, because it's basically humus suspended in liquid and lots of tons  of biology, lots of organic matter in there, it actually holds in the soil.  It actually either is taken up or a lot of it feeds other microbes in the soil or some  of it is used in that microscopic particulate as another food source for bacteria in the  
**[1:22:47-1:22:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:22:47):**  soil.  I love compost tea because of that and I love simple teas.  We do, so that's why we made our products where you don't have to aerate on the compost  tea.  You don't have to do anything.  
**[1:22:59-1:23:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:22:59):**  You throw a teabag in a bucket.  I always do that like it's going to be my great reveal when I'm at my gardening classes  for the new beginner gardeners where I'm going, I know most of you haven't used a compost  tea.  I'm going to show you how to do it.  
**[1:23:14-1:23:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:23:14):**  It's really hard, but just follow me.  I take a five gallon bucket of water and I open a coffee sleeve and I take a teabag out  and I drop it and I go, there you go.  They're like, that's it?  That's it.  
**[1:23:30-1:23:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:23:30):**  I think, again, it is part of the toolkit.  Experiment with it.  Use it.  Somebody can easily make that at home and do good things with their soil.  Another product that you guys sell is potting mix.  
**[1:23:44-1:23:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:23:44):**  I know this is really important to a lot of growers.  They get a cult following around a lot of potting mixes.  When it comes to a seed starting mix, what do you think is really important to have in  there?  Okay.  
**[1:24:00-1:24:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:24:00):**  Well, we make a seed starter.  It's our newest product.  It's a brand new product for us that started... It launched in February and got into the  stores right as this whole thing happened.  Our seed starter is really simple.  
**[1:24:18-1:24:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:24:18):**  It's basically a mixture of peat and of coir.  It's got 25% compost in it and it's got some really small perlite in it.  And it's a really good airy light mix.  And the compost, which most seed starters don't have that in it, have any kind of real  compost or casting in it.  
**[1:24:48-1:24:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:24:48):**  What it does is it helps hold moisture and it also... So it helps germinate.  And then once it germinates, you actually have, in a very natural way, a way for those  little tiny roots to start to absorb stuff that it needs, whatever it needs to absorb.  So we've had a really incredible result with it.  We've been making it for several years.  
**[1:25:11-1:25:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:25:11):**  It's finally in a bag.  It's also great as a microgreen grow.  So I've got a bunch of microgreen growers that grow on a big scale that we've been using  that mix for some time.  I grow a lot of microgreens at home here.  
**[1:25:24-1:25:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:25:24):**  And it's different from the potting soil because with the potting soil, what we did is... Our  potting soil, we were asked to go to create a super clean organic potting mix for Electronic  Arts who shared a campus with Google up in South San Francisco because they were taking  down... The landscapers were taking down a bunch of different stuff and creating kitchen  gardens.  
**[1:25:49-1:25:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:25:49):**  So we created that mix.  So we wanted to have something that was true organic, non-GMO, biodynamic, and that had  none of the usual suspects or as few as possible in terms of soil mixes.  So we didn't have the bone meal, the blood meal, the feather meal, none of the stuff  that we don't believe in.  
**[1:26:11-1:26:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:26:11):**  And what we have in there is a really clean mix that gets tested all the time and it's  a really effective mix.  That potting soil mix was designed to grow food and it grows food really well.  You can adjust that for other types of crops.  You can adjust that.  
**[1:26:30-1:26:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:26:30):**  I grow roses in it.  I grow fruit trees in it.  I grow all kinds of stuff in it.  And a lot of people grow cannabis in it.  And depending on... They may add a little bit more perlite.  
**[1:26:39-1:26:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:26:39):**  They may... Or pumice or whatever their strains or whatever they're doing.  So it's a good mix that is a standalone mix.  But it's one of those ones where I tell people all the time, you got to start feeding depending  on what you're growing.  It's not something where you're just going to put water on it and let it go for six months  
**[1:27:02-1:27:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:27:02):**  or eight months or a year because it's going to lose its efficacy and you need to help  that out.  You need to help the soil out.  It's a good start potting soil.  Right.  
**[1:27:15-1:27:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:27:15):**  And I'm looking at the ingredients of that one online.  That's Baby Boo's Biodynamic Blend potting soil.  And that's a mix of coir, compost, the perlite, worm casting, soybean meal, fish meal, bone  meal, fish bone meal, alfalfa meal, crab meal.  So you are getting nutrients in that compost.  
**[1:27:35-1:27:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:27:35):**  They're just not coming from those CAFO operation type sources.  Yep.  And what you're doing in there is you have, we created this mix, you have a really good,  strong, diverse mix of natural fertilizers and the compost in a good media.  And it gets everything off to a great start.  
**[1:27:59-1:28:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:27:59):**  Or if you're repotting stuff, it's got something right away.  Boom.  Like when we repot fruit trees or roses or whatever in them that are in containers, they  link to it immediately.  But it's one of those things where then I tell people like, great, I love that you're  
**[1:28:15-1:28:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:28:15):**  using Baby Boo's.  And now you've got to start top dressing with the sixteenth of an inch, an eighth of an  inch of compost.  You've got to start running compost teas.  You need to keep, especially when you're looking at things in a container or a raised bed,  
**[1:28:30-1:28:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:28:30):**  we have to help play the part of nature when we're doing that.  Because it's not like, my raised beds have a dirt bottom, so I've got a lot of biology  in there.  But when you first start them, it doesn't just happen in one second.  You have to build that.  
**[1:28:47-1:28:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:28:47):**  But when you're growing, like when I grow my potatoes or other things that I grow just  in containers, I have to be that person that's conscious about what would happen in nature  and what do I do.  And so by top dressing with compost, by top giving and running a tea, I'm in a really  natural way and gentle way and not stressful way, giving the plant, giving the soil what  
**[1:29:13-1:29:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:29:13):**  it needs.  And it makes the Baby Boo's.  One of the things that was really funny about the Baby Boo's, we got a letter from a very  big, the contractor on that site, a world famous landscape contractor.  We got a letter from one of the vice presidents from their office in San Francisco that wrote  
**[1:29:32-1:29:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:29:32):**  back glowing reviews on the product.  But he said, one of the things that was the most interesting thing about this was that  most soils were having to come back in and fill up with a lot of soil in every four,  six, eight months because of what we were talking about with having all the wood chips  and stuff in there.  
**[1:29:53-1:29:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:29:53):**  With this stuff, basically if you're top dressing with the compost and running the teas, the  shrinkage factor, the breakdown factor is so much more natural.  And he said, granted that your product was a little bit more expensive than other things  we've used, but in the long run, what you told us is true.  It's not more expensive.  
**[1:30:18-1:30:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:30:18):**  For a lot of growers who are out there looking to buy your compost or seed starting mix,  potting mix, is the only way to get it in bags at nurseries?  Can you buy in bulk?  Can you get totes of it delivered, anything like that?  Yeah.  
**[1:30:33-1:30:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:30:33):**  We don't do bulk, but we do totes.  We have two cubic yard super sacks totes that are available.  We sell the potting soil and the compost in those as well.  We have the one cubic foot bags of compost, the one and a half cubic foot bags of potting  soil.  
**[1:30:50-1:30:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:30:50):**  A lot of people buy the pallet.  A lot of places will give you deals on pallets.  A lot of people, the deal is the best price is on the totes.  We don't do for the stores and soil yards, we don't put our stuff out there for bulk  because you can really lose all the hard work you put into making that by having it put  
**[1:31:16-1:31:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:31:16):**  out in a place where it could get cross contaminated.  It could be sitting out in the sun on an asphalt soil yard with all kinds of crap blowing into  it and weed seeds blowing into it and all kinds of stuff.  We try to just bag up what we make.  We have some vineyards and some other places that we make compost for that we will come  
**[1:31:50-1:31:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:31:50):**  in and we'll truck out to them right to the vineyard and they're putting it right out.  But other than that, we really don't do bulk.  And for the sling bags, what's your delivery range on that?  Well, we have distributors all over the country and so each of them carry it.  So it just depends on some of them will go through their stores and other of them actually  
**[1:32:21-1:32:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:32:21):**  are stores that are distributors too.  So it just depends on who you're buying it from.  You can always go online on our store locator and see who's got us.  And if there's an issue or you have a question, we get thousands of questions every week on  our website and we respond.  
**[1:32:39-1:32:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:32:39):**  So people can look for that at malibucompost.com.  To start to close this one out, what's one takeaway that you want a listener or watcher  to have when it comes to compost?  I would say that when you're using a compost, go out there and get the best compost you  can get.  
**[1:33:11-1:33:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:33:11):**  Make compost at home.  Realize that it is, in my opinion, and now I've been doing this for a long part of my  life, 40 years of my life I've been doing this.  It's in my opinion the most important thing that you can add or that you can do in terms  of maintaining your garden.  
**[1:33:33-1:33:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:33:33):**  Good compost and in my opinion great compost.  It's the home run.  It's the grand slam.  It makes all the difference in the world.  And don't think, oh, this is expensive because my grandmother used to say to me all the time,  
**[1:33:55-1:33:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:33:55):**  you get what you pay for.  And she's pretty much right.  I've learned over time that if I want something that's good, I generally buy the thing that's  good.  And usually it costs a little bit more than the next one or the next one down.  
**[1:34:09-1:34:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:34:09):**  But the one that's good is the one that lasts.  And I've found that with my tools.  I've found that with vehicles.  I've found that with tractors we've bought.  I've certainly found that with compost.  
**[1:34:22-1:34:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:34:22):**  I don't cheap out.  I've learned my lesson as we all have, I hope in life, or you learned that lesson because  when I cheap out, I just don't get what I need.  And when you go ahead and use that good compost, then the compost, the things that you can  do from it at home when you're making your own stuff, you get the benefit of that.  
**[1:34:46-1:34:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:34:46):**  And I know just from talking to you, you are not just all here to sell compost.  You're also a big advocate for people to make their own compost.  And one of the reasons you started the companies is sometimes people just can't make enough  or a farm can't make enough, but you're not somebody who's saying just buy ours.  You also want people to make their own.  
**[1:35:04-1:35:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:35:04):**  I want people to be self-sufficient.  I want people to be in the soil.  I want people to, if they want, don't get me wrong, if they need compost, I want people  to buy Malibu compost.  And that's why we work as hard as we do and we're as diligent as we are and we're as careful  
**[1:35:23-1:35:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:35:23):**  and we're as conscious as we are about what we're making and that anybody that buys us,  I have a huge level of gratitude to the people that buy our stuff.  When I walk into a store, I walk into, let's say, Walter Anderson's nursery in San Diego  and I see Malibu compost sitting there on a stack and sitting there on a pallet.  I always, to this day, get this overwhelming feeling of like, wow.  
**[1:35:57-1:36:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:35:57):**  And it's not about wow, like, well, Randy, look what you did, or wow, Randy, you and  your guys are just so awesome.  It's just, wow, like we're part of something that's bigger than us and we're getting to  hopefully give a little bit of what we believe to people so that maybe they can give it to  somebody else.  
**[1:36:21-1:36:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:36:21):**  That's the beauty, I think, of living where we live is that you can vote with your wallet.  You can support companies and people who are doing their best for you.  And I always look at it like I do that and then the people out there, whatever it is  that we've done and Malibu compost has done, the return that we've gotten is so far greater.  And I'm not talking about money, I'm talking about the return of love and of support and  
**[1:36:52-1:36:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:36:52):**  of kindness and of community.  I could have never guessed this when we started in a million years.  I could have never guessed it.  It's really cool.  You know, you never see the ripple effects of this splash that you make sometimes.  
**[1:37:08-1:37:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:37:08):**  And that's cool.  I mean, thinking of the composting business, I took a PDC.  I don't know if you have one of the things that like everybody who comes out of a PDC,  like the most common business model that people want to start when it comes to permaculture  is they want to start a composting business.  
**[1:37:23-1:37:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:37:23):**  And I've talked to a lot of growers who live in areas of the south and the northeast where  they can't find either a local source of compost or a good local source of compost.  What advice would you have for somebody who wants to start a local composting business  and try and do it better than some of the big soil yards?  You got to stay convicted because I can tell you one thing.  
**[1:37:58-1:38:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:37:58):**  When you go up against the big guys, you're going up against some multinational global  corporations and they're big and they don't want you to succeed.  And you're going to run into all kinds of pitfalls and you have to be convicted with  what you're doing.  You have to have conviction.  
**[1:38:20-1:38:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:38:20):**  You have to believe in your heart that what you're doing is the best thing and it's the  right course of action.  And you can't let people turn you away or switch your mind.  I've had so many people over the 11 years that we've had Malibu Compass say to me,  well, why don't you guys do this?  
**[1:38:38-1:38:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:38:38):**  Or why don't you guys do that?  Why don't you add food waste from restaurants into your stuff?  And it's like we do what we do and we do what we do very well and we don't want to do that  because that's not our wheelhouse.  And we've had some rough times with weather, governmental control, other companies who  
**[1:39:08-1:39:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:39:08):**  like to see you get hit by a bus.  You know, and you have to really stand in that pocket.  It's kind of like, I don't know if you surf, but I know a lot of people can see the visualization  of surfing.  I grew up surfing.  
**[1:39:26-1:39:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:39:26):**  And when you surf big waves or you surf waves of let's say over 10 or 15 feet and they're  pretty big and all of a sudden you're paddling to catch that wave, all of a sudden there's  a tug and you have to go.  Once you're tugged into that wave, you're either going to stand up and go down that  wave and surf that wave or it's going to suck you over the falls.  
**[1:39:49-1:39:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:39:49):**  And if you're over a coral reef or a rock reef or who knows, bad stuff can happen.  So you got to commit.  So if you're going to start a compost company, you better be prepared to surf a lot of 20  foot waves.  Right.  
**[1:40:04-1:40:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:40:04):**  All in.  Well, here's another thing.  And we kind of talked about this briefly yesterday.  And I think this is applicable to a lot of growers out there.  You do what you do well.  
**[1:40:13-1:40:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:40:13):**  Most growers listening to this are trying to grow a premium product.  Maybe that's livestock, maybe that's veg.  They're not conventional.  They're not the ones selling it at a discount.  I have faced this problem.  
**[1:40:23-1:40:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:40:23):**  I know growers face this problem.  When you have a premium product, sometimes the tendency can be like, my competitor charges  $10 for a two cubic foot bag.  We charge 15, like maybe I should be charging 13.  And then you go to the bookkeeping side and you look at the numbers for 13 and you're  
**[1:40:45-1:40:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:40:45):**  like, that's not sustainable for us as a business.  They're doing things differently at 10 than I'm doing things, how I'm doing things.  I have to charge 15.  How do you, or how did you reconcile having the conviction to charge what you needed to  charge being a premium product, knowing that you're more expensive probably than a lot  
**[1:41:06-1:41:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:41:06):**  of your competitors, yet at the same time knowing that this is what you have to charge  to be profitable now and to stay in business and get bigger long term?  That is probably one of the best questions I've ever been asked.  Thank you.  If you're going to be in business and you make something or you grow something that  
**[1:41:31-1:41:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:41:31):**  you believe in, then you have to be paid for your work and your employees have to be paid  for their work and the people that are expecting your product to be on the shelves or the distributors  that are expecting to have their product there to take to market, it has to be there.  And so you have to charge for that.  And there is a value for that.  
**[1:41:53-1:41:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:41:53):**  And you have to look at what are your actual costs.  So we're very realistic about this.  So we look at what are our cost of goods.  We look at what is a correct margin for us to be running so that our investors get a  return on their investment, the people that work here get paid what their worth, what  
**[1:42:13-1:42:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:42:13):**  their value is to be paid.  And that's a fair value.  Nobody in our company is driving around in a $200,000 car or I'm not going to leave here  today and get on my helicopter and fly up to the farm in California.  When I go to the farm in California from where I live in Thousand Oaks, I get in my car and  
**[1:42:38-1:42:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:42:38):**  I have a Prius.  I love my car.  This is my third Prius.  And not to make a statement, but just I love the car.  It works, it functions.  
**[1:42:49-1:42:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:42:49):**  I've had other kinds of cars.  I don't need that.  I like what I, you know, it functions for me.  But we charge a fair price and we're not afraid to charge it.  And we're not afraid.  
**[1:43:04-1:43:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:43:04):**  We just did.  When I get off this interview, I'm about to do a talk to a national distributor and all  their reps because we have a virtual trade show coming up because the normal trade show  is closed because of the coronavirus situation.  I've raised my prices this year on several things because last year we were having problems  
**[1:43:28-1:43:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:43:28):**  with oil.  So we try to use as little plastic as possible.  There's prices in that.  We had upticks in freight charges.  There's a cost of doing business that generally goes up.  
**[1:43:44-1:43:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:43:44):**  We don't always hit that.  We don't raise our prices a lot.  This year I raised our prices a little bit.  And I'm not in fear in doing that.  I know it's the right thing and I know it's the truth.  
**[1:43:55-1:44:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:43:55):**  And so when you come out to people and you're just honest about it and you're forthright  and you tell the truth, and I have no problem telling people, hey, you want the best compost  in a bag out there in America?  Go get a bag of Booz Blunt.  And that's not a sales pitch, guys.  
**[1:44:15-1:44:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:44:15):**  That's what I use.  And that's what I have used on thousands and thousands of thousands of acres with great  results.  And so don't be afraid.  I'm a person of faith.  
**[1:44:35-1:44:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:44:35):**  I have faith.  A lot of people don't.  Whatever people's beliefs are, okay, I believe in God.  There's a thing that I believe is you can either be in faith or you can be in fear,  but you cannot be in both of those places at the same time.  
**[1:44:51-1:44:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:44:51):**  I try to stay in faith as much as I can.  Yeah.  And I think a lot of that is somebody's going to come up to you and say, Randy, that bag  is too expensive.  You're crazy.  
**[1:45:01-1:45:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:45:01):**  Like if that was $8 a bag, I'd buy it all day.  But at 15, I'm not going to touch it.  And you have to be strong enough in yourself and your own convictions and knowing what  you do to say, okay, that's your opinion.  This isn't right for you.  
**[1:45:18-1:45:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:45:18):**  Try something else, but we're always here if you want to come back.  And I've had to do that.  And you, you know, it sounds to me like you have that same experience because I literally  have said to guys, okay, you know, I mean, I don't, I don't need everybody on the planet  to buy a bag of Malibu compost.  
**[1:45:34-1:45:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:45:34):**  You know, if you, if you're looking for something that's going to help you grow a true organic  garden, it's there, it's available for you.  If you're looking for ways to stretch it or extend it or use teas or, you know, you're  on a fixed budget, you need to work on how do I transition this garden, reach out, reach  out to me.  
**[1:45:54-1:46:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:45:54):**  We try to help people, you know, achieve success, you know, and sometimes it's little baby steps  and sometimes it's big, you know, boom, I'm jumping off the cliff with you guys.  You know, and I, you know, I've had that experience a lot of times where people are like, oh,  you know, and I go, you know, I know.  And a lot of times in my classes I will, I say to people like, so when you start organic,  
**[1:46:17-1:46:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:46:17):**  true organic, it's going to cost you more money in the, in the, in the very outset.  But over time you're not going to be using a lot of the stuff that you've been buying  for years.  And all of a sudden when you look at year two or three or four, your cost starts to  drop and you go, wow, that crazy guy that taught that class, he actually told me the  
**[1:46:38-1:46:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:46:38):**  truth.  That's the truth.  And I said, and you know, I say like, and if you, if you're looking for ways to save  money, you're looking for ways to be able to afford this, you know, how many, you know,  soy chai lattes do we need?  
**[1:46:53-1:47:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:46:53):**  How many, you know, there's always somewhere, especially in our culture where, you know,  are in America where pretty much most people, I mean, that are, and I'm not saying people  that are, I mean, we donate a lot of product to people that don't have money or don't have  enough income to be able to afford a product like ours.  We work with the Edible Schoolyard Foundation.  
**[1:47:17-1:47:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:47:17):**  We do a lot of things like that.  But for people that are working and they're trying to grow a garden and are looking to  buy products, you know, I tell people like, I look at like, am I wasting money here?  Is this something that I should be, you know, using somewhere else, channeling this, you  know, this money that I've been giving to, you know, a coffee place or this or that?  
**[1:47:38-1:47:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:47:38):**  Not that there's anything bad with having a cup of coffee or hanging out with your friends  or a drink or whatever, you know, that's okay.  But sometimes we, you know, sometimes we get into habits, we get habitual and, you know,  and I find myself going like, wow, I just spent, you know, $300, you know, in the last  two months at this place.  
**[1:47:55-1:47:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:47:55):**  Like, do I need to do that?  You know, like you don't have to do it all at once.  Yeah, exactly.  Well, a lot of great insight in this one.  I want to thank you for sharing your time today to talk about your company and thank  
**[1:48:10-1:48:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:48:10):**  you for doing all the work that you're doing to help growers and gardeners out there grow  better products and make an impact on the industry.  So thanks again, Randy.  Really appreciate it, Diego.  Thank you.  
**[1:48:21-1:48:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-10-RandyRitchie-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:48:21):**  Keep up the great work.  Thanks.  