### In Search of Soil  (2020-00-11)
**[0:00:00-0:00:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:00:00):**  So, we meet again.  Compost tea.  What is it and is it as valuable as people claim it to be?  When you look at farming and gardening, one thing that gets consistently hyped to the  absolute max is compost tea.  
**[0:00:37-0:00:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:00:37):**  It's promoted as a panacea, a cure-all, a be-all, end-all that can do so many miracle  things to plants.  Yet is it true?  Today we're going to try and answer that question and many more.  To do that, I'm being joined by my guest, Troy Hinke.  
**[0:00:54-0:00:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:00:54):**  My experience and what I've heard from other people is that normally their first application  of compost tea, they will notice possibly a drastic difference or some slight variations  that they can notice.  But then upon further applications of teas, there won't be as drastic of a difference.  Troy is somebody who's worked with Dr. Elaine Ingram, he's worked at the Rodale Institute,  
**[0:01:18-0:01:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:01:18):**  and now he runs a biological consulting and services firm called Living Roots Compost  Tea.  Today we're going to take compost tea and try and bubble off most of the hype and try  and distill it down to reality.  What can you actually use compost tea for?  
**[0:01:34-0:01:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:01:34):**  Why is it beneficial and how can you make it?  If you enjoy this episode and you want to learn more about compost tea, then be sure  to check out Troy's brand new podcast series called What's Brewing?  That show debuts this Friday and I'll link to that below.  Now let's jump right into it with Troy Hinke of Living Roots Compost Tea.  
**[0:01:57-0:01:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:01:57):**  This is In Search of Soil.  And Troy, one of the things I wanted to start out with is this topic that keeps coming up  over and over in a lot of the interviews and people I talk to is around compost and it  involves the quality of compost.  How can somebody who makes their own compost, purchases in their own compost, evaluate the  
**[0:02:20-0:02:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:02:20):**  quality of that when they want to use it either as compost or in a tea, which we'll eventually  get to in this interview?  Right.  I mean, the best way is going to be with a microscope.  I understand that most people are not going to have a microscope, but I focused strictly  
**[0:02:38-0:02:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:02:38):**  on the biology in compost and compost tea soils.  Any compost that I'm looking at, I'm trying to see, has it got good bacteria, good fungi,  nematodes, protozoa, and wanting to see quality-wise just strictly on the biology.  So to me, a good compost is going to have all characters of the soil food web.  I mean, just kind of using your naked eye when you're looking at a compost from a compost  
**[0:03:12-0:03:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:03:12):**  facility, I would say just in general, most large-scale compost facilities are not necessarily  going to be making that great of compost because they're focusing on waste reduction more than  a quality compost.  They're trying to focus on taking a waste product and breaking it down for someone on  a super large scale and when you're on that large of a scale, it's kind of hard to focus  
**[0:03:43-0:03:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:03:43):**  on quality.  I'm not saying that everyone doesn't focus on quality.  I just haven't come across many companies that are very large that make great compost  biologically speaking.  But if you get a compost, you want to be looking for various degrees of decomposition in the  
**[0:04:06-0:04:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:04:06):**  material.  There may be some wood chips, but you have to think of those wood chips if you've got  good biology there.  They're going to be like a slow release fertilizer because they're going to be broken down over  time and bacteria and fungi are going to eat away at it.  
**[0:04:21-0:04:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:04:21):**  They're going to hold those microorganisms, hold the nutrients inside themselves until  a predator comes along and eats them or they die and are then made available.  The nutrients inside of them are then made available to plants to take up the nutrients.  So if you notice you've got a compost with a lot of chunks in it, then it either hasn't  fully gone through the composting process or there may not be a lot of good biology  
**[0:04:51-0:04:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:04:51):**  there to be breaking it down.  It's really hard to tell what the naked eye is, but I usually look for signs in my own  piles of are things turning into humus more quickly?  Have I got mycelium from saprophytic fungi on different pieces of wood chunks that are  in there?  
**[0:05:13-0:05:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:05:13):**  So for people who aren't familiar with what mycelium looks like, if you ever go for a  hike in the forest and you lift up some of the leaf litter or some sticks or something  like that and you see white strands on the bottom of a stick or leaves, that's mycelium  and it's from saprophytic fungi, which is fungi that breaks down dead or decaying matter.  So in your compost pile, if you notice these mycelium, you know that you've got good fungi  
**[0:05:44-0:05:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:05:44):**  going in there and you should have some good bacteria going in there.  It's a matter of having all the characters though because if we do have just bacteria  and fungi in a soil or in compost without getting into a lengthy explanation, they are  the first decomposers.  So on mainly green, easy to consume tissues, bacteria are going to consume those and then  
**[0:06:10-0:06:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:06:10):**  more brown woody tissue, fungi is going to feed on those.  If you've got bacteria and fungi, you've got those things broken down, but all those nutrients  from that organic matter are then held in the bacteria and fungi.  But in order to get those nutrients and minerals to plants and into soils, we need their predators  to come along and be able to eat them and release those nutrients in a plant available  
**[0:06:33-0:06:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:06:33):**  form.  So that's the reason we need all the characters, not just bacteria and fungi.  So we need to focus on building up all characters of the food web.  I think one misconception around compost or really any amendments is the plant is going  in and mining nutrients out of those amendments.  
**[0:06:55-0:06:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:06:55):**  The root is tapping into that compost and absorbing some.  I think there probably is some liquid transfer there.  If water goes down and leaches through, it's going to absorb that into the root.  But really the function of this compost, these amendments are you are feeding the organisms.  The organisms are consuming that compost.  
**[0:07:17-0:07:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:07:17):**  They're then consuming each other and that poop, the excrement and the dead bodies is  what the plant can access.  Correct.  Yeah.  So for billions of years before humans were around on planet earth, plants and microorganisms  
**[0:07:33-0:07:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:07:33):**  have had symbiotic relationships where plants through photosynthesis, they create lots of  energy and then they release carbohydrates, sugars, proteins into the soil that are foods,  they're exudates that they're shedding off through their roots as they grow into the  soil like you're talking about.  And they're feeding the microorganisms in the soil to bring those populations in.  
**[0:07:59-0:08:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:07:59):**  So if you, as humans, if we want to make friends, was one of the ways that we make friends.  We invite people over for food or go out to eat with someone.  So plants put out food to bring in microorganisms and then it's a matter of that symbiotic relationship  of the microorganisms being present in the rhizosphere then.  So then when they are consumed, the plant is able to take up those nutrients.  
**[0:08:26-0:08:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:08:26):**  And the chemistry behind the plant taking up the nutrients is a bit beyond my knowledge.  I don't have a chemistry background so I'm not able to explain that is what I'm trying  to say.  One thing you mentioned is a lot of times in municipalities, the goal is reduction of  size and quickly they're moving through a lot of volume and maybe that's sacrificing  
**[0:08:48-0:08:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:08:48):**  on quality.  Somebody could also do that on a home scale.  They might just be doing a composting method that's moving things along too fast and not  allowing the diversity of organisms and the population of that diversity to really proliferate.  Where's a mistake of large scale composting that we want to make sure we avoid on the  
**[0:09:11-0:09:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:09:11):**  small scale to end up with a quality product?  Well usually with a large scale compost facility, they've got so much real estate that they  can use that they're trying to make compost on and they're trying to make compost and  get it out the door to make money.  So they need that land to be able to make more compost.  
**[0:09:32-0:09:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:09:32):**  So normally in my experience from things I've seen, experience with people like getting  compost deliveries and stuff like that, you can see on Instagram somebody gets a large  delivery of compost and they're super excited but you see it steaming.  Well if the compost is steaming, it's obviously hotter than the air temperature and compost  is finished when it's at ambient temperature.  
**[0:09:57-0:10:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:09:57):**  So whatever the temperature is outside, it should be close to that within like 20 degrees  or so.  So the issue is that larger facilities are, it's not that they're getting it to break  down too fast, it's that they're composting it but then getting out the door before it's  actually aged and matured.  
**[0:10:21-0:10:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:10:21):**  So you've still got hot compost that's breaking down and it has the potential to harm plants  if you were to not dilute it down into a potting soil or something like that and it still could  cause issues then possibly.  But yeah, the main issue with large scale facilities is that and then whatever starting  materials that they're using may have some detrimental effects because they might just  
**[0:10:49-0:10:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:10:49):**  kind of be throwing anything in there.  On a home scale, so to kind of compare that to a home scale, it's really a matter of getting  a good mixture of feedstock.  So whatever you're putting into your compost pile, you want to have a good diversity of  that so you're getting a good diversity of microorganisms.  
**[0:11:09-0:11:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:11:09):**  You know, you're gonna have certain microorganisms on a banana peel, certain microorganisms on  a piece of lettuce, other types of microorganisms and species on a stick and a leaf.  So it's a matter of getting a diversity of that in your compost pile at home.  And then focusing on the management.  So like when I was working at Rodale with Elaine, we were trying to set the organic  
**[0:11:38-0:11:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:11:38):**  regulations to meet organic regulations for compost, you have to turn five times within  15 days and maintain a temperature over 131 degrees Fahrenheit.  Well, with that management practice, you know, you could have someone who goes out and is  checking their temperatures every day but they might be lazy or they might be too busy  to turn a pile or it might have rained and they can't get out into a muddy area where  
**[0:12:10-0:12:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:12:10):**  they're able to turn their compost.  And then they're turning five times, you know, the last five days of the 15 days that they're  maintaining those high temps, they're turning once every day.  So we were focusing on at Rodale, we were working on trying a turning according to temperature,  where your management practices are focused on the biology rather than just meeting regulations.  
**[0:12:39-0:12:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:12:39):**  So like turning according to temperature, you don't want to get above 161 degrees because  at 160 degrees, I don't know why I said 160 degrees or 165 and higher, the heat is coming  from microorganisms that are reproducing and eating.  So just like when we eat and reproduce, we create heat, that's where the heat in the  pile comes from.  
**[0:13:05-0:13:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:13:05):**  So when you're at 160 degrees, you've got a lot going on, you know, biology-wise in  a pile.  And at that point, the oxygen is being used up at such a rapid rate that the pile is going  to most likely go anaerobic on the inside.  And once you go anaerobic, you get anaerobic microorganisms which could start creating  
**[0:13:28-0:13:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:13:28):**  phenols and alcohols and things that are going to be detrimental to plants.  So when we're turning according to temperature, we want to get up above 131 degrees and then  turn if you were to hit 160, 165 degrees to get air back into that material.  Or if you notice a drop in temperature, if you were maintaining 145 degrees for like  three days or so, that's just an example.  
**[0:13:58-0:14:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:13:58):**  So then the next day you come out and you're at 135 or 130 degrees, something's going on  inside that pile where anaerobic microorganisms have most likely started to take over and  you really need to get air in there.  So when we're focusing on the biology, we're really looking at temperatures and moisture  levels too.  
**[0:14:18-0:14:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:14:18):**  So making sure that a pile isn't getting too wet and maintaining 50% moisture.  I like to compare composting to food preservation.  So as humans, we use salts, dehydration and airtight containers to basically keep microorganisms  at bay.  So if you've got food, the first things that come in and eat it are bacteria and mold,  
**[0:14:48-0:14:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:14:48):**  which is a type of fungi.  And as humans, we're trying to preserve that food so we dehydrate things, we take all the  moisture out of there so that the microorganisms aren't able to break it down or we keep it  in airtight containers away from where air oxidants going to get to it and help those  microorganisms to break it down.  
**[0:15:05-0:15:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:15:05):**  So in the opposite sense, when we want to enhance microbial populations, we need to  really be focusing on moisture.  So these microorganisms that I'm talking about live in little microfilms on the surfaces  of organic matter.  So that's why people talk about keeping a compost pile at 50% moisture or the consistency  
**[0:15:30-0:15:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:15:30):**  of a wrung out sponge, so that we're able to provide a beneficial habitat for microorganisms  that are going to thrive and succeed in breaking down these microorganisms.  And that also involves, they need oxygen and moisture.  So that's why it's important to incorporate both of those.  Lately I've been doing a lot of reasoning and kind of fallen into this school of cold  
**[0:15:56-0:16:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:15:56):**  composting where you are trying to employ the biological activity of fungi over bacteria.  So you leave the pile more passive, you're not turning as much, you're not concerned  with temperature.  And if we remove the regulatory aspect out of it, like for some people that doesn't matter  on a garden scale.  
**[0:16:20-0:16:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:16:20):**  Is there some validity to that, that if I maintain a pile with less turning, I'm enacting  fungi more in the decomposition process and potentially preserving more carbon in the  soil because there's less aerobic activity, which would then send carbon up into the atmosphere  as a byproduct of that aerobic activity?  You are correct in that.  
**[0:16:47-0:16:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:16:47):**  It's not just cold composting though.  It's been a while, I need to get it going again, but I ran an experiment on aerated  static piles.  Are you familiar with that?  ASP?  
**[0:16:59-0:17:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:16:59):**  Right, forced air system.  So you've got pipes laid on the ground that you, I don't know if you can see my fingers,  but you would put material on the pipes like this and stack it up and then you're forcing  air up through that.  And through my experiment with that, I had great results getting fungi going in the pile  
**[0:17:17-0:17:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:17:17):**  because I'm not turning it.  So yes, the whole deal with fungi and my whole mission since I started making compost and  doing what I'm doing is to get more fungal compost and get more fungi into the soil through  our conventional agriculture practices like using a tractor or having heavy machinery  on the soil that causes compaction or especially tillage.  
**[0:17:45-0:17:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:17:45):**  A lot of people think that every spring they need to go out and take their tiller out and  rip up the soil.  So when I was talking before about that saprophytic fungi and seeing saprophytic fungi in the  forest, when you notice that it looks like strings on a stick or on leaves and that's  what's visible to our naked eye, but most of these things that I'm talking about aren't  
**[0:18:08-0:18:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:18:08):**  visible to our naked eye.  So there's lots of things in the soil that we're not seeing and there's tons of thread  just miles normally in a healthy, especially in a forest system in a healthy soil, there's  miles of fungi underfoot that if you were to come through with a tiller or in this,  you're talking about compost if we're getting this saprophytic fungi and these mycelium  
**[0:18:30-0:18:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:18:30):**  going throughout the pile, if you come through and turn that, you're ripping up all those  threads and setting the stage back a lot earlier to where there's more bacteria that are going  to thrive and that fungi needs more time to get going again.  So it's provide the oxygen, but don't break up that network.  Exactly, yeah.  
**[0:18:55-0:19:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:18:55):**  And with cold composting, most people in their backyard are going to throw, they mow their  lawn and maybe they collect some of the grass clippings, they're going to throw those in  a pile and then in the fall or in the end of summer they might have a garden and they're  throwing some of those scraps on there and then in the fall they're throwing leaves in  there and sticks and things like that.  
**[0:19:14-0:19:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:19:14):**  And if you're not turning that, it's most likely going to go through an anaerobic process  because it doesn't have air in there, but if you leave it long enough, aerobic microorganisms  are going to take over and you will have good compost in the end and hopefully have good  fungi in there too because you haven't turned it.  But it's a matter of letting it age and mature like a year or a year and a half and most  
**[0:19:40-0:19:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:19:40):**  people are wanting compost a lot quicker than that and not wanting to have to wait around.  Yeah, I mean the more I read on this, I think that's the trade-off.  People are rushing it and I think they're giving up a lot of the value in that compost.  Like it's as though we say, well it's better to have it on the soil now at a five than  it is to wait for it for another 12 months and put it on the soil where maybe the effect  
**[0:20:10-0:20:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:20:10):**  on the soil is I'm making this up a 50 versus a five because those organisms have diversified,  they've matured, there's more of them.  You're just adding better quality, more concentrated stuff to the soil versus adding something  that's good but it's just quick.  Right.  
**[0:20:30-0:20:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:20:30):**  Yes, I totally agree.  And in that sense, to me, if someone were to know to look at the biology of a compost  and maybe got a sample, like they have a local municipal compost and they got a little sample  and were able to look at it with a microscope and say it was a five like you talked about,  well they're going to have to spend more to pay for twice as much compost or whatever  
**[0:20:57-0:21:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:20:57):**  to get it down to get the same effects as if you were to let a compost age a little  bit longer and then use less and have better biology on your soil.  I noticed on your Instagram page that you had started a Johnson-Sue reactor.  So David Johnson had found out through his research that one ton of compost applied on  an acre of land will get results.  
**[0:21:23-0:21:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:21:23):**  He's got fungal dominant compost.  He's applying that at one ton per acre which it's really hard to fathom one ton per acre.  I mean that's like probably two to three cubic yards of compost.  You're probably not even going to be able to see that as you apply that down at that  rate.  
**[0:21:43-0:21:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:21:43):**  But he got effects.  Through his research, according to his research, he got effects where he had an effect on the  biology in the soil then and was able to get more fungi going in the soil with just one  ton of compost.  Whereas most people are putting down 10 tons of compost at least I would think which is  
**[0:22:04-0:22:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:22:04):**  still pretty minimal.  Isn't it all going to this fungal dominated compost anyway?  So if we take that fungal dominated coal compost pile and it takes 18 months and we just let  it sit there and then we apply that, it's kind of as broken down as it's going to get.  It's in its base nutrients at that point.  
**[0:22:24-0:22:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:22:24):**  Where if we take more raw compost after let's say 45 days of turning, we add that to the  soil.  It's going in as compost but it's still going in the soil now going to evolve and break  down more by fungal dominated organisms into those base nutrients.  So at the end of the day after 18 months you're kind of still getting the same thing but one  
**[0:22:51-0:22:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:22:51):**  happened in the soil and one happened in the pile?  So if it's someone who's been not even necessarily cultivating by conventional means but someone  who's still been tilling and are organic, they may have been suppressing that fungi  for so long or breaking it up that they don't really have much fungi in the soil.  And if you take a compost that's half aged or whatever, you're most likely not going  
**[0:23:22-0:23:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:23:22):**  to have that same amount of fungi.  The fungi hasn't been able to grow onto the surfaces more to take over to have that same  amount of fungi.  I'm trying to think of an analogy to this but I can't think of one.  Well it makes sense.  
**[0:23:38-0:23:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:23:38):**  You're better culturing it all out in one place where it's hyper concentrated in the  perfect environment, building up the soil population by introducing that, then assuming  that there's enough biology in the soil that can take care of the more raw ingredients  you're putting into it.  Right yeah.  
**[0:23:56-0:24:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:23:56):**  So if you already have decent biology in the soil it wouldn't be as big of a deal because  we really need to be feeding the soil.  That's the whole kind of what we were getting at in the beginning of our conversation is  that it's not about feeding the plant, it's about feeding the soil, giving the soil what  it needs and then the soil is going to have interactions with the plant for the plant  
**[0:24:16-0:24:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:24:16):**  to manage its own nutrient needs and feed itself.  So yeah with that, putting compost down on something that already has good biology in  the soil is just helping to add more organic matter to it that's going to be foods for  microorganisms that will help to give nutrients to the plant.  So yeah if you do have good biology in the soil it wouldn't be as big of a deal to use  
**[0:24:40-0:24:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:24:40):**  more of a mulch compost that doesn't have as great microorganisms, microbial populations  in there.  For somebody at home that wants to evaluate their compost for fungal versus bacterial,  how hard is it to do with a microscope and what's involved?  What's the cost of a basic microscope to do that?  
**[0:25:03-0:25:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:25:03):**  I know there's classes online at places like Soil Food where you can learn to do it.  I don't think we can't go into all the details because it's very visual thing of what it  takes but how easy and costly is that to do?  You can get a microscope for it's gone up a little bit it's $315 or $320.  Microscopenet.com has a the brand that they normally have is an OMAX microscope.  
**[0:25:33-0:25:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:25:33):**  To get specifically if you want to look it up it's the model M8311 I believe.  I've had to look it up a lot of times.  But yeah that's $315 to be able to assess your own soils.  To be able to get the biomass of the fungi or bacteria in the soil or any other microorganisms  you'd have to set up a spreadsheet.  
**[0:25:57-0:26:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:25:57):**  I've got a spreadsheet that Elaine's continually updated a spreadsheet that she has and I've  got one of the ones that she's put out in the past.  It has functions in each cell that take into consideration the number of views per cover  slip and things like that to be able to do the algebra and everything that you need to  figure out what your biomass is going to be in from looking at one drop of compost or  
**[0:26:31-0:26:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:26:31):**  soil or whatever.  So then I mean it's a matter of being able to identify the microorganisms that you're  looking at which really most people are asking me about that and from my own experience it's  a matter of knowing what not to look at.  So when I'm looking through a sample I'm looking first I scan for nematodes so I'm mainly looking  
**[0:26:57-0:27:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:26:57):**  for movement from I'm looking for like a snake or worm like shape that's really moving or  maybe staying still.  And then as I'm focusing in more I'm looking for fungi and protozoa which is going to be  like testate amoeba, flagellates and it's a matter of knowing what their movements are  and shapes and kind of sizes to know what you're looking at and everything else.  
**[0:27:24-0:27:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:27:24):**  You don't want to necessarily ignore it but there's a lot of things that you can ignore  where most beginners who are using a microscope they see all these shapes and they're like  oh that's so cool and it's like yeah that's a piece of mineral like we don't it's good  that it's there but we don't really need to focus on it so it's really a matter of like  knowing how to identify things what you're looking at and just spending a lot of time  
**[0:27:48-0:27:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:27:48):**  at the microscope to be able to do that.  So you would have to most likely take at least one class to you know get to learn how to  identify microorganisms and then also like I said you have to have a way of calculating  the biomass of what you're looking at and plugging it into a spreadsheet or whatever  to get the accurate biomass of like fungal to bacterial ratio and how much you have of  
**[0:28:17-0:28:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:28:17):**  everything.  And it's really not that costly so you're let's say you're a thousand dollars into it  by the time you take the class you buy the microscope I mean that that sounds like a  lot but you own that knowledge forever you own that microscope forever and some farms  are buying 10, 20, 30 yards of compost a year at 30 bucks a yard.  
**[0:28:36-0:28:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:28:36):**  So you know what do you actually buying and can you see a situation where farm or maybe  you know of situations where farmers are over applying poor quality compost and they could  get away with applying a lot less of better quality compost?  I think it's totally worth it to spend a little bit more money if you have to to get a better  quality compost that's focused on the biology in there.  
**[0:29:08-0:29:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:29:08):**  It's basically an inoculant is what you can consider compost when you're putting it on  the soil.  You're manipulating the soil with good biology.  And so if you have something that's not a good inoculant like you want to bake a cake  and you buy the yeast to bake the cake but the yeast is dead what good does it do you?  
**[0:29:31-0:29:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:29:31):**  But you know you need that live yeast.  That yeast is going to be an inoculant in your cake basically to get going.  And so when we consider compost an inoculant I think people can grasp the concept a lot  better than it's not providing it is providing nutrients but it's not it shouldn't be considered  like a fertilizer it can should be considered an inoculant more in my opinion.  
**[0:29:57-0:30:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:29:57):**  Given that this is another question that's been on my mind for a long time.  Is there an upper limit to the amount of these organisms that you can apply or is there a  law of diminishing returns?  Obviously these are organisms that self-regulate their population based on their food supply.  But could you get to a point in soil where adding more compost applying more compost  
**[0:30:25-0:30:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:30:25):**  tea it just you're not getting as much of a bump each time because in a certain point  like that biology is going to be as active as possible you can have as much organic matter  as you can cram into that soil and just doing more because it makes us feel better might  not actually be doing anything for the soil and you might be wasting time and money.  Yeah I've got a few different answers to that so a quick description of succession in the  
**[0:30:58-0:31:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:30:58):**  soil for people who haven't ever heard of succession if you if you Google a picture  of plant succession or succession in soils at the very beginning stage of succession  or if we were to take a piece of just even like a three by three little piece of land  and take all the vegetation away and then let it go at first you're going to get some  pioneer weeds you know dandelions plantains things like that and then you're going to  
**[0:31:22-0:31:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:31:22):**  get some grasses after that and then maybe next year or in a couple years you're going  to get brambles and bushes that come up and if you leave it for 10, 15, 20 years you're  going to have a forest eventually come up you know coniferous deciduous forest so as  you move along in these stages of succession from pioneer weeds that's the very beginning  of succession the soil there is bacterial dominant and then as we move into like bushes  
**[0:31:54-0:32:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:31:54):**  tall grasses row crops that we grow a lot that's going to be what has been found to  be about equal bacterial to fungal ratio one to one ratio and then as we move into forest  systems we have the same amount of bacteria but we have way way way more fungi in the  soil that's helping these woody trees with that sense there's multiple things I can say  with that as we talked about when you're tilling and breaking up this fungal hyphae or using  
**[0:32:26-0:32:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:32:26):**  chemicals to kill weeds you are also having a detrimental effect you're having a detrimental  effect on everything in the soil but you're setting yourself back in succession so you  till that land to get rid of weeds but then you set yourself back at the beginning stage  of succession and what's the plants that come up because of that bacterial dominance you've  got weeds coming up and so with that if you've got a bacterial an extremely bacterial compost  
**[0:32:53-0:32:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:32:53):**  that you're applying to land and feeding a whole lot of bacteria but then you don't have  their predators to come in and eat them you have these pulses of bacteria that are just  going to keep creating weeds and keep creating weeds also with the talk I said about succession  we it depends on what plant you're trying to grow so you know someone who's got just  an apple orchard or a nursery or who is trying to focus on trees they're going to want to  
**[0:33:24-0:33:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:33:24):**  use a compost that is fungal dominant or they're trying to get more fungi going in their soils  with the trees where someone who's growing lettuce doesn't really want much fungi so  depending on what plant you're growing and where that plant lies in succession succession  has to do with the amount of bacteria to fungi in the soil and ratio of that so it all depends  on what kind of plant you're trying to grow or plants you're trying to grow as to how  
**[0:33:53-0:33:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:33:53):**  much biology you need in the soil does that explain it well it does and it's kind of echoes  what I thought I watched the video with Dr. Elaine this morning and she kind of talked  a little bit about that and it's just echoes a lot of what you're saying given that we're  growing vegetables and this fungi to bacteria ratio is around one to one weeds or I forget  the number but it was something like a hundred to one in favor of bacteria and you go to  
**[0:34:19-0:34:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:34:19):**  a forest and it's like a thousand to one could could people who are into this wood chip gardening  be potentially setting themselves up for failure if they're growing vegetables because at some  point that one to one ratio goes too much in favor of fungi which is for these higher  order species not what you're trying to grow in a vegetable garden and your soils out of  whack for vegetables where because you're providing that food source for fungi to break  
**[0:34:54-0:34:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:34:54):**  down all these wood chips fungi can have a field day you can get this proliferation of  fungi if you remove the wood chips and you just have compost being applied you leave  say root mass in the soil I don't feel like and I might be wrong on this that you're introducing  as much food for fungi so that balance stays closer to that one to one you're absolutely  correct yeah so as I mentioned before in a compost pile more green material is going  
**[0:35:27-0:35:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:35:27):**  to be food for bacteria and more brown woody material is going to be food for fungi and  so by yes by using wood chips in your garden you're promoting fungi or you're likely promoting  fungi and so yeah when I see you'll notice that people who grow lettuce and use wood  chips as a mulch or have issues even kind of from the beginning another part of it has  to do with and again I don't have a chemistry background so I'm not able to explain it fully  
**[0:35:59-0:36:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:35:59):**  but the nitrogen cycle so when you've got bacteria breaking down organic matter for  and helping to release those nutrients for plants they're producing more nitrate and  when you get more fungi in the system you're working with more perennial type stuff and  you get more the form of nitrogen is ammonium so  plants that are in the later stages of succession are going to be working with fungi more and  
**[0:36:42-0:36:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:36:42):**  using more of the ammonium form of nitrogen and plants in the earlier stages of succession  are going to be using more the nitrate form of nitrogen the nitrates put out bacteria  more and the ammoniums put out by fungi more and so it's a matter of what you're getting  from that by that what's being released from that from that biology so to really recap  everything we've talked about so far in the first 40 minutes we've we've established that  
**[0:37:18-0:37:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:37:18):**  you want compost that's fungal rich so you're going to need to create build that pile with  food sources for fungi in addition to bacteria so if you're just using all vegetable waste  without a woody component you would probably have less fungi you're going to have less  fungal you're going to have nasty compost if you've ever seen anyone who's just like  put food waste in a bucket trying to compost their food waste it turns into a slimy nasty  
**[0:37:52-0:38:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:37:52):**  mess you need it yeah you need brown material for for a number of reasons that's the chemistry  between browns and greens going together is what really sets off the composting process  more where you're getting that action from the microbes that's increasing heat and things  like that yes it does happen in wood chips and things like that but that's composting  so but yeah you need you need brown woody stuff for for several reasons in a compost  
**[0:38:28-0:38:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:38:28):**  pile you want it to help add foods for fungi but the brown woody material is also what's  going to give some structure to the compost pile so in that same sense you want different  sizes of material when you're building a compost pile you know if you when you put something  in a blender and you or chop something up very small you're creating that much more  surface area which you would think would make sense if you're creating that much more surface  
**[0:38:59-0:39:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:38:59):**  area you get more microbes that could move on to the surfaces right you get where I'm  going so if you had like a flower if you have flour think of how much that powder form you've  got tons of surface area for microorganisms to break down but there's there's gonna be  no breathability if you had a giant compost pile that's the consistency of flour or a  powder like that so you need you know it's kind of small medium and large things in a  
**[0:39:26-0:39:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:39:26):**  compost pile if you're using food waste you want to mix some leaves in there maybe some  straw some wood chips so the wood chips are going to be some nice fluff where it'll help  give it little pockets of air where where moisture can move in the same as with soil  we want good soil structure which is what these microorganisms are going to bring about  is the chance for air and water to move through the soil we want that same thing in our compost  
**[0:39:50-0:39:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:39:50):**  pile so we want a variety of not only a diversity of plants and stuff going into the pile but  we want to different sizes of things but yeah again you asked about so me personally I'm  trying to get more fungi going in any pile because most soils that that we come across  are degraded and need more fungi so it's been my goal to always increase fungi but if someone  were a lettuce farmer you know they're not going to necessarily want to make compost  
**[0:40:22-0:40:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:40:22):**  that's heavy and fungi because they're they're just growing lettuce and they don't need that  much fungi anyway so they do need some brown material and it's a matter of when you get  into that it's a matter of the ratio of ingredients in your compost pile so you'll hear different  people thought mention different things and I think on average you would people would  say what I hear or read is 50% browns to 50% greens or two-thirds browns to one-third green  
**[0:40:56-0:41:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:40:56):**  somewhere in between there but yeah in the sense that I was talking about green stuff  is food for bacteria brown stuff is food for fungi if you're trying to get a more bacterial  dominant pile or trying to get more fungi going then you'd want to have your ratio and  your pile have more green than brown stuff or if you're trying to get more fungi you're  going to want more brown and green stuff and it does come to a point where you can get  
**[0:41:22-0:41:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:41:22):**  you can skip tip the scale too far either way like if you've got 90% brown material  in your compost pile and 10% green you're going to get compost but it's going to take  a really long time because you've got a lot of energy stored in that carbon from the wood  that needs to break down and it's going to take a really long time in the same sense  when you have too much green that's what I mentioned before you don't have enough brown  
**[0:41:47-0:41:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:41:47):**  then you just get a pile of slop you don't get any there's really no consistency to it  or the consistency is slop there's no structure to it is what I meant to say where it just  doesn't turn out as good compost good quality compost so yeah in that sense to give people  some instruction if you were going to go if you're trying to build a fungal dot more fungal  dominant pile trying to get more fungi in a pile I would say don't use more than 70  
**[0:42:18-0:42:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:42:18):**  to 75% 75% yeah probably at the highest browns 25% greens and it's hard in the same sense  probably if you're trying to get more bacterial dominant compost I'm trying to think because  I'm never trying to do that so I don't really think about that I wouldn't go more than I  mean yeah 50 50 even for a bacterial dominant compost or just yeah maybe maybe not as many  wood chips and just other types of brown sources that might be easier to break down than wood  
**[0:42:51-0:42:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:42:51):**  chips so you might not get as much fungi going can you repeat that you cut out a second like  less mature carbon something like a corn stalk that's dry versus wood chips so I'm talking  to Troy Hinke of living roots compost tea.com. Troy one thing I think people could be saying  at this point in the episode is how do I know where I'm at are my soils bacterially dominated  to the point where I need to come in and apply compost teas to up the fungal ratio I need  
**[0:43:24-0:43:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:43:24):**  to apply fungal dominated compost to up the compost ratio if you're just applying and  you're growing you might be getting good results but how do you know if you could be getting  better results if you change that ratio a lot of I think what you do around soil and  applying teas is correcting soil issues but let's go to somebody who doesn't have poor  soil they have pretty good soil how do they know if it couldn't be better they're just  
**[0:43:54-0:44:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:43:54):**  not doing the right thing to make it better. Well observe nature what plants are coming  up you know are you having pioneer weeds or are you having tall grasses and brambles start  to come up you know what is nature showing you and again I'll refer to my succession  thing if you look at what plants are coming up you're going to get a general idea of probably  where your soils are at in the bacterial to fungal ratio but I also need to point out  
**[0:44:27-0:44:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:44:27):**  again that it's not all about just bacteria and fungi bacteria and fungi are going to  break those materials down and hold that minerals and nutrients in their body but if they're  just in the soil holding those nutrients and minerals in their bodies you're not getting  that nutrient cycling going so the plants not being able to absorb anything if the bacteria  and fungi are still just present it's also a matter of having protozoa nematodes present  
**[0:44:56-0:45:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:44:56):**  that are going to eat those and poop them out and give you those nutrients so in that  sense it really kind of does take a microscope to know that you've got the predators present.  I mean if you've got healthy plants that aren't susceptible to diseases and pests then you  know most likely you're doing really good. You think the presence of pioneer weeds is  a reliable enough indicator to give a good indication of soil conditions like I hear  
**[0:45:30-0:45:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:45:30):**  this and it's one of those things like it makes sense to me but part of me questions  it and says that is more myth than truth.  From the soils that I've looked at that are weedy it's absolutely true that there's not  really any fungi and there's really not a lot going on at all in those soils and as  a matter of fact it because of compaction if you you might have some weedy areas that  
**[0:46:01-0:46:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:46:01):**  actually if you get down to it and it you know those pioneer weeds might not have that  deep of roots so they're kind of just tapping into the top few inches there but you might  have a compaction layer that's one foot deep, two foot deep, three feet deep that the roots  of your crops would potentially be growing into and if you've got a compacted area it  is possible that you've got an anaerobic dead zone where you know if you've got a compaction  
**[0:46:35-0:46:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:46:35):**  layer in the soil which most people that's why they've got deep plows that they're trying  to hit that compaction layer but at that compaction layer you've got the dead pan where water  passes through the soil it hits that dead pan and then it just sits there you know usually  like a puddle and you and I can't lay face down in a puddle we're aerobic organisms we  can't lay face down in a puddle so these dead zones the biology in there are anaerobic it  
**[0:47:03-0:47:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:47:03):**  shows anaerobic biology the biology in there shows anaerobic microorganisms and like I  said before anaerobic microorganisms are usually creating a number of different substances  that are going to be detrimental to plants especially alcohols and phenols there's other  ones that I'm kind of blanking on at the moment but you know if you were to try you know people  take a cutting of a plant and put it into a jar of water to let it root out well if  
**[0:47:34-0:47:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:47:34):**  you were to take you know even half a jar of water and add 50% tequila to that and put  your plant in there is your plant going to survive no so when these plant roots are growing  down and they hit that dead pan they're working with their head they've been working with  aerobic microorganisms they're shedding off exudates putting out foods for microorganisms  and growing down deeper and then they hit this dead pan but the anaerobic microorganisms  
**[0:48:04-0:48:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:48:04):**  have you know created all these toxic things that are detrimental to those roots that it's  then not able to grow down and it may even grow out I've got a great picture Elaine uses  it in her talks where there's a tree that's a huge tree that I mean the canopy on it has  got to be like 30 or 40 feet across and if you were to picture that in the soil you know  you should have that same root zone you know at least like a 10 or 20 foot root zone that's  
**[0:48:30-0:48:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:48:30):**  coming down into the soil but these roots grow down five feet deep and all of a sudden  they start shooting sideways because it's hit a compaction layer where it's breeding  anaerobic microorganisms and those roots can't work with the microorganisms and then it's  looking for better soil better microorganisms to work with so yeah you could you could even  have potentially dangerous potentially detrimental soil that in in a compacted area like that  
**[0:49:03-0:49:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:49:03):**  so let's say we want to work on that compacted area we have it we're going to remove the  tool of some sort of deep tillage we're going to remove the tool of plant-based biology  so we're not going to use like a long tap rooted crop like a tillage radish to get down  there and bust it up can you apply a liquid soil drench in the form of a tea that can  go down there and try and out compete those anaerobic bacteria to change the soil biology  
**[0:49:40-0:49:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:49:40):**  there which would then allow the roots of the plants that you're growing to be more  efficient at that hard pan yes i've got a root injector so i part of my business is  going out and doing compost tea sprays for landscapes lawns gardens and farms and i normally  use a it's similar to like a paint spray gun but i also have a root injector and the idea  behind that is to get good compost tea into the root zone especially possibly in a compacted  
**[0:50:14-0:50:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:50:14):**  area and i just a couple weeks ago i posted on instagram of uh japanese maple that i'm  working with i'm actually sitting like 15 feet from it right now um where i'm trying  to get good biology going into the soil into the root zone so those roots can work with  the biology and and help to build structure there and then that biology is continuing  to work and grow out and reproduce and then it's working on the structure of the soil  
**[0:50:45-0:50:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:50:45):**  around that um i know you said without tillage and without roots but uh i need to say that  you know i'm talking about using a no-till system or i'm coming across as talking about  a no-till system in agriculture and yes we need to get to where we're no-till but there's  especially in tennessee we've got really bad clay soils and you know you can't just start  off with putting a seed in a hard clay soil you need to kind of break it up some and and  
**[0:51:16-0:51:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:51:16):**  get something going there so i i just want to put that in there that normally when you  are starting at least the first time you're most likely going to have to broad for or  till hook up compost tea applicators that are going to be hooked onto your deep till  method so you're tilling at two or three feet deep and you've got good biology that's coming  out of that same depth otherwise if you're well you can also use cover crops to help  
**[0:51:46-0:51:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:51:46):**  feed the soil and help create structure like you're talking about with the daikon radish  otherwise normally if you're using a soil drench or compost i've got a great video from  way back on instagram again where i had inadvertently left some compost on the top of the soil on  in my yard it's hard clay hard clay soil where if i i tap my finger on the soil i can't make  any penetration into it and then just a few feet away where i just happened to leave a  
**[0:52:14-0:52:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:52:14):**  couple inches of compost that had been sitting there for a year and a half maybe and i went  over there and stuck my finger in and my finger could go down like up to here you know like  a good four inches so the biology like i said you're inoculating the biology onto the soil  and what happens is it slowly works its way down through the layers of soil i mean it's  pretty slow it's not going to happen you know overnight or in one month it's going to be  
**[0:52:38-0:52:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:52:38):**  several months but it slowly works its way down creating structure creating structure  deeper and deeper into the soil and with that with the microbial breakdown in the soil you're  attracting more worms who are also then going to be coming into there creating soil structure  breaking things up kind of working the soil for you so like it in that sense i had left  a pile of leaves a pile of straw and something else in a place in my yard with the intention  
**[0:53:11-0:53:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:53:11):**  of building a compost pile and whatever life happened and i didn't get to it and it sat  there for maybe six or nine months and then i took all that material and moved it somewhere  else to make a compost pile but everywhere underneath there because of it was kind of  like a mulch layer or whatever and there were microorganisms there worms had come up and  made already made the top like two inches of that into nice pliable soil just through  
**[0:53:38-0:53:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:53:38):**  the action of worms and and obviously microorganisms too so yeah if you're not tilling and just  applying compost it's going to be a pretty slow process if you're wanting to get good  soil i would recommend if you're having you know if you have a really hard clay soil both  clay soils and so sand soil that are heavy in sand need organic matter in there to help  create more structure so putting compost down is helping to get good biology and helping  
**[0:54:10-0:54:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:54:10):**  to get good organic matter on there which is going to help the microorganisms to build  more structure and worms to build more structure so yeah tilling and then adding compost on  top of that and and even putting down a compost tea to really get good biology going and then  so that's getting life back into the soil and then we need to keep life going in the  soil by always having plants in the soil to feed the soil so that's the importance of  
**[0:54:38-0:54:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:54:38):**  cover crops and companion crops so you know while in the off season you've got a cover  crop going but also while you're growing your crop you've got companion crops that are growing  alongside and and it's a matter of picking out the right ones that are going to be a  good structure where they're not going to shade out your cover crop and they're going  to cover the soil nicely but they're ever it's always going to be continuously feeding  
**[0:55:00-0:55:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:55:00):**  the soil keeping that soil the biology in the soil alive which is then going to be able  to feed all the plants that you have there.  Given that a lot of these soil organisms that we're talking about that are beneficial in  a vegetable based system and that's really where we're talking about here on the evolution  scale they're aerobic they require oxygen do you think there's some detriment to those  
**[0:55:29-0:55:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:55:29):**  organisms in a pure no till system so I look at a no till system and I get the idea behind  it you're trying to mimic nature and it's really combating 100 pure tillage which I  see is really bad but if you go in pure no till that's mimicking a forest which there  we have this huge fungal to small bacterial ratio I'm applying compost teas if I'm applying  compost I need air to get into the lower levels of the soil so those organisms can proliferate  
**[0:56:07-0:56:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:56:07):**  can I rely just on biology whether that's microorganisms or larger organisms in the  soil like worms to provide enough aeration or should I be looking at ways that I think  are close partners to no till whether that's broad forking on a small scale or subsoiling  on a larger scale where you're allowing the soil air pathways into the soil without inverting  the soil is that beneficial or again there are you doing more damage by breaking up that  
**[0:56:43-0:56:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:56:43):**  fungal network that is there in trying to get air to the aerobic microorganisms you have  any thoughts on that?  I do yeah from my experience and from the experience of a number of other people and  research it has shown that if you get the biology going and through plants you can get  the structure of your soil to where you don't need to do any other additional methods so  
**[0:57:11-0:57:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:57:11):**  like Gabe Brown is a great one a great one to listen to on any podcast I would like to  correct one thing that you said is that you've mentioned that you know to try to get the  biology going or no till we're trying to mimic a forest system which we're not necessarily  trying to mimic only a forest system it depends on the biology so you know if we look back  in history the Great Plains were covered in grasses they had a good amount of fungi in  
**[0:57:39-0:57:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:57:39):**  the soil but then Buffalo came along and disturbed that soil either by trampling it or eating  it so there's some disturbance in that so yeah you may need to incorporate some disturbance  but I would say that it shouldn't be drastically moving the soil around yeah so to quick reference  Gabe Brown I was listening to a podcast with him where he was saying it was in the 1990s  it was like 25 years ago or something like that when he was first starting out on his  
**[0:58:10-0:58:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:58:10):**  land in a in an hour's rain event he his soil could hold a half an inch of rain in an hour  and through his using good biology and cover crops he said that he can now absorb 29 inches  of rain in an hour and that's all about soil structure you know his soil is just like a  sponge now so then it's holding the water holding the air for future use and there's  a I mean there's so many benefits to that you think of how much topsoil is lost in the  
**[0:58:47-0:58:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:58:47):**  in the Midwest or all over the United States right now into waterways and chemicals going  into those waterways if we were able to to hold all those especially with the heavy rain  events that we're getting due to whatever you want to climate change whatever you want  to call it you know we're it's obvious we're getting crazy weather events with extreme  rains and things like that and if we were to work with nature like you know Gabe Brown  
**[0:59:15-0:59:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:59:15):**  has he's able to he's able to tackle this and and take that on and and not and not have  any detrimental effects yeah I mean the grasslands I think are a great example because there  you aren't really getting any tillage other than prairie dogs and maybe things like that  your company living roots compost tea you deal on the compost tea side of things to  start kind of big picture here why is compost application not enough why should somebody  
**[0:59:44-0:59:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=0:59:44):**  think about adding tea to the mix in addition to applying straight compost there's advantages  of compost tea I mean it's really all a matter of your needs when it comes down to your farm  so what if you have compost like I said most people are applying 10 tons per acre you know  think of how much compost is that that's going to need and and that's all about inoculating  the soil with good biology through that compost you can take a very small amount of compost  
**[1:00:22-1:00:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:00:22):**  you know like say for an acre I've used probably you know 15 to 20 cups of compost cups you  know small very small amount of compost brewing a compost tea by adding microbial foods and  the idea is to you know add aeration agitate it and get the populations get to a peak population  where you've got a lot of bacteria you've got a good protozoa going and then you're  not using that as inoculate onto the plants and soil so you've got the advantage of being  
**[1:00:56-1:01:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:00:56):**  able to provide a foliar application but you're also able to use a lot less material and time  to get to inoculate soils and plants with good biology so like I said you know you're  using far less compost and if you think about the equipment that you would need to haul  out that much compost you know 10 plus tons onto a piece of land compared to taking a  four-wheeler or any other type of backpack sprayer or on a large scale attractor it's  
**[1:01:27-1:01:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:01:27):**  going to take a lot less time and energy to apply compost tea and use that as an inoculant  than to get compost down but again as I said you know it depends on your application and  what your need is because a lot of people are are their soil is needing that organic  matter so it would be good to get a compost down I mean there's a number of things I could  talk about with compost tea and you know you could take compost tea and use it as an inoculate  
**[1:01:58-1:02:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:01:58):**  on bad compost like what if you've got compost that you don't think is that great it's not  breaking down very fast spray it with some compost tea get that many more microorganisms  going on there and help your compost break down faster well what about this let's say  someone has a farm they've applied compost over the years so their organic matter is  up at eight nine percent organic matter is not a problem they're in a no-till type system  
**[1:02:26-1:02:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:02:26):**  they're leaving a lot of roots in the soil so organic matter let's say a lot of that's  being replaced by roots if we ignore for right now the exporting of minerals from the soil  so if we if we harvest lettuce and sell it off property we've mined some minerals from  the soil and we've exported them if we throw that out right now that's not a consideration  could we survive by just applying compost tea not compost so we're we're in inoculating  
**[1:03:02-1:03:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:03:02):**  that soil and adding more bacteria and fungi and organisms to the soil from tea a liquid  versus a solid compost and just get off the compost train for good  yeah you could I this is still questionable to me and I would say that I'd have to disagree  disagree with Elaine's statement Elaine's always made the statement that all soils have  enough nutrients and minerals to feed a plant and it's a matter of getting biology going  
**[1:03:39-1:03:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:03:39):**  in those soils to to access those minerals and nutrients and I can't say I fully agree  I do believe and I'm not an expert on remineralization but I do believe that it's also more effective  to have to incorporate remineralization or like in my compost teas I use I like to add  as a my and I don't use a ton I could probably even put a little bit more into my compost  teas but I'm trying to get you know those micronutrients and minerals going along in  
**[1:04:19-1:04:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:04:19):**  with the good biology and the nutrients from that biology to put back on the soil so yes  I believe it I believe at a point you're going to need more than just compost tea maybe at  that point it's focusing on that higher grade compost so it's less of a volume thing and  more of a quality thing yeah right correct compost tea I see there's there's really two  categories out there there's compost teas for the soil and there's compost teas as foliar  
**[1:04:57-1:05:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:04:57):**  feeds our foliar protectants amendments however you want to actually call that what are the  differences between the two when you say go to brew them biologically speaking or is there  a difference would you use the same tea on the leaves that you put on the soil  I don't know about other people's experience with having two different types of teas for  foliar versus soil application I don't I don't necessarily go by that but I will say this  
**[1:05:33-1:05:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:05:33):**  can get very confusing so compost tea to get very specific is where you put compost in  a mesh bag put it in water you're agitating that water for a certain amount of time through  our adding air to that water and adding microbial foods and the importance of compost tea is  the addition of foods for microbes so you're feeding microbes getting them to reproduce  so just say I mean it's far greater than this but say you start out with a hundred microorganisms  
**[1:06:02-1:06:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:06:02):**  you're feeding them and trying to get them to reproduce to a hundred thousand microorganisms  through that reproduction the bacteria and fungi create glues which helps those microorganisms  to be stickier so when you're providing a foliar application it's much more likely that  the microorganisms are going to stick on the surface of whatever you're spraying it's great  to put that onto soil but you don't necessarily need that on soil so you could use just an  
**[1:06:35-1:06:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:06:35):**  extract on soil an extract is different from tea in that you're putting compost in a mesh  bag you're putting it in water and you possibly are aerating it but you're not putting any  microbial foods in there so you're extracting those what I said was a hundred microorganisms  just say a hundred microorganisms the point is to extract those hundred microorganisms  in the into the water but then you're not getting them to reproduce so you're not getting  
**[1:07:03-1:07:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:07:03):**  those glues from reproduction and you can put that on at the land if anybody's just  a quick kind of how-to like if anybody was interested in doing that you know you could  kind of increase your population by putting compost in a bag extracting it dumping out  that compost now you've got a hundred microorganisms refill your bag with compost do the same thing  so now you should have you know 200 micro 200 microorganisms you can increase the population  
**[1:07:33-1:07:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:07:33):**  that way without you know adding foods but at a certain point you're getting so much  sediment in there you can't like keep doing that because you're going to clog up your  applicators also a quick note you know I may do an extract but then I'll I'm not trying  to get the whole idea of the foods is getting microorganisms to reproduce I'll make an extract  and then put it into a sprayer or whatever and then add foods for microorganisms like  
**[1:07:59-1:08:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:07:59):**  humic acid or fish hydrolysate that's going to benefit the microorganisms that are in  the soil but it's also going to be foods for those microorganisms that you're spraying  out into the soil that will help them to proliferate once you get it onto the surface of the soil  and plants so I'll do that same thing with you know compost tea like and again I know  you didn't ask this question but for people who are interested in applying compost tea  
**[1:08:27-1:08:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:08:27):**  we did experiments at Rodale at five gallons of extract per acre with a large-scale corn  farmer and not to get off the subject but you know this is a guy who was doing research  with Monsanto in the 70s he'd been a chemical salesman he did research with Penn State who  does both conventional and organic research but they're known to do a lot of research  so this guy was really big-time chemicals when we first met with him and Elaine was  
**[1:08:55-1:09:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:08:55):**  talking he was using the term snake oil all the time in reference to compost tea he was  very skeptical more skeptical than yourself probably I went out with him to put in an  application at five gallons per acre and we did it was supposed to be 500 acres we ended  up doing a hundred acres and I went out with him at the end of the season in his harvester  his combine to harvest and he was telling me he's like you know before I even get my  
**[1:09:21-1:09:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:09:21):**  numbers back and I can already see that I've got more corn going and I even had some damage  from deer and I can tell that my crop this year is going to be larger than other years  and he went on to work with Rodale for another maybe two or three years I don't know if he's  tillers or not but I mean that was at five gallons per acre my point behind this is I  normally do 20 gallons per acre but still like if you think about that little amount  
**[1:09:46-1:09:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:09:46):**  on a whole acre it's very hard to get that little amount on a whole acre so you need  to dilute compost tea down and in the water that I dilute compost tea down in so you know  say you've got an acre of land and you know it takes you 50 gallons to spray that whole  thing so then you would want to dilute your tea down into 50 I think I said 50 gallons  I may have used the wrong word yeah it takes 50 gallons to cover that amount of land you  
**[1:10:10-1:10:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:10:10):**  don't want to dilute your tea down you know if you're using 20 gallons you know 30 gallons  of water 20 gallons of tea equals 50 gallons and then you'll spray that out so in that  water what I'm getting at is that I will add foods to my water so that it provides more  food for the microorganisms that I'm adding in with the tea to help even feed it more  once it gets onto foliar and soil surfaces.  
**[1:10:35-1:10:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:10:35):**  So here he was the skeptic turned believer and I think this is where I think skepticism  comes in. As humans I think we have a hard time believing things that we can't see at  least immediately because we've been just sold a bunch of snake oil like you mentioned  in the past and in everything and I look at something like tea and the question I always  see people ask and I often ask this of myself when I've made them is how do I know that  
**[1:11:13-1:11:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:11:13):**  it's actually working or doing something positive and by doing something positive I mean am  I going from a 1 to a 1.5 or am I going from a 1 to a 100 for me to go to a 1 to 1.5 that's  great but is it worth the time maybe maybe not and this isn't just the compost you think  it could be any of these minerals that they sell in all these catalogs they get this marketing  spin on that that promises so many good things but for the end user at home what can somebody  
**[1:11:53-1:11:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:11:53):**  look for if they're doing trials with compost tea on their farm in their garden and say  okay what change should they realistically expect to see with their eyes?  With everything with this it all depends I mean depending on your soil depending on the  quality of compost depending on the quality of compost tea depending on your plant you  know you maybe you only go to a 1.5 or maybe you go to 100 it there's so many conditions  
**[1:12:25-1:12:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:12:25):**  and variables that that are dependent on that you know like what if you have a great what  if you apply a great compost tea but then like you had some crazy I can't even think  of a weather event that might come in but like something weird that affected that biology  and then kind of negated it. My experience and what I've heard from other people is that  normally their first application of compost tea they will notice possibly a drastic difference  
**[1:12:57-1:13:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:12:57):**  or at least some things that they can some slight variations that they can notice but  then upon further applications of teas there won't be as like drastic of a difference because  it is usually because that biology hasn't been present and then the plant gets the biology  and it's like whoa party time you know like I finally get what I need but then it's kind  of comfortable and it's got and it's got that it may need some extra but it's not going  
**[1:13:25-1:13:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:13:25):**  to show the excitement in future applications. I will tell you yeah what really got it you  know what really did it for me so I took a 20-day class with Elaine at a university that  I went to and then I wanted to apprentice with her on the microscope because I had no  experience with a microscope. I went to Rodale to apprentice with her and that's how I ended  up getting hired there they liked me a lot but anyway the point is I saw the results  
**[1:13:58-1:14:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:13:58):**  that she was getting enough to convince me that I was like I want to do this I believe  in this but I didn't have my own personal experience and I kind of I kind of went nuts  when I went to Rodale. It was like this perfect time where this guy had just happened to donate  a compost tea brewers there because Elaine had just started there and I was there and  like I took advantage of all that and I just went nuts making compost tea all the time  
**[1:14:21-1:14:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:14:21):**  and I went out to I couldn't apply anything to their organic stuff because of regulations  but I could apply stuff to their the stuff they were going for a CSA community supported  agriculture and I went up to the tomato plot and it was like four o'clock in the afternoon  I got off from work and I was doing my it was on my own time and I sprayed one row of  tomatoes like 300 feet long and I left several other rows I just the foliage so these are  
**[1:14:52-1:14:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:14:52):**  tomato plants that were three to four feet high it was late summer they're starting to  flower and fruit so they're based there at the beginning of their flowering stage before  their fruiting I went out there in the afternoon to spray compost tea and I sprayed one row  and left several others just to see if I could notice any difference that day the the flowers  the little yellow flowers from the tomato were all hanging down like this downwards  
**[1:15:25-1:15:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:15:25):**  I came out the next day 24 hours later and took pictures I took pictures that before  I took pictures after that so 24 hours later I went out there the row my left hand or this  hand is the is the road that didn't get compost tea this is the one that did get compost tea  all those flowers almost every flower on the plants that got compost tea had turned up  towards the sun like a satellite like that the ones that didn't get compost tea were  
**[1:15:50-1:15:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:15:50):**  still facing downwards and I was like holy this stuff works I mean it really convinced  me maybe a misconception around compost tea is I think people think okay well there's  a bunch of nutrients in that tea there's there's nitrogen and potassium and phosphorus and  trace minerals and that's what's enacting the plants to respond I don't think that's  true and correct me if I'm wrong I think it's more there is you're applying microorganisms  
**[1:16:20-1:16:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:16:20):**  to the plant the plant is responding to the plant microorganism interactions what part  of that or none of that is true yes I from what I understand in my experience all of  what you just said is true that it's all about the microbial interaction yes there are nutrients  in there but it's not the nutrients it's the microbial action that is giving them the advantage  or there that's what they're gaining from yes so for somebody at home who wants to start  
**[1:16:54-1:17:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:16:54):**  what's a basic recipe for compost to I have a bucket I have water I have a bubbler I have  some good quality compost do I need anything else so in any presentation not the cheapest  way you can make compost tea you can get a bucket for free even by going to the bakery  section at a grocery store and get a three to five gallon bucket you go to a paint store  you get a two to three dollar paint strainer bag that's a five gallon bag it has an elastic  
**[1:17:27-1:17:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:17:27):**  top it fits perfectly on a bucket it's extremely it's like made for brewing the most you're  gonna spend is on like a 20 to 40 dollar aquarium pump that's gonna pump air into there and  then compost so with my my quality of compost I use three to five cups per five gallon brew  I normally more on the three cup side it you really don't need much and then you know you  could do just an extract and get results from that not add any foods but if you want to  
**[1:17:57-1:18:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:17:57):**  add foods so there's bacterial foods and there's fungal foods the really the only bacterial  food that I recommend or that Elaine talks about is unsulfured blackstrap molasses which  is something that you can get at the grocery store  then fungal foods there are different things the main ones that I like to use are humic  acid fish hydrolysate and then I like to either use feather meal or kelp meal or soluble kelp  
**[1:18:33-1:18:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:18:33):**  and in a five gallon brew I'll use a tablespoon of humic acid possibly two but I don't go  more than that and a tablespoon of fish hydrolysate and a tablespoon of kelp so like I'm not doing  more than three tablespoons all together in the whole thing for five gallons you really  it just really needs to keep it minimal because you're working with microorganisms that are  tiny you know like they don't need a ton of food most people think that more is better  
**[1:19:04-1:19:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:19:04):**  but not in this case so minimal foods so yeah a tablespoon humic acid tablespoon fish hydrolysate  tablespoon kelp or feather meal and then if I were to use a bacterial food the unsulfured  blackstrap molasses I would only put like half to one teaspoon in a five gallon bucket  and normally you've got enough the fish hydrolysate is going to also be food for bacteria and  we've normally got enough bacteria going in our compost that we don't really need to get  
**[1:19:39-1:19:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:19:39):**  that going that much more because we're trying to get other microorganisms going more and  then I've got a table that's a rule of thumb that I put together on brew time so brew time  for a compost tea really is dependent on the ambient temperature outside which has an effect  on the oxygen in the air as well so in the springtime in March and April when I've got  cooler temps and it's getting down to 35 45 at night but then in the daytime it's getting  
**[1:20:16-1:20:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:20:16):**  up to 65 70 degrees I'm brewing for two and a half to three days to get to peak population  in the summertime it's a lot hotter the microorganisms are more active anyway it will take you know  in the middle of the summer I don't normally brew in the middle of summer but in the beginning  of summer say it's only going to take you know if it's 75 at night 95 during the day  it's going to take only you know like 24 hours to brew and because of that you're what I  
**[1:20:51-1:20:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:20:51):**  said you're trying to get to a peak population so the peak the population microorganisms are  growing growing growing you hit a peak population and then all of a sudden they've run out of  food and they've used up all the air even if you may have been oxygenating it and you  quickly go anaerobic and so it's a matter of hitting that peak population and the problem  that many people have is that they're brewing for too long and you're getting those anaerobic  
**[1:21:12-1:21:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:21:12):**  microorganisms going if you ever need to air air on the side of brewing for too short so  if you think it's too hot out brew for just a few hours like I said that guy in Pennsylvania  we weren't even using foods Franklin where we're using extract so we weren't increasing  the populations and he and that was five gallons per acre and he was getting results so if  you need to air air on the side of of being not brewing long enough or what you think  
**[1:21:40-1:21:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:21:40):**  would be long enough is there a visual cue for brewing too long there's not a lot of  people a lot of people think it's great to like see foam in compost tea like foam really  doesn't have anything to do necessarily with microorganisms yes they do create a little  bit of foam through their reproduction but not the kind of things that I see people on  YouTube videos talking about it's normally because you've got a thick substance like  
**[1:22:08-1:22:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:22:08):**  fish hydrolysate that's getting air pumped up through it so like just when you're a little  kid and blowing on milk blowing in your glass of milk and creating bubbles it's kind of  that same thing I the only thing that the only cue that I have noticed is once you start  to get this the only way I can describe it as a wet straw smell so it's kind of a kind  of a gross smell if you've smelled straw that sat around wet if you once you start to hit  
**[1:22:38-1:22:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:22:38):**  that I would say you're either at PQ population or you need to use it then if there are there  are cues that that it's gone bad if you smell anything bad so same thing with a compost  pile your our noses are meant to detect bad things and we can rely on our own devices  so if you smell something that is very off-putting to you it's going to be off-putting the microorganisms  especially because they're a lot more sensitive than we are so in a compost tea if you smell  
**[1:23:17-1:23:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:23:17):**  like a manure smell it's definitely gone anaerobic and you probably don't want to use it another  thing I do need to mention is that compost tea is made with compost if you put soil and  peat because people get this idea oh I need a fungal dominant brew so they'll take what  they know is fungal dominant soil and put it in your brew and I can't say I haven't  done that yes I have but you're taking the chance that there might be a pest or disease  
**[1:23:43-1:23:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:23:43):**  in that soil that hasn't gone through the composting process using pathogens into your  brew so in that same sense I believe it was Penn State that did I think it was in the  90s it was either in the 90s or early 2000s and that did compost tea experiments and research  but they were using manure manure is not compost manure is manure so they were making manure  tea and breeding E. coli and stuff like that so these people who are introducing bat guanos  
**[1:24:13-1:24:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:24:13):**  and stuff like that I'm not necessarily saying you're gonna get bad stuff but that's not  necessarily a strictly compost tea compost tea is using compost and I apologize but I  meant to touch on this briefly way back in the conversation but you had mentioned cold  composting I just want to mention this real quick the reason that we want to get up to  temperature on a compost pile and go through what are called PFRPs practices practices  
**[1:24:36-1:24:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:24:36):**  that reduce pathogens is because those hot temperatures kill pathogens and weed seeds  and so that's the benefit of having a hot composting process is because we're hopefully  killing all the pathogens and weed seeds that are in that in that same sense with the smell  if you've got a compost pile that you smell ammonia you're losing your nitrogen in the  form your the nitrogen that's in not all the nitrogen but the nitrogen or the stuff that  
**[1:25:02-1:25:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:25:02):**  you smell you're losing so much of that nitrogen as a gas form of ammonia and so the nitrogen  that you should be keeping in your product is getting lost in a gaseous form as well  as that compost is going anaerobic or if you get like a sulfur smell that's also gonna  be I can't think of the the nutrient that it is but that you're you're losing that nutrient  in a gaseous form so anytime you smell something bad you're not only losing nutrients your  
**[1:25:31-1:25:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:25:31):**  pile has gone anaerobic and you need to get air immediately into there and turn a pile  thinking Tombo's tea here are some of the big mistakes potentially one adding too much  molasses or any molasses which is something I personally know I've done in the past you've  mentioned it I've heard Dr. Elaine mention it that there's already enough bacteria there  you probably don't need to breed them out so adding molasses not a lot of bang there  
**[1:25:55-1:26:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:25:55):**  for your buck in terms of what you're going for two brewing too long and then three would  be using soils where you're potentially introducing pathogens into the mix any other big mistakes  you see people make water quality is the only other thing I can think of I mean it's you  really need to start with good water quality I mean even people even talk about this I'm  just watering their garden you know when you're using water from a tap if you're in city water  
**[1:26:24-1:26:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:26:24):**  it's gonna have any amount of chlorine or chlorine and that chlorine or chloramine is  put into the water to go through the pipes and and kill any bacteria that might be collected  along the way so that we don't consume any of that and in that same sense that chlorine  or chloramine is going to be working against any of the biology that we're trying to grow  because we're trying to enhance these bacteria so you want to off gas water or treat that  
**[1:26:50-1:26:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:26:50):**  chlorine or chloramine if you're using tap water say you know you get your five gallon  bucket out you fill it up with water from your tap you can let it sit out for two days  to off gas that two days or more to off gas that you also want to be getting your water  to ambient temperature I'm gonna I'm gonna bring come back around to that in a second  here so you can off gas it in a couple days by letting your water sit out you can put  
**[1:27:21-1:27:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:27:21):**  your air pump on there and let it sit for 12 to 24 hours and that should off gas by  bubbling it it'll increase the rate of the off gassing and you should be able to off  gas that chlorine or chloramine in a matter of 12 to 24 hours or if you aren't able to  do that you can use humic acid and again because I don't have a chemistry background I'm not  able to describe how this works but there's something about humic acid in any acid that  
**[1:27:47-1:27:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:27:47):**  it binds to the ions of the chlorine or chloramine and ties up like one of the oxygens or something  I don't know I don't wanna I'm not even gonna give you a wrong answer but there's something  about it that it that it ties up chlorine and chloramine so you can use humic acid to  tie up any of that chlorine or chloramine and it really takes a middle amount according  to Elaine you just need to put enough humic acid into the water where the water even just  
**[1:28:13-1:28:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:28:13):**  becomes tinted brown so that's like five to ten drops of humic acid but I'm normally like  I said I'm normally using you know a tablespoon in a five gallon brew so that would treat  that like I said I just wanted to mention like with brewing you want your water at ambient  temperature and when you're brewing compost tea you want to brew at the same ambient temperature  that you're applying into the plants so if you've got a greenhouse that you're wanting  
**[1:28:38-1:28:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:28:38):**  to apply plants to don't brew it outside and then bring the water into your greenhouse  or don't brew in the air conditioning of your house and then bring it outside into 90 degree  weather and you may have heard Elaine talk about this she was working with I think it  was the Bellagio it was one of the places in Nevada in Las Vegas that she had consulted  with they had a great brew program going landscape looked fabulous and then the summer came and  
**[1:29:06-1:29:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:29:06):**  they started having a bunch of issues that they thought was the result of the compost  tea and so she questioned them questioned them couldn't figure out what it was and then  she went there finally they paid her to come out and check out what was going on well they  had moved their up their brew operation from the outside to an air conditioning environment  for their own comfort and they're brewing you know in the 70s and then taking it out  
**[1:29:28-1:29:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:29:28):**  into a desert and having issues so you won't always brew at the same ambient temperature  is what you are applying it to your plants I think the water is an interesting point  and that's something I throw my experiences I've seen people really freak out about the  amount of chlorine for I mean in the water and my unscientific opinion is there's not  enough in there you're putting so much compost in relative to the amount of water that that  
**[1:29:52-1:29:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:29:52):**  bacteria is going to outcompete chlorine it's just like if you had a five gallon bucket  full of water go to the bathroom in that five gallon bucket I'm not going to be confident  in drinking that water is that chlorine is going to kill anything so I mean those are  my thoughts on that but people yeah they freak out about too much chlorine in the water but  I think you're right you just bubble it and that solves that problem if you're worried  
**[1:30:16-1:30:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:30:16):**  about it and I'm kind of of the same opinion as you I feel like usually the chlorine is  not going to have that much of a detrimental effect on the biology because we've got so  much biology but you never know how much I mean like if you smell chlorine you know there's  a lot in there and it's good to treat it so yeah and because you're using humic acid as  a food anyway you're likely tying that chlorine up like it's it's not usually a factor that  
**[1:30:41-1:30:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:30:41):**  I am extremely concerned about but it's good to focus on water quality and if you can use  rainwater even better right use the best that you have available and then do the best you  can with what you have you know but don't get paralyzed and not starting yep so let's  say that the tea is now brewed we made this optimal tea I want to go apply it to my farm  into the garden put it in a sprayer straight up should I dilute it down what's the best  
**[1:31:10-1:31:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:31:10):**  method of applying the best the best best method of applying is whatever is going to  be best for your application or whatever you've got so you know someone with a small garden  if you're if you've got flower beds around your house or a small vegetable garden that  you normally use a watering can for put it in a watering can and go water it if you you  know it all depends on how much time you want to spend applying you know so a backpack to  
**[1:31:42-1:31:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:31:42):**  go from like the smallest to largest you know watering can backpack sprayer water pump with  a sprayer like I use I've seen multiple multiple different things you know that large scale  with that guy he was using a drip emitter on a boom from his large tractor you know  that's like a 40 60 I don't even remember how much how big that was a huge boom on a  drip emitter spray emitter I've worked with someone I sold them compost tea they took  
**[1:32:11-1:32:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:32:11):**  out four wheeler you can they've got those tanks with the 10 foot boom or whatever on  a four wheeler use that and then you know you can apply it at full strength if you need  to or like I said it really just depends on how much water you need to be able to apply  it on to the land that you have so in a boom like that with the with the four wheeler he  was able to put strictly compost tea into the tank and apply it without diluting it  
**[1:32:46-1:32:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:32:46):**  down if you were to with myself I'm using a I use a Honda water pump hooked onto an  IVC tote with a 200 foot garden hose and a spray so I'm having to dilute down you know  a couple hundred gallons normally and I'm normally wanting to do that also because I  want to really make sure that the soil is moist to give a good moist surface for that  biology to continue to survive and thrive and I'm not just spraying it on a on a dry  
**[1:33:14-1:33:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:33:14):**  surface so like I said if if you're a farmer that has one acre and you know it takes you  50 from your experience applying other stuff you know that it takes you 50 gallons to cover  your whole one acre then dilute it down however you need you to cover that one acre and you  know I don't know where the breaking point of diluting it too much is normally you can't  really dilute it too much or it doesn't come to that point where you're diluting it too  
**[1:33:45-1:33:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:33:45):**  much it's just a matter of and you know that that might mean if you don't have experience  with applying stuff out on your land it might just mean a matter of seeing how much it takes  to see how much water it takes to cover that amount of land and then in the application  that you're using. Do you think you can over apply? It's cheap you can make it at home  you can essentially make infinite amounts is there a danger of putting too much? I've  
**[1:34:16-1:34:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:34:16):**  been asked that different times and I can't honestly answer that but I don't see how you  could I don't see how you would have the time to make enough to really over apply it especially  if you're like a market gardener or something like that you've got enough other things going  on I think that having the time to apply it as much as you could is a matter is more would  be more of the issue I have noticed so I had a fig a fiddle leaf fig tree in a potted plant  
**[1:34:50-1:34:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:34:50):**  in my house and I applied compost tea to it a few times and the soil in that broke down  so much that it was like humus that it like almost broke down too much so it can depending  on your climate you know if you're if you're in the southeast where it's humid you're gonna  get a lot more micro it's gonna be a lot easier for you to get microbial action so you've  got a if you've got a cover crop that you chop and drop or use a flail mower on you're  
**[1:35:25-1:35:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:35:25):**  gonna break down a lot faster in a in depending on your climate so if you don't want if you  if it's gonna be detrimental to get that breakdown too fast yet then yeah you could be applying  too much compost tea but I would say most of the time it's not gonna come to that point  I hope that it answers it well do you have any thoughts for market gardeners applying  compost tea to leaves that will be consumed lettuces kales food safety is a big thing  
**[1:36:00-1:36:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:36:00):**  nowadays especially with the coronavirus that's brought that all to light here what are your  thoughts when it comes to applying tea to a part of the plant that you're going to eat  if you're using a microscope and you know what you're doing and you know what you're  looking at and you know how to identify disease microorganisms through the microscope and  you have full confidence that you don't have that in your brew or your compost I feel safe  
**[1:36:34-1:36:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:36:34):**  I feel safe spraying it on any plan if someone like I'll tell customers or other people like  you know it's totally safe for your dog your kids to go out and play in this like right  after I spray it spray compost tea I was like it's totally safe for your kid to go out here  and if they're kind of questioning like if you want I'll spray it in my mouth right now  like I'll drink the compost tea myself like I'm not worried about doing that and other  
**[1:36:58-1:37:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:36:58):**  people do drink compost tea yeah like when we were at Rodale just kind of a funny story  we had a class of kids who I think they were thinking that the compost tea was like tea  and so they wanted to try it and we sprayed everybody lined up and they wanted to have  it sprayed in their mouth so we sprayed it in a bunch of little kids mouths which I'll  admit that years later now that I can't get in trouble for it but you know nothing happened  
**[1:37:25-1:37:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:37:25):**  if and again it comes down to making sure you have safe compost and you wouldn't want  to be you that's where it comes down to the microscope I should say that's the importance  of using a microscope to look at what you're doing but to be on the safe side yeah it'd  be good to follow regulations to where you're applying that you know 30 days before harvest  for eating but I have no issues I've sprayed at my I have a lot of friends who own a farm  
**[1:37:59-1:38:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:37:59):**  like two miles from me I've gone by and sprayed their stuff and then I've know they've I know  I knew that they harvested that stuff the next week and I buy a CSA from them and they've  most likely cleaned it a little bit but there may still be stuff on there and I'll eat it  without washing it or I'll pick stuff that I've just sprayed and eat it I don't have  an issue with that right so I mean when I think compost tea I think going in initially  
**[1:38:26-1:38:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:38:26):**  a lot of my thought would be around applying it to the soil where it sounds like a lot  of what you're applying to is direct to foliage is that like if you had to recommend one way  to use it is it on the foliage versus the soil I would say the most important thing  is the soil so when I'm going out I didn't clarify that when I'm going out spraying what  I normally do is if this the plant that I'm applying it to I'll hit the foliar foliage  
**[1:38:55-1:39:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:38:55):**  up here and then I'll zoom in and soak that root zone and so I'm getting a foiler spray  and a soil soak in the root zone of the plant but the most important thing as I am trying  to point out is the matter of getting that biology into the soil so that the soil can  feed the plant and inoculating the soil.  Well along that here's one thing I hear a lot of people talk about when it comes to  
**[1:39:24-1:39:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:39:24):**  teas is in the tea brewing process you've created this perfect environment for these  microorganisms to survive.  You're giving them tons of oxygen, tons of food, you're starting them out really vigorous  and healthy, they're going nuts.  Now you're relocating them to the soil which may be non-optimum conditions.  
**[1:39:51-1:39:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:39:51):**  Are they actually surviving in the soil or are you seeing like a rapid decline in population  because soil conditions aren't potentially near where brew conditions were so it might  not be as effective as thought?  Yeah that's a great question.  I point this out to people, I've learned to point this out to people, if I go and spray  
**[1:40:17-1:40:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:40:17):**  a farm who doesn't have a lot of mulch down and they've got pretty bare soil and I can  see that it's clay soil, a compost tea, the foliar spray is going to benefit the plant,  the soil soak is going to benefit the plant a certain amount, but Maslow's hierarchy of  needs food and shelter, food and habitat, food and shelter, so we need a habitat, microorganisms  need habitat, and that's what I want to get across to people is that the soil, you need  
**[1:40:54-1:41:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:40:54):**  to treat the soil as a habitat and try and make the most positive habitat that you can  to further the microbes.  So if you don't have good organic matter on your soil or in your soil, you're going to  get a bit of benefit from the life that I'm spraying onto there, but there's not necessarily  going to be a good continuation of it.  
**[1:41:22-1:41:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:41:22):**  So that's where cover crops and mulches come into play.  Through cover crops you're not only getting the good exudates from roots that are feeding  the soil, but once that plant dies or is terminated, you're getting that organic matter on the  top of the soil that's going to also feed the microorganisms and it's been shown that  the preferential food source for soil microorganisms is first, root exudates and second, organic  
**[1:41:48-1:41:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:41:48):**  matter in the soil.  So they're getting the benefit of root exudates and then when the plant dies, they're getting  the benefit of using that organic matter for food and it's also going to create structure  in the soil.  So we need to give a good healthy habitat to these microorganisms, which is the habitat  
**[1:42:05-1:42:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:42:05):**  for the plant as well, and so it's all about giving a good home to this for the soil and  feeding the soil and then keeping that life there.  Is there a benefit to just applying food sources for microorganisms in the soil to the soil  instead of actually adding the organisms to that liquid when you're applying them?  I get what you're saying.  
**[1:42:38-1:42:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:42:38):**  So yeah, two of the main, one of the main fertilizers that organics uses or that I know  of is fish emulsion or fish hydrolysate.  So people in organics are using that as a fertilizer for their plants.  Well, what is that?  It's a food for microorganisms, so what are they really feeding?  
**[1:43:03-1:43:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:43:03):**  They're feeding the microorganisms.  Yeah, so if you've got good biology in the soil, I do think that there's a benefit to  that.  I can't say that I've ever done that just myself, but yeah, say you want to increase  things in your compost pile, what if you just took some humic acid and fish hydrolysate  
**[1:43:21-1:43:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:43:21):**  and put it in a mix and sprayed that into your compost pile, you're giving all kinds  of foods to those microorganisms to help feed them.  Yeah, I totally believe that.  Dan Kittredge, the Bio-Nutrient Food Association, I think he has a great example of this.  He talks about, you know, like on cloudy days, if you've got multiple cloudy days in a row  
**[1:43:44-1:43:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:43:44):**  where you're not getting photosynthesis from the sun, you're not getting the root exudates  being pumped as heavily into the soil because you don't have that photosynthesis, so he  likes to use molasses mixed into water, diluted down into the water and sprayed out to his  plants as a food, a sugar and food source for those microorganisms to keep them fed  and keep them going in the soil for times like that.  
**[1:44:09-1:44:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:44:09):**  And I don't want to say that's true or that I know that that's true, but according to  my research and my experience, that totally makes sense.  All right, Troy, man, I really want to thank you for coming on today and sharing all this  knowledge.  I think a lot of people have a lot of information that they can go and work off of.  
**[1:44:27-1:44:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:44:27):**  A big takeaway for me is I want to go out and make some compost tea.  I mean, I think, why not?  And that would be my call out to people listening to this.  Why not try it over the summer when things are growing?  It's not going to take a lot of money and maybe, just maybe you'll get some great results.  
**[1:44:44-1:44:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:44:44):**  Any final thoughts you want people to take away when it comes to compost and compost  tea?  One thing I had failed to mention when we were kind of talking about the foliar spray  is that according to Elaine's research and also my beliefs is that if you get the biology  onto the foliar surfaces of a plant, you're providing a protective surface where you've  
**[1:45:08-1:45:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:45:08):**  got a wall of beneficial biology that's going to keep diseases and pests at bay.  So like tomatoes get blight in the middle of the season.  And so it's good to have a foliar application to help prevent this.  Again, that goes back to having a healthy plant and healthy soil to not attract those  pests in the beginning.  
**[1:45:30-1:45:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:45:30):**  But I just I did want to mention that because I hadn't mentioned that.  And so like with application rates, people often ask about application rates, which we  didn't get into.  And I normally say at seed at first true leaf and then one and two months later or like  with landscapes or lawns, I'll recommend three to four times per year.  
**[1:45:49-1:45:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:45:49):**  If you're doing gardening, I think it's good to get an application down once a month or  depending on your plant, like say we've got roses or tomatoes, which are very susceptible  in summer months to fungal issues.  So then you'd be wanting to get out there once a week or once every other week to get  a good coating of biology on those plants.  
**[1:46:06-1:46:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:46:06):**  So that's what makes a good, and I'm not saying that's a hundred percent.  Just because you go out and spray doesn't mean you're not going to get diseases because  there's always things that happen.  But I had wanted to mention that because I had not gotten to mention that in our conversation.  The seed thing is one really great thing to touch on, Click, here.  
**[1:46:26-1:46:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:46:26):**  I mean, I've heard people talk about inoculating seeds where you spray it, you then let the  tea dry on the seed, the microbes go dormant.  That way you can run it through a seed drill or a seeder.  It gets into the soil when moisture hits it, that biology reactivates or you seed your  plants into your cells that you're going to be transplanting from.  
**[1:46:44-1:46:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:46:44):**  And then you just spray that soil really quick.  So the biology is there in the cell when you transplant the seed, the plant and the soil  into this garden bed.  Totally.  Yeah.  
**[1:46:57-1:47:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:46:57):**  So again, relating this to humans or any other animal, when mammals come out of the vaginal  canal, they're coated with tons of bacteria that are giving them this coating that's a  good start to life, which is a really good start to life.  And it's been shown that people who have C-sections, their kids need to be inoculated with this  good biology from the vaginal canal.  
**[1:47:20-1:47:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:47:20):**  I'm sorry to get into this on a gardening podcast, but it's really good analogy.  So with that in mind, we want to start the seeds off with good biology, coating them  with soaking them in an extract to get that good biology on the surface or applying it  as immediately as possible.  I'll just mention real quick because a lot of people are into mycorrhizal fungi.  
**[1:47:43-1:47:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:47:43):**  And that's not one thing we didn't touch on, but saprophytic fungi is what you're going  to find in compost.  You might have mycorrhizal spores, but mycorrhizal spores need roots to germinate.  So even if you have mycorrhizal spores in compost, it doesn't mean you have mycorrhizal  fungi in compost.  
**[1:48:00-1:48:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:48:00):**  So you can purchase separate mycorrhizal spores to inoculate seeds.  Or also, I'd wanted to mention that earlier is, I don't always, but it's always great  to add a mycorrhizal spore powder, soluble powder into a compost tea mix.  You can do that as well to get that into the roots, especially if you're doing root injections  to get that into the soil and help to benefit plants that much more.  
**[1:48:26-1:48:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:48:26):**  So yeah, in that same, when we're talking about that, when you're doing your seeds,  coat them with extract and add some mycorrhizal.  If there are mycorrhizal, which 90 to 95% of plants have mycorrhizal associations, put  some mycorrhizal powder in there because you're going to be using a lot less.  It's all about money with most people.  
**[1:48:45-1:48:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:48:45):**  You're going to be using a lot less if you do it at a younger stage than if you're trying  to do it at a plant that's big, you're going to be using a lot less and you're going to  be getting that good inoculation in there, which can then take off itself and thrive  rather than having to use more to get it going.  So you're saving money about doing it.  
**[1:49:01-1:49:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:49:01):**  You're saving money, you're getting the plant going better with, through that biology at  a young age, young stage of the plant's development.  Last great words.  Love it, man.  Where can people find out more about you if they want to learn about your services, some  
**[1:49:17-1:49:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:49:17):**  of the other things that you offer and just follow along with projects you're working  on?  Yeah, the best place to follow along is on Instagram or Facebook, more like Instagram.  I do a lot on there.  I've got a website that's livingrootscomposttea.com and I specialize in soil microbiology, not  
**[1:49:36-1:49:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:49:36):**  in website building, so it's not the greatest website, but you can find out my experience  and services and products that I offer there.  Half of what I do is consulting with growers and composters nationwide.  I can do it by phone or by email too to give people help.  The other half of my business is offering compost tea sprays in the Nashville and Middle  
**[1:49:55-1:49:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:49:55):**  Tennessee area, like I said, for landscapes, lawns, gardens, and farms.  A quick add, I've been considering changing my business name because compost tea is not  necessarily all I do.  I've been considering changing it to Living Roots Biologics because biological stuff on  a whole is much more on what I'm working with, like making compost.  
**[1:50:19-1:50:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:50:19):**  And I've also been trying to get Nashville's first large-scale food waste compost facility  using worms to compost.  It's just been a matter of finances.  So yeah, keep an eye out at Living Roots Compost Tea on Instagram, livingrootscomposttea.com.  If you want to email me, it's troytroy at livingrootscomposttea.com.  
**[1:51:05-1:51:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/insearchofsoil/iSOS-05-TroyHinke-CompostTea-FullEpisode.mp3#t=1:51:05):**  Thank you.  Thank you.  