### In Search of Soil  (2020-10-09)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://insearchofsoil.libsyn.com/welcome-to-in-search-of-soil-trailer#t=0:00:00):**  How can we know so little about something we're so dependent upon?  That's the case with soil.  Where in just a single teaspoon of rich brown earth, we can find millions of species and billions of organisms.  But we don't know very much about any of them.  We've always just had the attitude that micro arthropods, micro arthropods were predators.  
**[0:00:24-0:00:32](https://insearchofsoil.libsyn.com/welcome-to-in-search-of-soil-trailer#t=0:00:24):**  And that's really the only benefit they give to the soil food web. But that's not true.  It's these unknowns that have made soil one of the last true frontiers of science.  We're just in the very, very early days of starting to understand and see some of that.  You know, compared to the whole picture, it's just very, very early days.  Let's unfold some of that mystery and let the exploration begin as we go in search of soil.  
**[0:00:55-0:01:02](https://insearchofsoil.libsyn.com/welcome-to-in-search-of-soil-trailer#t=0:00:55):**  You realize, OK, even though we're told all the time, you know, science has sort of figured everything out and, you know, this is how it's looking for the future.  You can come back and say, well, we still actually don't know all this stuff about fungi.  And let's not throw in the towel just yet, because it seems like there's a lot we haven't applied.  I'm your host, Diego Footer, and on my new podcast In Search of Soil, we'll dive deep into science to get answers about the unknown world that isn't very deep below your feet.  And in one of the studies I did, for instance, we did not apply potassium for four years and we took six crops of corn wheat soybean.  
**[0:01:35-0:01:48](https://insearchofsoil.libsyn.com/welcome-to-in-search-of-soil-trailer#t=0:01:35):**  And we found that where we did not apply potassium, the ending soil test potassium values were higher than where we did apply fertilizer potassium.  I'm Diego Footer. The show is In Search of Soil.  Follow and listen weekly on Spotify or wherever pods are cast.  