---
title: A Conversation With Plants & Pascal Fafard
---
### Regenerative Agriculture Podcast  (2019-03-12)  
### Author(s): John Kempf  

**[0:00:00-0:00:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:00:00):**  Hi friends, I'm Jon Kampf, hosting this podcast. I am passionate about developing regenerative  agriculture systems that improve soil health, produce crops that are completely resistant  to diseases and insects, and produce fruit of such an exceptional quality that we can have  
**[0:00:16-0:00:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:00:16):**  a legitimate conversation about growing food as medicine. I've discovered that there are many  people with incredible knowledge and information about soil and plant systems and how to develop  regenerative agriculture systems. However, much of this knowledge and this information is scattered,  
**[0:00:33-0:00:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:00:33):**  it's found all over the place. Some of it has been published in peer-reviewed publications,  but there are many incredible stories and a lot of knowledge that has not been published  and that hasn't been shared with many people. I started Advancing Eco-Agriculture in 2006 to  
**[0:00:49-0:00:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:00:49):**  bring this knowledge together in a more coherent fashion and incorporate it into products and  growing systems that growers can easily put into practice. It's my personal mission to have these  regenerative agricultural systems become adopted globally and become the mainstream, the status  
**[0:01:05-0:01:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:01:05):**  quo against which all other growing systems are compared. To help achieve this goal, I want to  share the knowledge that we have learned in the last decade and make it available to everyone.  While we have developed products at AEA that embody the principles of regenerative agriculture  
**[0:01:22-0:01:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:01:22):**  systems and make them easier for growers to apply, this knowledge and these principles can be applied  anywhere. And when they are applied properly, they will always increase farm profitability and  resilience to climate stress. If you have any questions, suggestions, comments, or ideas,  
**[0:01:40-0:01:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:01:40):**  topics that you would like for me to discuss, please connect on LinkedIn or on Twitter, where  my username is at vision builder seven, or you can also email me at john at john kempf.com. I would  very much like to hear from you and to hear your feedback. Be sure to subscribe to this podcast,  
**[0:01:59-0:02:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:01:59):**  and thank you very much for listening. Enjoy the show.  Many great growers have had the experience of walking through a block of fruit or through a  field of vegetables and saying something like something just doesn't quite feel right. This  
**[0:02:15-0:02:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:02:15):**  block is off. It's sometimes hard to quantify, but we know that something doesn't feel right.  What if you could tap into what your crop is attempting to communicate? In this episode,  I'm delighted to host a good friend Pascal Fafard. Pascal is a consultant in Quebec,  
**[0:02:32-0:02:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:02:32):**  as you'll be able to hear from his awesome accent, and is in very high demand to work with the  largest vegetable growers in the region. While Pascal has decades of experience and a background  in agronomy, his consulting work is not focused on managing insects or managing nutrition.  
**[0:02:50-0:02:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:02:50):**  Instead, he helps growers figure out how to tap into what is happening with their soils and plants,  and how to determine what is going on when things just don't feel quite right. This is a very  important topic, a very different topic from our typical agronomy science focus, but one that I  
**[0:03:06-0:03:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:03:06):**  believe is very important and that you'll greatly appreciate and enjoy. This season, like the last,  is brought to you by Advancing Eco-Agriculture. Each episode, we gift a community impact spot,  which features the efforts of organizations who are doing really great work in the sphere of  
**[0:03:23-0:03:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:03:23):**  regenerative agriculture and food. We hope that you'll check them out and get involved and support  their work as well. This show, we have Chelsea Green, an important publisher in the regenerative  agriculture space. They have long been a valuable source of information to growers, intent upon  
**[0:03:40-0:03:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:03:40):**  learning more about ecologically sound farming practices. Chelsea Green Publishing, employee-owned  and mission-driven, is recognized as a leader in content about organic farming and gardening,  homesteading, local food, restorative living, regenerative agriculture, and diet-focused  
**[0:03:59-0:04:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:03:59):**  integrative health, publishing expert authors that bring in-depth practical knowledge to life  with books, ebooks, and audiobooks. Go to ChelseaGreen.com and enter code REAG30 at  checkout to receive a special regenerative agriculture podcast discount on your next  
**[0:04:21-0:04:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:04:21):**  print book purchase. And be sure to sign up for our newsletter and stay up to date on new releases.  Chelsea Green Publishing, cultivating change since 1984.  I love it. My own library has many titles from Chelsea Green and I hope that you'll take  
**[0:04:37-0:04:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:04:37):**  advantage of the discount they offer. Many growers and agronomists have asked that we develop more  in-depth information to describe the concepts that we've developed in our work at AEA, and which  I allude to here on the podcast. I'm delighted to announce that we've been able to produce a series  
**[0:04:53-0:05:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:04:53):**  of online courses where we do a deep dive on important agronomic principles. You can find  the Regenerative Agriculture Academy by searching for it or you can find it at academy.regen.ag.  I'm very excited by the information that we are sharing and I look forward to seeing you there.  
**[0:05:13-0:05:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:05:13):**  Hi friends. I'm here with a consultant who is loved by his growers for his work as a coaching  consultant. Pascal Fafard has a fascinating story and I think a story that is very relevant for all  of us as growers and as consultants. One of the most important things that we can do in working  
**[0:05:32-0:05:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:05:32):**  with plants is remembering that the image that we hold in our mind of success, what success looks  like, and the space that we come from within can have a tremendous impact on the crops that we're  growing, on the people that we interact with every day. Pascal has a fascinating story, has done some  
**[0:05:51-0:05:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:05:51):**  very interesting work in this area that I wanted to share with all of you. Pascal, thank you very  much for joining us today, for being here and for sharing your story. We're very excited to have you.  Thank you very much, John. It's a pleasure. Pascal, can you tell us a little bit about your  
**[0:06:06-0:06:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:06:06):**  background and what has led you to the work that you're doing today?  Yeah, sure. First, I am an agronomist. I made my studies at university for four years.  I have been working for 10 years. Mainly, I think I learned to learn because most of my expertise,  
**[0:06:29-0:06:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:06:29):**  I really found it in the field with growers, with other advisors, and in general with my life.  So, I've been working 10 years in a group of consultants doing IPM, Integrated Pest Management.  My goal was to look at the farms and reduce pesticide. I learned a lot there on the methodology  
**[0:06:53-0:07:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:06:53):**  to look on the very scientific, but counting the disease to decide if we reach the appropriate level  to take an action. But most of the time, the action was put a pesticide, insecticide,  fungicide to kill something. After some time, I realized I was ready for a new area, a new way to  
**[0:07:21-0:07:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:07:21):**  deal with the farms, with the grower. I quit. I started to work for two years using a different  product coming from Germany. The name of the product is not important, but it was more now  on building something. So, product to promote health of the plant, health of the soil,  
**[0:07:46-0:07:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:07:46):**  the microbiology, and really building something. So, I think it's probably at this moment,  the guy who was using those products was a naturopath. Is that a good word? Sorry for  my English. Is that a good word in English? Yeah. So, he teach me, he brought me a new way to look at  
**[0:08:06-0:08:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:08:06):**  the farms as something living. So, the soil would be as similar as the digestive system. So, you  want to help it to work in the proper way so that the plant received the proper nutrient. So, for  me, it was a shift and I was ready for that. But all along my career, I met so wonderful people who  
**[0:08:31-0:08:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:08:31):**  bring their richness, their expertise, who make who I am now. Anyway, so, I've been there for  two days and after what I was seeing is, yes, I'm working more with the nature, but I see so many  grower stress with child or the next generation who just don't want to take the farm because they  
**[0:08:53-0:09:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:08:53):**  see their parents or their father doing 100, 120 hour per week, being stressed, not fully fulfilled.  And I'm talking about good farms, really successful farms in the area from 100 to 500  acre of vegetable mostly, very established enterprise, but still with a lack of happiness.  
**[0:09:17-0:09:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:09:17):**  So, based on those experiences, I decided to take care specifically of the grower, family,  business grower, and put aside all the agriculture for two years. So, it was a good opportunity for  me to really feel the challenge that experience of a farmer, a grower. Yes, grow plants, but manage  
**[0:09:45-0:09:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:09:45):**  a team of employee, do the marketing, do the sale, repair the machinery, create new machinery.  So, so many domains that they have to be really good. And what I felt is there was a lack in  staying connected to what is their first passion. So, after those two or three years of coaching, I  
**[0:10:06-0:10:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:10:06):**  came back as a consultant, but more in a way to teach first because my main goals in, it's a big  answer for a small question, but my main goals is really to bring back autonomy to the grower  because that's their farms. So, I start more to develop kind of services that we're going to talk  
**[0:10:32-0:10:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:10:32):**  later to bring back autonomy. And I really think it starts with educate and teach and make sure  that the basic function of the soil and the plant is understood.  So, Pascal, you're describing yourself as being in the area of bringing autonomy to the grower  
**[0:10:51-0:10:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:10:51):**  and you're working with fruit and vegetable growers in Quebec, which is, we can hear from  your accent. What are some of the memorable moments that led you to do the work that you're  doing today? And when you describe bringing autonomy to a grower, what does that really  
**[0:11:14-0:11:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:11:14):**  mean to you? Yeah. First, as I said, I think since I was 25 years old, the first time that my  older brother told me, you know, Pascal, life is just incredible. The only advice I can give you  is do course, experiment, you know, learn because life is so much complex that we can see it,  
**[0:11:42-0:11:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:11:42):**  but it's so exciting to go through it with a mindset of discovering. And naturally,  since 20 years, I really open-minded to new ways to see life, to understand life. As I said,  I love people. I really try to see people for their own color and get the gift that they have  
**[0:12:10-0:12:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:12:10):**  to share naturally and in their unique color. Based on that, you know, you are a person that  first time I met you, I receive a lot on your way to see life, your capacity to explain in detail  something so complex, example, the photosynthesis of the plant. But why is this process is there  
**[0:12:36-0:12:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:12:36):**  for the plant? And put it in perspective. So people, as you bring a richness to my life  to help me to become who I am now, it's a process. It will never end and I'm really excited  because it keeps moving and also it brings me a sense of humility. You know, if there is  
**[0:13:00-0:13:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:13:00):**  something I want to say today, I'm not here to say the truth. I have one truth and my only desire  when you offer me this opportunity is just open new possibility to the grower and if there is  something or resonate in themselves in what I say, just take it. If there is something that doesn't  
**[0:13:21-0:13:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:13:21):**  talk to you, just put it back, throw it in the garbage. And it's really an opportunity to look  at your own relationship with your friends, with your family, with your employee, with the nature  and look if you can get a gift and add it to your own tools. Pascal, when you were working with a  
**[0:13:45-0:13:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:13:45):**  grower and coaching, as you describe it, what exactly is the scope of the coaching? What are  you really doing with the growers that you're working with? Okay, first I have really a focus  to what is the priority on the farms. So when I arrive on the farm, usually I really try to find  
**[0:14:08-0:14:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:14:08):**  what's working and where there is an opportunity to improve. So sometimes I'm going to talk about  the field, the fertility, sometimes I can, you know, we have a problem at the harvest time and  example, the plants are not at the same stage. So I have a feeling that, okay, maybe we need to go  
**[0:14:27-0:14:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:14:27):**  back to the planting time or the seeding time and we can go back and just walk behind the machinery  and get information to find a good diagnostic about the situation. So I really try with the  grower to get an overview of his farm and find opportunity to improve. I look at it in different  
**[0:14:53-0:15:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:14:53):**  aspects. What is success? You know, when I started as an agronomist 25 years ago, it was  no damage of the insect or having a good yield. It is still something very important.  But now I had other aspects as you have fun, you have pleasure to do your work as a grower.  
**[0:15:18-0:15:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:15:18):**  Are you still connected to that passion that brought you to the farms or to follow what your  parents did or I don't know, no matter if you start your own business or if you're a second or  third generation. Are you employees also fulfilled? Are they expressing their full potential?  
**[0:15:40-0:15:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:15:40):**  Because I really think that it's when everybody bring their own richness and is in the good place  in the farms that we have the most chance to have success in every area. Clearly profitability is  important. I saw a lot of growers work hard, really hard, being really committed, but they had a lack  
**[0:16:06-0:16:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:16:06):**  to just step back sometimes. Do I put my time, my energy at a good place? For me, it was a big  revelation. Is that a good word in English? Yeah. Revelation to the good place.  Revelation to see that, wow, I expect that some people who are on their farm for 10, 15, 20 years  
**[0:16:33-0:16:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:16:33):**  would know their farm very well. I'm not saying that they don't know nothing, but what I realize  is a grower, a farmer is not different than a businessman in any area. Things can go fast,  life can go fast, and sometimes it's easy to go on the automatic pilot and lose that awareness  
**[0:16:58-0:17:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:16:58):**  that's going to help you to hope, oh, something going on here. I need to look more closer or  I need some help to really understand what's going on. Once I get the information and I know what's  going on, now I can maybe adapt my strategy and make it happen. So following up on what you just  
**[0:17:22-0:17:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:17:22):**  described, what does success look like for you? What does a successful grower look like? Yeah,  I really think the biggest way from what I saw with my grower is are they fulfilled?  Are they fulfilled in what they are doing? What I realize is when my grower slow down,  
**[0:17:48-0:17:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:17:48):**  take moment to go in the field, take moment to have an overview of their farms, look the employee,  ask the question, is that person, is the good person at a good place? I really see that a new  state of peace of mind come for them. They take better decision because they got better  
**[0:18:09-0:18:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:18:09):**  information at first. They attract different things too. We didn't talk about it before, but  I teach also to my grower that I truly believe that our farms, our life is made of energy.  No matter your religion or your spirituality, I think if you are a grower or a consultant in  
**[0:18:32-0:18:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:18:32):**  agriculture, we accept the fact that there is something bigger with an awareness and we can  call it God or universe or energy or nature, but there is something bigger that bring life or make  life happen. As a human being, we are part of that world, of that system. What I observed  
**[0:19:00-0:19:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:19:00):**  during those years is, okay, you need to work with your mind, with your rationality, but you  need also to develop your intuition, your connection to the nature. I think it's when you  put both together that you get the best result. If I go back to your question, I think when I  
**[0:19:20-0:19:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:19:20):**  observe that one of my grower become more fulfilled, happy, it's because naturally all  the other aspect got in place. He is proud of the field, good yield, good quality. He is proud of  the way he grow it. I'm not working with only an organic grower. I take all the people and I take  
**[0:19:47-0:19:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:19:47):**  from where they are and naturally we evolve to work more with the nature because I think that's  the more efficient way to produce good yield and good quality, but it's also the most natural way  as a human being to be with. They realize that, okay, when I put a pesticide, it is not good  
**[0:20:08-0:20:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:20:08):**  to bring disorder in the soil, on my plant, it's toxic, the cost is always increasing on the market  to buy the product and I'm not building something. So naturally, they think differently, they prepare  the soil, they work with more natural product and after four and two, three, four, five years,  
**[0:20:27-0:20:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:20:27):**  they realize, wow, I completely transformed my way of growing. No matter if they are already organic  or not, there is a process going in that direction. Also, I heard a lot of my grower hearing that  now the seller wants their product. I don't know what you're doing on your farm, but that shallot,  
**[0:20:51-0:20:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:20:51):**  green onion, the conservation, it's much better in the grocery. So you're a bit higher on your price,  but I want to pay it because my customer wants that I buy from you. That's other for me,  result of the success. The quality, the seller wants your product, usually the price goes up.  
**[0:21:14-0:21:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:21:14):**  Also, profitability is important if we want a long-term success for a farm. But what I realize,  if I bring my grower fulfill in what he's doing, that's where you're going to use the most,  in the best ways, his potential and it's going to reflect on everything on a direct way and also in  
**[0:21:38-0:21:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:21:38):**  a subtle way as attracting good things on an energetic level. Pascal, I find this to be a very  interesting topic. We don't often hear consultants speaking about fulfillment of farmers and growers  and the question that comes to mind is what are the areas that you find most often that growers  
**[0:22:05-0:22:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:22:05):**  are dissatisfied with or that are preventing them from feeling fulfilled in their work?  I think a lot feel often overwhelmed. Running after a list to do that will never end until the  winter arrives. If it ends them. Yeah, exactly. That's a very good point because I know some of  
**[0:22:36-0:22:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:22:36):**  my growers store some vegetables like carotene and they can't keep the same speed. Maybe that  brings me to something I didn't share yet that five years, five times go fast, five or six years  ago I've been introduced with a woman, Maya Kincaid from Sedona, Arizona. Maya, since she's  
**[0:23:05-0:23:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:23:05):**  very young, expressed a gift. She can talk telepathically to animals and mainly that's  expertise and enterprise now. She teaches people in business or just individuals to connect with  the nature. She mostly works with animals but one day through a friend we connected and she told us  
**[0:23:32-0:23:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:23:32):**  that she could teach us how to communicate with plants. Naturally, I was really, why not? I heard  so many stories in my life. I've been meditating for many years, not in a constant way but  every two weeks, I don't know. Anyway, I knew that there are many aspects of life that I'm not  
**[0:23:59-0:24:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:23:59):**  mastering but it doesn't mean that they don't exist. So for me, when I heard about that woman  that she can communicate with animals and that she answered us that she could teach us how to  communicate with plants, I told myself why not? In the first way, I saw the opportunity as an  
**[0:24:20-0:24:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:24:20):**  agronomist. Wow, if I can communicate with the plants and the plant told me I want more nitrogen,  increase the population, it's going to be much easier to develop a strategy. But it was just,  it was nothing about what I've been discovering over the five, six or seven years and I naturally  
**[0:24:45-0:24:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:24:45):**  integrated in my work with my grower. Why am I talking about that? Because at first,  I wanted to teach it to the grower to get the information, as I said, but what I realized after  I started implementing that technique in grower and farmer's life, they start to slow down  
**[0:25:08-0:25:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:25:08):**  and at least one time a day, take 15, 20 minutes, sometime more, but at least 15 minutes, go in the  field and just connect truly with the nature and just that 15 minutes calm the mind, bring more  peace, put some light on the priority and after when they go back to the other usual task that  
**[0:25:39-0:25:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:25:39):**  they have or responsibility they have in the farms, they look at it with a new sense of awareness  and if I go back to the fulfillment, they are in a relationship with the challenge of being a farmer  in a much more calmer and quiet way. So instead of being rushed and always reacting,  
**[0:26:01-0:26:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:26:01):**  they start to dance and you know like surfing with the wave, they start to dance with challenge  and naturally after weeks, months or years of practice, they are completely in a different place.  They are much more powerful to deal with the responsibility and the challenge of being, yes,  
**[0:26:25-0:26:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:26:25):**  it's beautiful to be a farmer but that's a reality and I'm sure all the person who are listening now,  they experience some time that that stuff, you know, the climate, the sales are just growing,  there is a lot of challenge but what I saw is with bringing that skills, you can completely  
**[0:26:47-0:26:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:26:47):**  transform your relationship in a good way to your farms. Pascal, talking to plants,  this is a fascinating skill that I've heard other people speak about. One of my mentors,  Bruce Tainio was very gifted at speaking with plants. Bruce is unfortunately no longer living  
**[0:27:05-0:27:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:27:05):**  but I'm really intrigued. Tell us a little bit more about what is the experience like  in communicating with plants and what are the types of things that you learn?  As I said, that's my truth. I don't say it to force it. I'm just sharing what I have experienced,  
**[0:27:26-0:27:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:27:26):**  what I notice. At first, it was a knowledge that someone teach me, I don't know the verb in past  dance. It's an English course for me now. Anyway, someone who teaches me English,  I had it with my own past experience about meditation. In my personal life, for many years,  
**[0:27:48-0:27:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:27:48):**  I love to go and hike in the mountains or in nature. When you are in nature, naturally,  you slow down, you start observing the bird. We develop a new technique called the  nature. For example, in the spring, the nature is like awakening. We can feel something happening.  
**[0:28:22-0:28:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:28:22):**  It's not something weird or bizarre. We feel there is a new sense of life growing.  Another thing, sometimes I'm sure you're going to feel, I don't know why there is a problem  some here. I cannot point it out right now but something wrong or the opposite. Oh, wow.  
**[0:28:50-0:28:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:28:50):**  I don't know. That field is so alive. I'm really excited to see it at the time of harvest because,  wow, that's wonderful.  You're absolutely right, Pascal. Both of those things, when you walk into a field in the springtime,  
**[0:29:06-0:29:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:29:06):**  the air feels different. There's songbirds singing and there is a burst of vitality and energy that  happens in the spring that is very observable. Also, I couldn't agree more with the second  comment that you made. I couldn't begin to recall all the times that we have walked with a grower  
**[0:29:24-0:29:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:29:24):**  through an orchard or through a field and the girl will say something like,  this block just doesn't feel right. Something is not right. I'm not sure what it is,  but this block just doesn't feel right. At first, honestly, when I got the course,  
**[0:29:38-0:29:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:29:38):**  I remember it was late August 2011. I remember the name. Wow, it's kind of wild. I told the first  course it was by phone. If I go through the process, it was really easy. I expect a very  complex technique but what Maya told us is, okay, at first, just be aware of your mind. Do you have  
**[0:30:02-0:30:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:30:02):**  expectations? Do you have other worries on your day? What I developed after is, okay, I put all  my worry, I put it aside. It's like I'm talking to myself and I'm going to take you back later,  but now I'm going to just experience something. She gave us an example to remind a positive and  
**[0:30:22-0:30:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:30:22):**  a negative souvenir just to observe, to connect to the emotion inside and to realize, to be aware  that, okay, there is something going on in my body and it's emotion. What's emotion? Again,  it's energy. You could say that the flow of the blood increase or, yeah, that's the physical part,  
**[0:30:45-0:30:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:30:45):**  but what's emotion? That's energy. That's something subtle. Second step, we just accept  the fact that we can't communicate with any living organism. In my believing, I really believe  every living organism as a soul or a consciousness. Usually, I don't put much importance to the world.  
**[0:31:13-0:31:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:31:13):**  I just try to describe that something and I know it exists and that's the way I go in life. I want  to know the basic, but I don't, in French, we have an expression, on the St. Franschpont,  a les flores du Tepi. I'm sure you don't understand the French or the way I said it,  
**[0:31:36-0:31:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:31:36):**  but the point is you don't give too much importance to the detail. You just get the overview  and that's the main goals. So, we accept the fact that we can't communicate with plants.  So, I was in my city. My other friend was in another city in Quebec and Maya was in Sedona,  
**[0:31:58-0:32:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:31:58):**  Arizona. The way we did it is that she asked us to prepare a list of plants, insects,  fields that you want to communicate with. I use the word communicate because talk for me sometimes  and for some person, it's harder to accept the concept because talk, we say automatically that  
**[0:32:20-0:32:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:32:20):**  we, there is a sound. For me, usually, it's more in my mind. It's like more telepathic.  It's, yeah, sometimes you can talk. So, I know some growers prefer to talk, but I just want to  say that it's a kind of communication. Anyway, tell me if I go too much in detail. So, we're  
**[0:32:42-0:32:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:32:42):**  having this conversation to go into detail. So, at that first course, I have to be honest,  I have a small doubt. I was really open-minded and honestly, I had to talk with the person and  I saw she was a grounded person, nice personality. So, for me, she showed me the sign of someone I  
**[0:33:07-0:33:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:33:07):**  can have confidence. So, anyway, I'm going to try it and we see what happened. And I still remember  the first communication, I choose a field of corn one hour away from my city. It was a customer that  I had and we had some trials where we test some new product and those products in general promote  
**[0:33:31-0:33:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:33:31):**  really good result, but on that field, there was no result. So, I had the idea that why we don't  talk with the field and we have a very practical example. So, the way we did it,  Maya asked, okay, I'm going to ask the question. We wait for two minutes and we observe  
**[0:33:56-0:34:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:33:56):**  what we get and after we share our answer, both all three of us. So, the question was something  like how we can help you or something similar. So, she said it and right away we observe on our  our home side, in our home, what show up. And for me, right away, I got the I don't need your help.  
**[0:34:21-0:34:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:34:21):**  I don't need your help. And clearly, I could feel it was not myself talking to me because it could  be one of your questions. Are you sure it's not your mind? And I could feel there wasn't a  different personality bringing me some thoughts and I start laughing. What's going on?  
**[0:34:45-0:34:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:34:45):**  And what, you know, I was ready to receive a beautiful, nice answer. Oh, you could tell to  buy grow her to pay more natural change. No, that's I don't need your help. So, I start laughing.  Anyway, after two minutes, we share our answer and I think I was the first and I share that and  
**[0:35:08-0:35:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:35:08):**  then I got a strong I don't need your help and I start laughing and I start just dancing with that  first answer and inside my mind, I told myself, oh, why that corn is saying me that? At the moment,  I ask a question, I receive an answer. Probably not from the corn at that time but from a higher  
**[0:35:34-0:35:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:35:34):**  level and as I said for me, it was not important. I'm noticing that I was connecting to a higher  level of consciousness in a very practical way and there was an opportunity to explore there.  And the first answer I got from why is he answering me? It was, yeah, maybe it was a  
**[0:35:55-0:36:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:35:55):**  pretty fast and straight introduction. You know, you don't know who we are. I didn't  introduce myself and I noticed that my intention was to get answered to take care of my customer.  Honestly, I didn't care so much about the corn itself. So, anyway, we share the answer and the  
**[0:36:18-0:36:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:36:18):**  three of us has mostly the same result. Maya and Michael received that why I would answer to you,  you don't like corn. So, the same tonality, the same kind of emotion that you disturb me and both  of them shared to me that, wow, I realized with the answer of the corn that Maya and Michael have  
**[0:36:45-0:36:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:36:45):**  in the background believing that there is too much corn on the planet. It's too hard on the soil,  it takes water, it's not positive, it's not a positive plant. So, what we realized that, wow,  the exploration, the discoveries already started, we noticed that the plant felt judged.  
**[0:37:10-0:37:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:37:10):**  So, in the future, if we want to create a nice relationship and develop communication,  we need to respect the organism, the living organism that we want to communicate with it.  I don't know if you have a question at that part of my story or I just continue.  
**[0:37:28-0:37:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:37:28):**  Well, there's a number of different questions that have come up, but let's continue. I'd love to hear  the end of that and then I'll follow through. Okay, good. So, what comes to my mind now is  maybe some people listening now are maybe, I don't know, that, oh, am I able to do that or  
**[0:37:49-0:37:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:37:49):**  it's almost impossible to believe or, okay, I will not censure, I will express myself freely.  So, I have two answers to that. First, yes, is that like everything, the more you practice,  the better you become. So, my aptitude now, seven years later, is much better than at the beginning.  
**[0:38:16-0:38:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:38:16):**  Second, yes, I've done meditation, you know, I've, for many years, I work in nature and so,  I develop my sensibility and my awareness. But what I see is I've teach that to  particular, to individual, to any kind of farmer, some very rational people who think everybody  
**[0:38:42-0:38:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:38:42):**  was able to do it, everybody. So, I'm not different. Yes, maybe I reach a level of mastering,  I don't know, and I know people who are much better than me, but the point is everybody, I truly  believe in that, is able to do it. One of the questions that I have, Pascal, you express your  
**[0:39:02-0:39:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:39:02):**  desire to learn about and thought you might be able to get answers about nutrient management  or irrigation management and then the answers that you received were actually about your  relationship with the crop rather than about nutrition management in that example that you  
**[0:39:22-0:39:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:39:22):**  shared. What were the types of answers that were common as you continued with this over the years?  Very good question. You're a good interviewer, John. I think you should follow on that.  Okay, I'm going to answer your question with finishing the story with the corn and I'm going  
**[0:39:44-0:39:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:39:44):**  to bring additional example. With the corn, after that first question and first answer,  we realized that, okay, we need to connect with heart, with deep soul, you know, with a good  intention with the plant, if we want to receive good answer. So, the second step we did, we  
**[0:40:08-0:40:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:40:08):**  introduced ourselves. So, the corn was not able to see me, so I'm a human, I am an agronomist,  I like my grower, I like the corn, the plant, and I'm really interested to know more about you.  And I could feel, you know, the energy changing. For me, I see no difference, okay, mostly,  
**[0:40:35-0:40:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:40:35):**  but really mainly a plant or an animal or a human is mostly the same. It's living, it wants to have  a purpose in life, there is emotion. So, in that specific case, the corn, he felt like attack,  so he protect himself, hey, whoa, whoa, whoa, don't walk on my feet and who are you, where are  
**[0:40:59-0:41:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:40:59):**  you coming from? So, after a second step, just introduced, I could feel the protection  energetically going down and I could feel, he feel my desire really to take care of him.  And at the end, what we got, because it was a short conversation, but if you want to help me,  
**[0:41:22-0:41:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:41:22):**  the only things I can tell you, don't put more of us in the field, it's already too much crowded.  So, he was talking about the level of the rate of seeding in the field of the population.  So, that was my first practical example of agronomic answer coming from a plant.  
**[0:41:43-0:41:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:41:43):**  As you brought up, there is two kind of answer we can receive, agronomic answer and  relationship answer, if I can say that. If I start with the agronomic, I got a case,  I think it was the first summer, the second years, I start with a grower in about 400-acre vegetable  
**[0:42:06-0:42:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:42:06):**  farms in mock soil, lettuce, onion, carrot, some mini crop. He had a disease of corrupt.  There was still another agronomist doing the IPM management, you know, reduced pesticide.  It was the same organism that I was working before and he had me to bring different view on the farms.  
**[0:42:29-0:42:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:42:29):**  So, he called me, Pascal, my advisor come in the field, they observed there was a root disease in  my carrot, most of my field is attacked and he recommended me to destroy it and never plant  carrots for three, four, five years to make a rotation and he said, probably the disease is  
**[0:42:52-0:43:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:42:52):**  going to stay there but we just try to decrease the level. I know you look at things differently  and I would like you come in the field and give me your opinion. So, I went there, it was one of  my first big challenge. So, I was a bit nervous, you know, it's not because I learned the technique,  
**[0:43:13-0:43:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:43:13):**  I practiced the technique that I'm always full of confidence and wow, I'm hot, you know.  I'm human as grower and advisor, yes, I doubt something but what I learned over the time is,  and that's a shift if I can open that, in my first 10 year, first years of advisor,  
**[0:43:36-0:43:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:43:36):**  I brought the obligation to myself to bring answer.  There was a smooth transition to where now I bring light on the situation, I bring question  and when I do that, I realize that we find better information, we have better diagnostic  
**[0:44:02-0:44:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:44:02):**  and we build something, we build an expertise as grower, as advisor, we really build something  on a short, mid and long term in that way. So, I catch myself, I told myself, okay,  forget about your doubt, just walk in the field and do the technique with no expectation,  
**[0:44:23-0:44:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:44:23):**  no obligation to perform, just connect and look what you got, what do you get.  At the moment I told that in my mind, I start having problem to breathe,  really important problem to breathe. So, I, wow, I become more emotional, what's going on?  
**[0:44:45-0:44:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:44:45):**  At the moment I ask what's going on, I receive something telling in my mind,  a thought telling it is not you, it is the soil and now I start smiling, oh wow, okay, I got it.  And now it was a dance, I was dancing with the answer, the rational agronomist with the  
**[0:45:08-0:45:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:45:08):**  intuitive part of me. I asked myself, okay, problem of breathing, root disease, oh, maybe there is a  lack of oxygen in the soil, I go take my shovel, dig a hole and it was mock soil and what I see  is the first, maybe, I don't know exactly, 20 centimeter was well decomposed, is that it?  
**[0:45:34-0:45:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:45:34):**  Is that a good word in English? Well aerated? No, but the process of decomposition.  Okay, yeah. So, because it was a mock soil, so usually there is a lot of fiber,  right, but with time, with microorganism, it starts to decompose and smaller fibers  
**[0:45:53-0:46:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:45:53):**  and it releases the nutrients from the process of decomposition. So, I saw a first part very well  decomposed and right after, there is no decomposition on that part. So it's really  orange, big thick fiber where water has problem to go through, clearly a lack of oxygen.  
**[0:46:19-0:46:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:46:19):**  And I see that because I dig other hole, every area where there is more disease, the depth of the  decomposition is higher. So when there is deeper decomposition, the roots went better,  better health system, better area and there is less disease. So, wow, that's really interesting.  
**[0:46:45-0:46:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:46:45):**  We walked that field many times, but we never dig a hole and that's a thing I see so much.  And honestly, I studied four years at university, but never someone put to the end phases of  look the roots, go dig hole and hole and hole and get information. And many of my growers,  
**[0:47:09-0:47:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:47:09):**  when I went with them dig hole, it was the first time of their life doing it. I'm not saying it's  everybody. I'm clear some of you listening and you did it. But with my experience, I would say that  80 to 90 percent of my growers, and really I'm working with really top grower producing very  
**[0:47:31-0:47:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:47:31):**  good crop, but most of them never took time to dig all to look at the roots of their crop.  Yeah, we see the same thing. It's very common. Growers are very busy and they've never been  taught to look at root systems and they're easy to ignore. They're out of sight and out of mind.  
**[0:47:51-0:48:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:47:51):**  So if I go back to the technique, I connect in the field because I receive a physical experience.  Because for me, it's dependent on the person. When you communicate with nature, you can receive  information as a thought, as an image, as an emotion. You can be a person. You can be a person.  
**[0:48:19-0:48:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:48:19):**  You can be pulled to go somewhere in the field. So it's dependent on the person. Sometimes some  people hear a voice. Me, I never hear a voice. It seems it's not my kind of sensibility. But  you know, be open-minded in the way it's going to be your way. So anyway, if I go back, I go in the  
**[0:48:41-0:48:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:48:41):**  field, I have a breeding problem. It brings me back to my analysis about the link with root disease  and plant. I got the feeling I need to dig a hole. After that, I got information about it's not the  same in everybody. You know, the other advisors said that, but no, there is a different place. So  
**[0:49:03-0:49:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:49:03):**  I've got intuition to go in different places in the field, dig out a hole, got other information.  What we got the first recommendation that you can do nothing. I have to feel, okay,  can we do something? I got some information. Yeah, you can put that product to bring more  
**[0:49:21-0:49:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:49:21):**  vitality in the microorganism in the field. You can plant some area, not the other. Anyway,  I got some information I got to make to give to the grower and to understand more what happened  and what we can do and not do. So that was mostly for the agronomic part. Second part, human part,  
**[0:49:44-0:49:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:49:44):**  relationship human with the nature. I was ready to leave the field because it was an area of the  farms outside of the main block. So it was maybe two kilometers. So I go in my car. At the moment,  so I go in my car. At the moment I go out of the field, I feel I need to pull out on the side and  
**[0:50:07-0:50:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:50:07):**  to wait. So I stopped my car and I got, I missed to see my grower. I missed the presence of my  grower. And again, I start smiling and go, what? And I got nothing else. So I go to see my grower  and I shared what I just shared to you about the soil, what I got, the way I got information,  
**[0:50:34-0:50:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:50:34):**  I dig all. And so he's really excited. He trusts me and he's really open to develop other skill  to put in his toolbox. So it's very excited. And that's the time that I know I have to talk about  the last message. And I ask myself, is that too weird? But what time I know when I have to say  
**[0:51:00-0:51:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:51:00):**  things. And never it happened when I asked strong message for a grower or another person,  I know it and I know it's going to be accepted. So I told him, I have another message for you.  So he starts smiling. Like he was already knowing it was going to be special. I told him,  
**[0:51:24-0:51:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:51:24):**  do you go often to that field? And now a bit guilty smiling said, no, my main farm is here.  And I felt that it was going well. I see visually that it was well, so I don't go often.  So I shared that I got that the field, the block, you know, really the soil told me I would like,  
**[0:51:49-0:51:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:51:49):**  I would enjoy, it's not I would like, I would enjoy that my owner, my grower come to see me  more often. And that would help me to grow more healthier plant.  For me, it was so beautiful to really realize that the soil or the plant,  
**[0:52:13-0:52:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:52:13):**  they have a relationship with us. And with developing that skill to communicating,  we really can create a partnership, you know, being aware there is a partnership, but doing it  in a way that we are aware of it, and that it's possible. And for my grower, he really understood  
**[0:52:34-0:52:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:52:34):**  what I meant when I said that. We were talking about, you know, going to spring and feel there  is something going on or going to feel, oh, something good or there is a problem without  knowing what is the problem. When I told him, it touched something in him that, yeah, I knew  
**[0:52:53-0:53:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:52:53):**  it. I knew it. I had to go more often. But you know, things going fast. And I was not listening  to that inner voice to go more there. So I commit to myself and to my land. I'm gonna go there.  And not because I'm in an application, because I'm excited to really go there and spend more time  
**[0:53:20-0:53:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:53:20):**  there. So, again, long answer to small question. With that technique, we get, we can get agronomic  information. But there is so much more to explore about developing a relationship with the crop  or the soil for the result in the field. But also, we know one time we asked the question,  
**[0:53:47-0:53:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:53:47):**  what's your purpose to the plant? It was a general question to all the species. What's your purpose?  And the answer was clear. It was our main purpose as a plant is to participate to evolution of human  being. I really try to keep that in mind that the plant, the soil, they want to be involved in our  
**[0:54:11-0:54:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:54:11):**  life. They want to take care of ourselves. And I experienced seeing the years after as we developed  that the more you develop your partnership with the farms, it's like magic. It's like things flow  much more naturally.  
**[0:54:29-0:54:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:54:29):**  Something that I've observed over the years, and this is this is more commonly and perhaps better  understood or more relatable perhaps by growers and farmers who are working with livestock. I grew  up in a community with a lot of smaller dairy farms, 40 cows to 100 cow dairies. And on some of  
**[0:54:49-0:54:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:54:49):**  these old dairy farms, where there's tie stalls, there can be two rows of cows with their backs  turned to the farmer. The farmer gets up in the morning, goes out and walks to the barn. As the  cows are getting up, and he will stop and say, there's something wrong with that cow. And yet  
**[0:55:11-0:55:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:55:11):**  there is nothing. There is no visual symptom or no visual expression that something is not okay.  It's just an intuitive connection that they develop this relationship and this connection  with their livestock and with their animals that they know something is not right. And I've  
**[0:55:28-0:55:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:55:28):**  observed this same characteristic with really good growers and sometimes very large growers. They  spend time out in the fields, walking through the fields, and they know when something isn't right.  And so the question or the comment that you just made really kind of struck me pretty hard,  
**[0:55:46-0:55:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:55:46):**  because I was about to ask the question, what is the role of the relationship between the  grower and the plant? What is it that plants desire from the grower?  I would say that you should ask. Yeah, I would say in general, plants are not different than  
**[0:56:08-0:56:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:56:08):**  human beings. They won't have a partnership relationship. They want to take care of them,  and they want to take care of us, guiding us in our decision in life, participating on the success  of the farms in every aspect from fulfillment, profitability, healthy, and abundance in crop.  
**[0:56:39-0:56:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:56:39):**  What I could add is I realized that really plant as a human want to have a purpose.  And it's not automatic. It's what I observed. I was surprised that, but I saw it many times.  If I do the correlation with human being, you know, sometimes we feel a bit lost and we have  
**[0:57:06-0:57:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:57:06):**  a lack in the sense of what am I doing? What's my purpose? You know, what am I useful for?  So there is a different level of where you can be. You can completely out of your purpose.  You can be right on and, you know, no doubt about what you want to bring to society and you are  
**[0:57:30-0:57:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:57:30):**  fulfilled and you can be in between. With the plant, sometime I found a field. Honestly, the  feeling, it was, the field was depressed. The emotion was there, the field and every single  plant was depressed. Growing, but it's funny, you say that in English, but in a vegetative way, you  
**[0:58:00-0:58:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:58:00):**  know, for us in French, it means that it's automatic pilot with no awareness. I realized now  that we judge the nature when we say that. But anyway, the point is when you, when a grower,  when a team work in the field, you bring your color. If you're joyful, you seed, you bring the  
**[0:58:30-0:58:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:58:30):**  energy of joy in the field. If you're depressed, if you're stressed, if you're frustrated, you bring  that energy in the field too. And slowly the soil or the plant get impregnated. Can we say that?  Wow, my English is very good. I think that's the first time I use that word. That's cool.  
**[0:58:56-0:59:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:58:56):**  Anyway, so about the purpose. When I observed that, I realized, example, I have a case in mind.  I arrive in a field, the field is like dead. Visually, it's okay. It's not a nice field.  It's not a very nice field, but it's okay. But I feel like it is dead. So I just do my little  
**[0:59:25-0:59:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:59:25):**  usual step, breathe, put my reary beside, bring my intention to connect and I listen.  And I start noticing some, it's like the field wake up from a night of many days. It's come,  okay, who's talking? What's going on? And as I said, now, and sometime when I go in the field,  
**[0:59:52-0:59:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=0:59:52):**  I introduce myself. Okay, I am the human being. The communication you're receiving,  I am the human being at the end of the field now. And now I really get the intention. I feel  that they know where I am. I don't know how does it work. Do they see me? I know they don't have  
**[1:00:10-1:00:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:00:10):**  eyes. Do they see me? Do they feel me? I don't want to go there, but I'm just saying that  I feel that there is a recognition. They know I'm there. And usually that's the first time  that a human talk or communicate with them. So there is a naturally an excitement coming up.  
**[1:00:34-1:00:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:00:34):**  What's going on? Wow. So we start now communicating in different way. And naturally what's coming is  by showing interest to them, it's like they become more joyful, more alive. And often at the end,  they have so much gratitude for me just being in communication with them. And it's like a reminder,  
**[1:01:04-1:01:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:01:04):**  it's like a reminder, oh, I'm here to grow, to feed people. I'm here to grow, to be sell and  participate to the prosperity of the farms. So sometime I go deeper and I really create  partnership. I participate to make sure they understand how important they are. You know,  
**[1:01:27-1:01:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:01:27):**  you're going to feed people and can feed a family, child, parents. By harvest, you, the grower,  are going to receive money. With that money, you're going to pay employee, those employee  are going to take care of their family. With that money, you're going to maybe be able to take more  
**[1:01:48-1:01:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:01:48):**  time for himself, take care of himself, build a good thing, build new machinery to take care of  the soil. So it's really incredible how they can participate in the success in every way  of the farms. A couple of years ago, you described a story for me of a grower who was working with  
**[1:02:11-1:02:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:02:11):**  several fields of lettuce who had been damaged by hail and the relationship and the image that he  held in his mind for those fields. Can you share that story? Are you talking about, it was a storm  iron in 2011, I think, and the field has been damaged a lot, not by eel, I think it was, but  
**[1:02:35-1:02:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:02:35):**  big drop of water pushed with the wind. So there was big damage on the leaves and it was a field.  He told me, tomorrow I'm going to destroy it because there is too much damage and we need  still 10 days to get the size to harvest. So in that field, when we entered, there was so much  
**[1:02:55-1:03:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:02:55):**  sadness, we could feel it. That was my first teaching for that specific grower. And I was  just sharing step by step what I was getting as an information. For me, it was new too. So it could  feel that, wow, what are we doing with that? And it's funny because it was very vulnerable.  
**[1:03:18-1:03:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:03:18):**  Usually I'm not able to deal with sadness in my own life. So what do we do? And what come in my  mind is just connect and take care. You have child, if your child is sad or what will you do? You just  listen to him, you hug him. So let's do it in a virtual way, the same with the plants.  
**[1:03:40-1:03:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:03:40):**  So it was really interesting. And later in that experience, I was sharing all the different  way to experience could have a thought, an image, emotion. And on that specific case, we got pull.  It's like something pull our shoulder to look in a different way. And that time you look at me,  
**[1:03:59-1:04:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:03:59):**  you got pull. I start smiling and said, yes, I got pull. After that experience with the litters,  I started having some image. And that's probably what you remember. I got an image.  And I said, do you realize if we start to be able to communicate with plant, create a partnership,  
**[1:04:23-1:04:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:04:23):**  create a good context of existence for those plants. I see a head of lettuce in the middle  of the table with three child parents and the lettuce is going to feed the plants, the plants,  build the human. And now I realize seeing it, wow, it's going to be digested and become blood.  
**[1:04:44-1:04:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:04:44):**  So the lettuce become now part of the human system. And we were looking at each other is,  wow, it is just incredible. And at the same time that we share that, we turn the head on the  direction of the first field, the one who was too much damaging was supposed to be destroyed  
**[1:05:07-1:05:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:05:07):**  the day after. We look at the field, we look at each other. We look at the field,  we look at the field, we look at each other. And at the same time, we say, it's greener.  It's greener. And he said, that's impossible. And as I told you, I'm pretty open minded.  
**[1:05:28-1:05:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:05:28):**  I know I heard and I experienced so many things in my life. I accept the fact, okay, I'm not crazy.  It's clearly greener. And I have the question, okay, what happened? And what I got coming,  sir, was a course I've done in university. In my course of agronomy, there was animal physiology  
**[1:05:55-1:06:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:05:55):**  and we were talking about the eyes, how the eyes perceive the light and the color. And it's only a  question of frequency. I explained it the best way I can, but red, if you compare to blue, it is just  a different frequency of energy. And in your eyes, there is some specific part that can perceive  
**[1:06:19-1:06:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:06:19):**  those frequency and transfer the signal to the brain. So with that reception of different  frequency, we know what we call blue, we call yellow or red. Anyway, the more you have energy  in yourself, the more your frequency gets higher. It's well documented by many researchers. So  
**[1:06:43-1:06:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:06:43):**  more energy, more frequency. My explanation that got validated by nature was, as I was talking  about with my grower about what was possible, you know, imagine the letters that the field beside  was listening. So without knowing, I was creating live a new context of existence for that field of  
**[1:07:12-1:07:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:07:12):**  letters. As the letters individually hear that, they get excited. Their level of energy as, you  know, if you compare a human being depressed and fully joyful, you know which person has the more  energy. That's the joyful person. So what I realized that by talking, I created a new context  
**[1:07:40-1:07:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:07:40):**  of existence for those letters. Their level of energy went up. So my eyes, in the eyes of my  grower, perceive a different frequency, still green, but a higher level of frequency of green.  So we perceive it greener, darker greener. So I'm sure if I would have do a leaf analysis,  
**[1:08:05-1:08:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:08:05):**  I would not have found more nitrogen or more iron. I know it. But my eyes was able to perceive  a change, a difference. And what's cool with that, that field, my grower told me was supposed  to destroy it the day after. I talked with him two weeks later, or he texted me and he told me,  
**[1:08:33-1:08:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:08:33):**  we finally harvest the field. I decided to keep it. I give some natural spray, but I know  it's not that. I really know that that day that we went, something happened. And honestly,  I forget the point, very important. When I got the explanation of why my eyes were perceiving  
**[1:09:00-1:09:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:09:00):**  a greener color, I told myself, I'm going to ask the field. And at the moment I asked the  question, the field, the letters told me, sorry, we cannot answer now because we have not so much  time to be ready for the harvest in 10 days. So it's like, okay, we got to heal. We're going to  
**[1:09:20-1:09:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:09:20):**  be ready so that the grower can harvest us. Any harvest, almost all the field, it was almost  100%. Clearly there was some leaf on the bottom that would damage. And the market was really low  because many other growers had problems, but it was still able to harvest a quality of lettuce  
**[1:09:48-1:09:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:09:48):**  to sell it. And I'm clear that it started with the new context we created, me and my grower,  and that the letters hear us. Wow. Wow. So you've described a number of different experiences in  communicating with crops. And I think something that I've learned over the years is how in the  
**[1:10:08-1:10:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:10:08):**  past, how important it is for growers to have a clear image of success and what success looks  like for them in the context, just as you described of not success in terms of money and  boxes of produce in a cooler, but success in growing a crop to really support and sustain  
**[1:10:32-1:10:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:10:32):**  people. And I've observed that the growers who have a clear image of their crops sustaining humans  tend to have very strong successes in the field very consistently. So all of these pieces, and I  think all the experiences that you must have had, Pascal, I'm sure have given you a very  
**[1:10:51-1:10:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:10:51):**  interesting perspective on agriculture and on food production. So a question that I have for you  around that is, what is something that you believe to be true about modern agriculture that is  different from the mainstream view, from what most people believe?  
**[1:11:10-1:11:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:11:10):**  I think we put too much emphasis on the exterior versus what's inside. Second thing, I think  we need, not we need, but there is an opportunity to work with the nature instead of fighting it.  And I'm clearly, I'm not judging, I'm just bringing some observation and some facts.  
**[1:11:34-1:11:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:11:34):**  You know, I've been working with conventional, if we call it conventional, and with organic grower.  I've saw good organic, bad organic, good conventional, bad conventional, I mean,  in a way to the result in the field. But sometimes I saw organic grower fighting nature.  
**[1:11:56-1:12:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:11:56):**  They fight nature with natural product, but they fight nature. And I saw conventional grower using,  you know, chemical fertilizer, but with love, with really trying to understand the nutrition  of the plant, really caring, observing with really beautiful results. And I'm not saying that one is  
**[1:12:22-1:12:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:12:22):**  better, that using chemical fertilizer is good or what. What I'm just saying is, in what context are  we doing the things? Are we embracing nature? Because, you know, if we are a grower, if you're  a grower, if you're a crop advisor, most of them, most of us, most of you, you do it because you like  
**[1:12:48-1:12:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:12:48):**  grow food, you like grow plants. Can be animals too. Some doing for business, you know,  agriculture is like a small society, you know, there is no different. There is an entrepreneur  with integrity and who love what they do, and there is some people who did just for the money.  
**[1:13:06-1:13:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:13:06):**  So in general, I think we fight too much the nature instead of working and creating a partnership.  And the opportunity to develop your awareness and your communication is just that. It's just  a tool to fit with what I think agriculture should go. Going in a way that we build something,  
**[1:13:29-1:13:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:13:29):**  we are proud of what we do, we bring love, passion, and that's it. And I think doing that,  the agriculture can just be positive. And, you know, I was giving the example of the storm  with my grower. Sometimes nature, I think, remind us that, whoa, take it easy, you're not going the  
**[1:13:54-1:14:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:13:54):**  right way. So it's not cool or comfortable at the moment, but that doesn't mean it's not that it's  supposed to happen for our own development or the development of the farm or the enterprise  or the agriculture. That is intriguing. Within the context of all the pieces that we've talked  
**[1:14:14-1:14:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:14:14):**  about, Pascal, what is a book or resource that you would recommend most often? I don't have one  specific. I would say if that interests you, look at the sign. In the next days, in the next week,  someone's going to call you or someone's going to talk about a specific book, a new technique.  
**[1:14:38-1:14:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:14:38):**  Life is going to show you the way. Clearly, on the telepathic communication, Maya Kincaid in  Soudana was someone who made a tremendous difference in my life. I am in a process also  to develop my workshop and really spread that approach or that way of seeing life.  
**[1:15:01-1:15:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:15:01):**  But I would say another thing that I love too, it's an energetic technique. It's called  Pranic healing, healing with the prana. It's an international course in about 100 countries  in the world. It's a way also to develop spirituality, but it teaches on any kind of  
**[1:15:23-1:15:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:15:23):**  religion or people without religion because the founder of this technique was a chemical engineer.  He developed this technique of understanding energy in a very practical and grounded way.  I know that the level one of that course, Pranic healing, has made a huge impact in my  
**[1:15:48-1:15:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:15:48):**  understanding of my system, being part of that system, explaining it as a fact. After, you can  just expand and add your own understanding and skill to improve it. That's some example I have  in mind. I would say trust, have faith that the path is going to show, if you ask it, at a good time,  
**[1:16:11-1:16:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:16:11):**  but in the right way. I would add to that, I think there are two books very relevant to actually what  we're speaking about, which were very influential for me. One of them is titled The Lost Language of  Plants, and the second one is titled The Secret Teachings of Plants, both by Stephen Herrad Bhner.  
**[1:16:34-1:16:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:16:34):**  Both of those are very good at describing the relationship aspect of the relationship that  plants desire and that we can have, and provide a very interesting perspective. Pascal, we've talked  about many different and very exciting topics. What is a question that you wish I would have asked?  
**[1:16:53-1:16:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:16:53):**  What do you eat for dinner?  I don't know. I really, I am nothing specific. I really love the way you lead the interview.  For me, it was really an opportunity to just share my experiences. You know I really appreciate who  
**[1:17:19-1:17:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:17:19):**  you are as a person, as a consultant. I think you set up the table, the place with all your  questions that agriculture, it's not only about harvesting something, it's about living off some  of a work that can be just wonderful, and then with opportunity to evolve and to connect with  
**[1:17:46-1:17:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:17:46):**  something beautiful that is called life. I have no specific question more than what you brought today.  Wonderful. Pascal, thank you very much for joining us, and thank you for sharing your stories  and your examples. I'm very inspired, and I'm sure many other people will be as well.  
**[1:18:07-1:18:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:18:07):**  Thank you very much. That's very kind. The team at AEA and I are dedicated to bringing this show to  you because we believe that knowledge and information is the foundation of successful  regenerative systems. At AEA, we believe that growing better quality food and making more money  
**[1:18:25-1:18:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:18:25):**  from your crops is possible, and since 2006, we've worked with leading professional growers to help  them do just that. At AEA, we don't guess. We measure. We test. We analyze, and we provide  recommendations based on scientific data and knowledge and experience. We've developed products  
**[1:18:44-1:18:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:18:44):**  that are uniquely positioned to help growers make more money with regenerative agriculture.  If you are a professional grower who believes in testing instead of guessing, someone who believes  in a better, more regenerative way to grow, visit advancingecoag.com and contact us to see if AEA is  
**[1:19:00-1:19:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/a-conversation-with-plants-pascal-fafard/#t=1:19:00):**  right for you. Thank you for listening, and we look forward to working with you.  