### Regenerative Agriculture Podcast  (2020-03-17)  
### Author(s): John Kempf  

**[0:00:00-0:00:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:00:00):**  Hi friends, this is John and this is the Regenerative Agriculture podcast.  Thank you for being with us and for listening. Today I have Dr. Norman Uchoff from Cornell  University. One of the themes that I've spoken about a bit in the past is the idea that we're  
**[0:00:17-0:00:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:00:17):**  harvesting only a fraction of the inherent potential that our seeds and our plants are  really capable of producing. And one of the developments along this line that I have been  very intrigued by and I'm excited to share with you is the system of root intensification  
**[0:00:37-0:00:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:00:37):**  that Dr. Uchoff has developed. So Norman, welcome to the podcast. I'm very glad to have you here.  And I don't want to describe too much of your background in my own words because it is very  rich and I'd love for you to just tell us a little bit about your pathway and the work that you've  
**[0:00:56-0:01:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:00:56):**  engaged in over the last decades developing this different model of growing plants. Okay, well I  grew up on a dairy farm in Wisconsin just south of Madison so I am a farm boy originally but I  had the good fortune to go to Inters Minnesota and then to Princeton Berkeley to prepare myself for  
**[0:01:16-0:01:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:01:16):**  the social sciences of development in Africa, Asia and Latin America. And for my first 30 years of  professional work I was focused on things like audio associations, farmers organizations, women's  groups, local government decentralization and so forth. But then in 1990 I was appointed the  
**[0:01:38-0:01:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:01:38):**  first director of our Cornell International Institute for Food Agriculture and Development  which was set up in 1990. I was a very generous at that time anonymous gift to work on problems  of sustainable agriculture and rural development. The third year into my 15 years of tenure I  
**[0:01:57-0:02:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:01:57):**  was asked to go to Madagascar by the USAID mission out there and so I was a colleague of mine from  from Cornell who was francophone and who spoke French that is and also knew more about rice than I did.  Dairy farming is very different from rice farming and so John and I went out there to look at the  
**[0:02:19-0:02:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:02:19):**  project USAID had funded to help conserve the rainforest area which was under challenges and  was dwindling because of slash and burn agriculture. And the first morning I was out in the field with  John in just some of the poorest villages I've ever lived in. I've been in quite a few countries.  
**[0:02:43-0:02:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:02:43):**  I remember attorney John saying yeah we've really got to get the rice yields up here.  They're only two tons per hectare. The world average is about four so it's half the world average  and as long as they produce so little rice on the available irrigated area they have  
**[0:03:00-0:03:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:03:00):**  they're going to have to go into the forest and cut down trees and do slash and burn agriculture.  And he agreed and when I got back to Tom and Marie the capital the Malagasy project coordinator who  I talked to who had a background in agriculture as well as conservation said you know you're right  
**[0:03:20-0:03:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:03:20):**  you're right I agree with you. Would you like to talk to a small NGO that does something called  system of rice intensification? We're telling Benjamin I don't know much about rice I know  even less about Madagascar. If they know both I sure should talk to them and see what I can learn.  
**[0:03:39-0:03:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:03:39):**  So he arranged them to come over to our office that afternoon and I started explaining what I  thought the problem was and Benjamin translating to Malagasy and I still remember the NGO presence  of leaning forward as I talked and when I finished he wages and said part of problem no problem.  
**[0:04:02-0:04:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:04:02):**  And he said we have a system of rice intensification which uses the same seeds as before  uses compost instead of chemical fertilizer and uses maybe half as much water as with usual  irrigated rice production and we get yields of five ten even fifteen tons per hectare.  
**[0:04:23-0:04:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:04:23):**  And I imagine my eyebrows went toward the ceiling. You can't do that the green revolution  uses new seeds uses more agrochemicals and also use more irrigation water. Here they're doing  here they're doing none of those and they're getting five or ten or fifteen tons per headwear  
**[0:04:44-0:04:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:04:44):**  average in the country is about two. And I remember thinking to myself actually I think I  said it to them I said let's not talk about ten or fifteen tons because nobody at Cornell's are going  to believe that. I didn't say I don't believe it. No one at Cornell. Cornell will believe it and  
**[0:05:00-0:05:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:05:00):**  you know they didn't mind my thing. We aimed for maybe three or four tons per hectare.  We worked on an agreement we had USAID funding for this so their NGO would provide four field  staff to train farmers in these new methods that have been developed by a French Jesuit priest  
**[0:05:22-0:05:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:05:22):**  who had been living in Madagascar for over 30 years at that time. And turned out by the end of  the first season they could only get 38 farmers to try these new methods because they're quite  counterintuitive but their average yield was eight tons instead of two. And these are soils  
**[0:05:41-0:05:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:05:41):**  that North Carolina State University had studied for a PhD thesis. These are some of the worst  soils they ever analyzed. Very low cation exchange capacity on all horizons. pH is 3.8 to 5  because it means they're very acid. And the available phosphorus is less than half the  
**[0:06:01-0:06:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:06:01):**  minimum of 10 parts per million that most agronomists thought was necessary for even the  poor you know lowest acceptable yield. And they were less than half of that minimum.  Three to four parts per million. This should sound already crazy so you know it looked very  
**[0:06:19-0:06:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:06:19):**  good in our report. Next year we had 68 farmers and they averaged over eight tons again and  third year we still had farmers over eight tons average some as high as 10, 12 and 14. One was 16.  Using the same methods for measuring yield as the government using its yield trials and reports.  
**[0:06:41-0:06:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:06:41):**  So at that point I figured I had to start learning French so I could read the priest's  papers and also agronomy so I could try to explain to my colleagues at Cornell what.  So I want to correct your earlier statement John. I did not develop this. This is something  
**[0:06:56-0:07:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:06:56):**  I never would have dreamed of developing because I'm a social scientist not an agronomist. But  father Henri de La Launier had spent 30 plus years working with farmers in Madagascar  trying to figure out how to enable them on very small plots with very poor soils. They had  
**[0:07:16-0:07:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:07:16):**  adequate rainfall if it came at the right time but they really were desperately poor and he developed  these set of methods that are if I say most of them counterintuitive which greatly increased the yield  and to put in very critical terms but they're not uncommon terms anymore  
**[0:07:36-0:07:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:07:36):**  from a given genotype or variety given genetic potential we got plants which were much more  desirable more productive more of phenotypes phenomena. These are the actual organisms you  and I are both phenotypes. We started from genotype but over the course of our life we  
**[0:08:00-0:08:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:08:00):**  were exposed to various kinds of influences and we developed into the phenotype that we are.  Well the plants that grew at SRI were you know usually two to three times more killers.  Root growth is two to three to four times greater. They stayed green longer and didn't start dying  
**[0:08:20-0:08:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:08:20):**  back and senescing midway through the season. They were more upright so they intercepted more sun.  As I say they gave higher yields. They were more resistant to pests and diseases.  They didn't go over in the storms very easily. They could withstand water stress and even drought  
**[0:08:41-0:08:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:08:41):**  conditions. So really quite phenomenal and I was a political scientist by training so for me this  is all a matter of learning what's going on and trying to get scientists who knew more about  agronomy and soils than I did to take a look at this. Unfortunately the International Rice  
**[0:08:59-0:09:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:08:59):**  Assertions Institute which we went to and asked them to work with us to evaluate this never  picked us up. They were pretty well satisfied that making genetic improvements would suffice  to meet the needs of small farmers and big ones of course as well. As it turned out that you know  
**[0:09:21-0:09:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:09:21):**  these methods lower farmers costs, less inputs, more robust in the face of the environmental  and climate change pressures. We've even discovered since we're trying to article on this  based on three published scientific articles showing that when you use these alternative  
**[0:09:43-0:09:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:09:43):**  methods you get more copper, zinc, manganese, iron in the grains of rice. So the plant  takes more of these micronutrients and concentrates more of them in the grains  themselves. So it's really quite a remarkable thing and maybe the other remarkable thing is that  
**[0:10:04-0:10:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:10:04):**  these same ideas and methods if suitably adapted for other crops give similar kinds of yield  increases and similar hardiness to resist climate change stresses. So it's been really quite a  quite a 20-year adventure. Took me three years to accept this as I said I guess in 97 I tried to  
**[0:10:24-0:10:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:10:24):**  cite it was for real and took us another five years to get up to try and get these methods on  15 countries. Now we can say we have reports with you know good evidence that you'll get a better  phenotype from rice at least with these methods that were over 60 countries where we were able  
**[0:10:44-0:10:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:10:44):**  to show that there are these benefits. We can talk a little bit more about this since most of your  listeners I guess are from the US. We've gotten a few things started in the US but for the most part  American farmers and they know they're in trouble because of farm costs and climate stress and so  
**[0:11:05-0:11:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:11:05):**  forth. But the idea that something which is developed for really small really poor farms in  Madagascar helping them with their 500,000 or more acres hasn't really gotten through yet.  And of course we have to also talk about how these ideas or these principles can be applied with the  
**[0:11:24-0:11:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:11:24):**  mechanization that thanks to a colleague a large and very smart and progressive farmer in Pakistan  we can now you know describe directions these ideas can be taken for large-scale production.  I better stop I go on like this. That's a little background for you. Thank you for sharing that  
**[0:11:44-0:11:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:11:44):**  background and for the correction on the source and how this develops. It seems to me the yields  improvement and all the quality improvement, the climate resilience, the data, the numbers that you  quoted an average of 4x yield increase or higher those would be really powerful motivator and a  
**[0:12:07-0:12:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:12:07):**  really powerful incentive to reconsider our farming practices and think about what we might be able to  improve. So certainly I think the listeners of this podcast are growers who are very innovative  and who desire to do a better job. So I'm very hopeful that we can gain some traction here.  
**[0:12:26-0:12:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:12:26):**  I think so we've you've given us the description and background of SRI and you've alluded to the  methods. I guess the obvious question is what are these methods? What is the system of root  intensification? How does it really work? Well this is assembled very empirically, very inductively,  
**[0:12:48-0:12:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:12:48):**  experimentally. Father Lani came to Madagascar in 1961 with no prior experience with rice. He'd  grown up in a large wheat farm in southern France, gone to the best ag school in France before World  War II but decided as the war was getting started he really wanted to you know serve humanity rather  
**[0:13:12-0:13:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:13:12):**  than create himself to go back to the farm of his family. So he went to Jesuit Seminary from 1941 to  45 and then he got sent to Madagascar in 61. Initially he tried to introduce other crops which  have higher nutrient content than rice which is mostly good for his calories but it turned out  
**[0:13:35-0:13:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:13:35):**  that Madagascar farmers just weren't interested in the vegetables, the broccoli, carrots, etc.  They needed to get their rice yields up because Malagasy's generally eat three meals of rice a day,  maybe two vegetables or once in a while some meat with them. And so what he found his side was I got  
**[0:13:56-0:14:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:13:56):**  to tackle the problem at his base, work on rice, and he found a few farmers who were planting just  single rice seedlings in a hill rather than three, four, five, six seedlings in a club which is what  farmers do almost every country in the world because if you put a single seedling it looks  
**[0:14:15-0:14:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:14:15):**  pretty puny and pretty meager. So farmers put half a dozen in and they figure maybe the insects or  something gets a few of them there should be something there, kind of an insurance policy.  But it turns out if you plant plants close together the roots inhibit each other. We know  
**[0:14:36-0:14:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:14:36):**  you don't plant tomato plants in a clump, you don't plant any plants in a clump, but for some  reason we thought that rice will do better in a clump and it certainly makes the transplanted  field look better because it's got more green in it and so does mud. But in fact rice plants if  
**[0:14:58-0:15:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:14:58):**  put in the soil all close together they don't grow the same kind of good systems  deep and broad and long-lived. He found some other farmers who were growing their rice without filling  the fields continuously which is sort of the ideal. Most farmers think for irrigated rice you  
**[0:15:19-0:15:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:15:19):**  want a couple inches on the surface and if a little is good more is better so they like to  have four, five, six inches of water standing on the field. It looks beautiful because it reflects  the sky and a nice blue color and silver not just muddy brown. But in fact when you flood the fields  
**[0:15:38-0:15:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:15:38):**  you suffocate the roots. You cut them off from their air supply and so they start degrading after  a couple weeks and so they get really truncated root systems especially as they're growing in  close proximity. And so just simply taking, they cut the plant population way down and cut your  
**[0:16:00-0:16:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:16:00):**  waterway down. Those two changes already gave better rice crops. Father Larni invented the next  practice. Farmers were planting their rice plants helter skelter which is the common way.  Ag scientists have been trying to get them to plant in rows so they could use a mechanical weeder  
**[0:16:24-0:16:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:16:24):**  that you'd push up and down the rows to uproot the weeds and burrow them in the soil. It's kind  of green manure. And Father Larni thought what happens if I plant in a square pattern and then  I use this weeder in perpendicular directions at 90 degrees. He just tried it and no farmer is  
**[0:16:48-0:16:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:16:48):**  right in my way ever think of this because if you're doing single seedlings and you know wide  spacing you're cutting your plant population by 80 to 90 percent and that was a stupid way,  super thing to do. We all think more is better so you plant more seeds, but you get more seedlings  
**[0:17:08-0:17:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:17:08):**  the higher yield you should get. It's not true but it sort of seems that way. And so anyway he  developed this method of weeding with this soil aerating weeder because it turns up the soil and  gets more oxygen in the top layers. That's very good for the roots to grow better but it's also  
**[0:17:26-0:17:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:17:26):**  good for the soil organisms to grow better. The bacteria and fungi which are beneficial,  the nematodes and protozoa which cycle nitrogen. Eventually you get the earthworms which will  make the soil sort of macro aerated because you get pore space. What you're doing in SRI is really  
**[0:17:47-0:17:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:17:47):**  managing the plants and the soil and the water and the nutrients in different ways to get synergy  among the practices which we have good evidence on, but also so that you're really growing larger,  deeper, longer live root systems and you're increasing the abundance of life in the soil  
**[0:18:06-0:18:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:18:06):**  as well as the activity and diversity. The capstone in a practice was when almost by accident  Prabhu Lani discovered in 1983-84 that if you start with very young seedlings only 10, 11, 12  days old instead of two weeks, three weeks, four weeks, five weeks which farmers like to do because  
**[0:18:31-0:18:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:18:31):**  they're bigger healthier seedlings when you transplant them the field looks not quite so bare naked  as it does when you put single you know seedlings in by themselves. He found out that if you  transplant 15-day seedlings or younger you get more growth of roots, more growth of tillers,  
**[0:18:50-0:18:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:18:50):**  even better grain weight. That I could go into if you want to ask me. It's a story which is sort of  separate but it gives a scientific basis for why using very young seedlings is preferable. Many  people are horticulturalists who will know that again with you you're going to plant the vegetable  
**[0:19:08-0:19:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:19:08):**  seedlings you don't want to get them very mature before you set them into the soil because there's  less vigor. When I go to the farmers market I have to tell myself not to buy that biggest and  most handsome tomato set but rather take a pretty young one and take a little longer for it to  
**[0:19:27-0:19:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:19:27):**  mature but I'll get much much better yield from it. So anyway he synthesized these practices  and that was what he called SRI and then when the government took the subsidy off chemical  fertilizers in the late 80s he switched to compost because the farmers he worked with could not afford  
**[0:19:45-0:19:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:19:45):**  to buy fertilizer at a higher price and it turned out if you do these other five things then with  compost you get even higher yield than with chemical fertilizer and so that was kind of the  last step. And again we have very good evidence on this even published in the Erie Proceedings back  
**[0:20:03-0:20:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:20:03):**  in 2002 but ignored. So these different practices say the effect is to get more tiller growth or  root growth the root growth being really critical but then also by increasing the soil organisms  from the microbes to the the macrophonic earthworms and mites and  
**[0:20:27-0:20:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:20:27):**  columbola and so forth. And it turns out the same things of wider spacing, lower plant population,  providing enough water for the plant and its needs and also the soil iota and their needs  but not too much not enough to create hypoxic conditions in the soil so the soil is mostly  
**[0:20:46-0:20:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:20:46):**  aerobic most of the time getting more organic matter into the soil to feed both the soil  organisms and the plant. These practices together give you a very different phenotype and I wish we  had you know visual capacities for the podcast to just see the difference in the plant growth.  
**[0:21:07-0:21:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:21:07):**  I've been given a a panicle of rice in Sri Lanka which is just huge as a single head of grain  and if you get a hundred grain on head of rice that's that's okay 200 is pretty good.  300 you're really excited, 400 you're ecstatic, this is 930 grains. Wow. One head of rice.  
**[0:21:34-0:21:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:21:34):**  And you know I counted them. And in Indonesia a couple years ago my wife and I were  brought a big wooden box we were oh no we don't want to take any more gifts back to the states  were already fully packed and it was a stump of rice grown from one single seed that had 223  
**[0:21:53-0:22:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:21:53):**  pillars or a stalk all from that one single seed. It's a huge clump and with huge you know mass of  roots on it as well. I couldn't bring it back to the states because of phytosanitary regulations  but I got a picture of it I fell out my hands and gave it to my Indonesian colleague to keep for us.  
**[0:22:16-0:22:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:22:16):**  The potential in the rice genome is really incredible we also see wonderful potential in  other plants like mustard plants that are as tall as I am over six feet and with you know two to  three times more yield when you start with a tiny young seedling and soil is broken up so the roots  
**[0:22:35-0:22:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:22:35):**  can grow vigorously not in compacted soil given organic matter. So I'm going to give you a little  bit of a story about how you can use the soil to get a good  taste of the soil and to feed the plant as well.  
**[0:22:51-0:23:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:22:51):**  Norman you've put out so many valuable thoughts. So I want to go back first of all to your comment on photos.  We can certainly share photos and to all of those listeners. I was listening as you were  describing the method of one of the elements of SRI. The list that I came up with from listening to you  
**[0:23:12-0:23:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:23:12):**  were speaking about plant spacing doing a much broader spacing using less water and not flooding  and saturating the fields for extended periods and then the capacity to weed and aerate the soil  with mechanical cultivation using very young seedlings and then using compost applications  
**[0:23:35-0:23:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:23:35):**  instead of chemical fertilizers. There's a few of those that I'd like to dive into a bit deeper.  We work with many in addition to broadacre crops we work with many vegetable growers and I've  observed the same thing they described that using young seedlings within a few weeks of transplanting  
**[0:23:54-0:23:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:23:54):**  and growing them in optimal conditions and taking them straight to the field invariably we get much  better establishment less transplant shock and much more productive and high-yielding plants.  Can you describe some of what you've observed and how that occurs?  
**[0:24:10-0:24:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:24:10):**  Well again the first thing is that Nisamie Fadlani discovered that you know Madagascar farmers were  treating the roots of the seedlings very badly almost brutalizing them. They let their seedlings  go to be six even seven weeks old in the nursery and then when they took them out from the nursery  
**[0:24:30-0:24:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:24:30):**  the roots are so long they got in the waste they take the machetes and cut them off cut them back  and so they're putting these plants which had been amputated and the roots into standing water  three four five inches deep which suffocates them and that's what's called transplant shock  
**[0:24:49-0:24:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:24:49):**  where it takes 10 to 14 days for the plants to resume their growth after they've been brought  from the nursery into the field. Also what he discovered was that if you take the seedling  you push it down into the mud the tip of the root will invert upwards so the root shape is a bit like  
**[0:25:08-0:25:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:25:08):**  a J and what we say is that you want to put the roots in carefully so they're at least horizontal  you know they're nice so they're clearly vertical like an I but at least horizontal like an L  instead of a J so they can begin their or they can resume their growth practically immediately.  
**[0:25:28-0:25:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:25:28):**  We've seen this happen so treating the roots really carefully understanding how important they are  is a key element. Why do why does the roots grow so much better with young seedlings  with the shit that have been carefully handled? There's a bit of agronomic knowledge  
**[0:25:50-0:25:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:25:50):**  developed in Japan that's not widely known which applies to all of the gromine or grass family  species that's why millet and maize and wheat and other plants have similar effects when these  methods are used. Dr. Katayama in Japan in the 1920s and 30s studied wheat rice and barley  
**[0:26:14-0:26:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:26:14):**  in laboratory and test plots and so forth trying to understand the tillering process and he came  up with the idea which is called phyllochron, phyllo for plant, cron for time and that's a  periodicity in the emergence of tillers and matching that in the emergence of roots growing  
**[0:26:35-0:26:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:26:35):**  downward and sort of balancing the growth of the tillers upward and I don't know how many of the  listeners will know about Fibonacci series if they've read Dan Brown's book The Da Vinci Code  I don't know about that where each number in a successive period is equal to the sum of the  
**[0:26:54-0:27:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:26:54):**  previous two periods so it's like one, one, two, three, five, eight, thirteen, etc. One and one is two,  one and two is three, two and three is five, five and three is eight, etc. It turns out that  in the first period of the rice plant's emergence it'll put up one main stalk tiller and the main  
**[0:27:16-0:27:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:27:16):**  root going downward and then it has two periods in which there is no artillery or root growth  and then the fourth period it puts out a first primary and a root and then the next one another  primary and a root but then the one after that you get the third primary but a first secondary  
**[0:27:35-0:27:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:27:35):**  from the first primary and you know roots are matching this and so you get this one, one, two,  three, five, eight, thirteen, twenty-one, etc. pattern if all the growing conditions are optimal  and the seven principles for accelerating this periodicity include first of all temperature,  
**[0:28:00-0:28:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:28:00):**  warmer temperatures, I say speed up the biological clock, colder temperatures slow down the biological  clock, if there's good sunshine insulation that speeds up the clock, shading slows it down,  if the soil is well spotted with nutrients the clock speeds up, if it's nutrient deficient the  
**[0:28:22-0:28:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:28:22):**  clock slows down, if plants are close together they slow down the clock, the wide spacing,  the root growth and the tilling all accelerates, if there's enough water but not too much it'll  be faster growth, if you're either too little or too much water slows it down. So anyway  
**[0:28:45-0:28:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:28:45):**  sometimes the interest line if we can get material on this, there's this kind of periodicity in  rice and wheat and also in finger mill, we've been able to show that. So timing does make an effect  on the gene expression, spacing has an effect on gene expression, having enough water but not too  
**[0:29:09-0:29:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:29:09):**  much that also helps to speed up the biological clock as I like to call it and you get a faster  growth. These are things that any farmer already knows at least intuitively but Katayama's work  which was done before World War II and then never published until after World War II and then  
**[0:29:29-0:29:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:29:29):**  published only in Japanese and so far I've found two, three different sources in English about it  but there's been no translation in English which is a great loss. Farmers who grow wheat  know about fillecans more than farmers who grow rice. In Australia the forage farmers or  
**[0:29:51-0:29:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:29:51):**  cattlemen who raise forage know about fillecans but some of the rice, you know, sector  never quite picked up this as a discovery of Katayama and so now that my father had discovered  that younger plants are better and then he discovered the work for Katayama and I expect  
**[0:30:13-0:30:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:30:13):**  he's a Eureka now I know why younger plants do better and when I got back to Cornell one of my  horticulture friends was only known after years in tomato sets you know I'm younger and they'll  grow better. There's surely many facts including phyto hormone production under certain conditions  
**[0:30:34-0:30:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:30:34):**  but again I'm not an ag scientist myself and so I can't give as good explanation probably as  someone else could. Norman I do want to talk a bit more about some other crops and commercial  applications also but one more thing that I think is important to unwrap a bit is the increased  
**[0:30:56-0:31:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:30:56):**  effectiveness of compost versus commercial fertilizer. Why is compost more effective at  producing plant these types of yields? Why does it have this contributing effect that is a bigger  effect than commercial fertilizers? We've had a number of studies which show that for many crops  
**[0:31:16-0:31:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:31:16):**  or many situations you may want to combine inorganic and organic to get some optimum  combination and so SRI is not against inorganic fertilizer but if you're doing all these other  things and as the soil becomes more fertile over time which does with SRI phytoses it becomes  
**[0:31:41-0:31:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:31:41):**  uneconomical to keep using inorganic fertilizer. We had two baccalaureate theses done on this back in  2000-2001 with very large operations. Students don't know how much work this kind of research  can be so they agreed it when they do it. The one student had 286 plus two and a half by two and a  
**[0:32:06-0:32:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:32:06):**  half square meters random block design testing six variables at sea level and sandy soils on the west  coast of Madagascar very poor soils. The next year another one did his trials up at about a  thousand meters elevation up from the plateau good soils temperate climate instead of tropical  
**[0:32:30-0:32:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:32:30):**  climate and we got the same pattern of response that and one of the treatments was either  recommended inorganic fertilizer applications or compost and it was interesting that the yield  results for all the different combinations we did factorial trials replicated the yield combinations  
**[0:32:54-0:33:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:32:54):**  still were better with chemical fertilizer versus compost when you use one two or three of the SR  pack but if you use the whole package or set the SR packages the compost plots of yield of the  chemical fertilizer plots which we say is an indication of the synergy among the practices.  
**[0:33:16-0:33:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:33:16):**  Using compost isn't just for the plants themselves but it's also for the soil organisms many of which  may not be that well known to your listeners live actually inside the plants as endophytes  symbiotic endophytes. In the last five to ten years we've become very conscious of how the  
**[0:33:39-0:33:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:33:39):**  organisms inhabit our bodies around or within our bodies and really improve our health and vitality  we call human microbiome. Well plants also have plant microbiomes both fungi and and microbes  that enter through the roots somehow or through cracks in the roots and they live both in the  
**[0:34:05-0:34:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:34:05):**  roots and then in the stems and up into the leaves. It's quite remarkable we now know that the  the microbes living inside the plant affect the plant's expression of its genetic potential and  I've worked with colleagues in China and Malaysia who've done the trials on this. I helped them  
**[0:34:26-0:34:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:34:26):**  write it up but I couldn't begin to do the work myself. Well we've really got good documentation  that is microbes which affect the gene expression and to answer your first question how do we get  these different phenotypes is it's spacing, it's timing, it's enough suffocating the roots with  
**[0:34:44-0:34:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:34:44):**  water but it's also nurturing the plant microbiome which will make the plants perform better.  I can refer to three different pieces of research from China that helped me understand this.  A fellow named Feng Xi who's now in California he couldn't find a good egg microbiology position  
**[0:35:09-0:35:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:35:09):**  in China but he was doing the studies of rice plants of the same variety. He was the same  variety for all his trials but he published this article in the Journal of Applied Microbiology  Environmental and Applied Microbiology and he took six sets of pots, got soil that he homogenized and  
**[0:35:38-0:35:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:35:38):**  sterilized and put the same soil in all six sets of pots. He kept one set of pots, you know just  the soil with no inoculation or no microbial amendments and then he took five different  strains of rhizobium and put the different strains in each of the five sets of pots  
**[0:36:01-0:36:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:36:01):**  and planted the same aged seedlings and all the pots in together and then analyzed them and it  turned out that the inoculated pots which had this rhizobium in them and which rhizobium actually  they showed with microscopic pictures enter the roots and then go up into the plant and inhabit  
**[0:36:23-0:36:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:36:23):**  the various plant organs above ground. All five of the inoculated sets of plants had significantly  higher root growth, significantly greater biomass above ground, higher levels of chlorophyll in the  leaves, higher rates of photosynthesis in the leaves, a higher ratio of carbohydrates fixed  
**[0:36:49-0:36:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:36:49):**  from CO2 in relation to the water transpires so the plant is more efficient at producing  photosynthate from a given amount of water and then significantly higher yields. And that was the  first thing and he said it to me and I think I said Eureka! Then five years later he published  
**[0:37:10-0:37:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:37:10):**  another article as a postdoc in which he had taken the best of the five rhizobium and  Sinorhium melalate 1021 as a specific organism and he did what's called proteomic analysis  where they're able to identify the the the synthesis of different proteins in the  
**[0:37:38-0:37:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:37:38):**  roots or in the shoots or in the in the leaves and could identify 20 or 30  proteins that were significantly more abundant or less abundant where they either had a 50%  increase or a 50% decrease and this is evidence that the genes that synthesize those proteins  
**[0:38:01-0:38:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:38:01):**  were either up to regulated or down regulated. That was published in the journal on Quaporteomics  which was exciting and then his mentor in China at the Institute of Botany in the China Academy of  Agricultural Sciences and he and I got acquainted and he actually helped them write up some research  
**[0:38:22-0:38:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:38:22):**  that they had been able to get published and this was even more elaborate more but in a sense they  were doing transcriptomic analysis where you're looking at the messenger RNA which you know comes  from the DNA and then triggers the plants dissection of particular proteins and this is  
**[0:38:43-0:38:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:38:43):**  fascinating because they look at the plants in one set of plants they inoculate them with dead  bacteria and the other they inoculate the live bacteria which then inhabited the interior of  the plants and this article published in a very good journal I can't remember the name right now  
**[0:39:06-0:39:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:39:06):**  showed that one day after inoculation of the second set of plants you had the upregulation  significant upregulation of about 100 different genes that they can thanks to very modern  technology they can actually identify which gene is upregulated and also even by how much  
**[0:39:25-0:39:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:39:25):**  and then the third day there's over a thousand genes that have been upregulated by the fifth day  it's maybe a thousand by the eighth day it's maybe maybe 800. The thing was that they had  already shown in their experience that when they inoculated plants they had a growth spurt between  
**[0:39:50-0:39:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:39:50):**  days three and eight and some things are going on that you could see at the plant level but at the  molecular biology level they could also see which genes are being up and down regulated things that  for instance would affect the strength of the cell wall that would affect the rate of cell division  
**[0:40:12-0:40:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:40:12):**  cell elongation and so forth so it was showing that in fact microbes living inside the  plants are affecting how the plants express their genetic potential due back to your opening  observation. I found that rather interesting now I look at a plant that's doing well I say I wonder  
**[0:40:32-0:40:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:40:32):**  what you know what the you know the microorganisms inside are doing to guide accelerate the genetic  activity. I recently interviewed Dr. James White from Rutgers University on the impact of endophytes  and rhizophagy and the aspect that you're describing that you're pointing out when we look at  
**[0:40:56-0:41:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:40:56):**  Dr. Mabel Ho's work on the fluidity of genetics and horizontal gene transfer between  organisms and living plants then ultimately what you're describing really I mean when you think  about the rice plant that you describe where they typically have 100 seeds or 100 grains per head of  
**[0:41:18-0:41:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:41:18):**  rice to 930 grains that's completely different genetic expression that plant I'm certain looks  visually very different from the plant that only has 100 seeds per head. Right. And the root systems  will also look very different and we have evidence that microbes exude phytohormones that will affect  
**[0:41:42-0:41:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:41:42):**  the growth of roots and so inoculating plant roots with certain you know beneficial  beneficial organisms will give you more roots longer roots more diameter of roots more surface area  etc. And the reason microbes do this if I can impute a reason to it is that the roots are  
**[0:42:05-0:42:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:42:05):**  themselves exuding carbohydrates amino acids various organic acids into the rhizosphere  the soil area right around the root which then is food for the microbes the microbes  give the plants phosphorus to give them nitrogen and they mineralize various micronutrients  
**[0:42:27-0:42:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:42:27):**  and in return for that I don't know where it starts with a chicken egg proposition but the  plants are feeding their microbes 20 to 30 percent of the photosynthate from the leaves let's say  of rice. Rice will be transferred down to the roots and will be put out into the rhizosphere  
**[0:42:49-0:42:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:42:49):**  around the around the roots with the effect of nourishing sustaining the population of  organisms outside the plant some which come in and the fact that if any plants had evolved  giving up 20-30 percent of the energy stores that they produce and got nothing back from it  
**[0:43:10-0:43:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:43:10):**  they would not have survived these for 400 million years. The fact is that the  microbes provide services benefits protection etc. to the plant the plant provides food nutrition  energy to the microbes there's a symbiosis we usually just have the root surface now I know  
**[0:43:33-0:43:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:43:33):**  there's actually going on inside the plants in endopedic ways so that the closest between plants  and microbes the interdependence of plants and microbes is really quite marvelous and we've known  very little about it in the past farmers would say you know this this soil is really good what  
**[0:43:57-0:44:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:43:57):**  they didn't see was the organisms in the cell that were making the soil more fertile and the plants  that grew in them more you know vigorous more rapid growing more hardy but that symbiosis between  plants and organisms microorganisms has been going on say pretty close to 500 million years  
**[0:44:20-0:44:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:44:20):**  we have fossil record back about 460 million years showing our busker mycorrhizae in the roots of  plants when they first started evolving on on land they came out of the ocean and you know  became terrestrial and so the symbiosis between plants and microorganisms goes back a long long  
**[0:44:42-0:44:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:44:42):**  time as I said if the plants didn't get back as much or more than they gave up I don't think we  could have had a plant world and really ultimately a biotic world at all like what we have now  it would not be a symbiotic and co-supportive relationship absolutely no you know when you  
**[0:45:02-0:45:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:45:02):**  at the very beginning of our conversation you mentioned that this the development of this method  of SRI also resulted from the benefits was increased nutritional content which is a  topic the person you're very passionate about because of the implications for public health  
**[0:45:19-0:45:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:45:19):**  and the message the necessity of producing more nutritious food for the growing world  population what were the impacts on increased nutrient content from using and adopting this  method well this is still a laboratory work or field trial work it's not been I mean  
**[0:45:39-0:45:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:45:39):**  first of all we had never had any resources to work with to evaluate a lot of this and  most of our effort has gone into just the understanding and communicating as in the race  of farmers could try for themselves so it works fine they can have it there are no limitations  
**[0:45:55-0:46:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:45:55):**  on it um but three different researchers who I had known before but I didn't know they were  doing this research till they sent me drafts and said could I help you know all of them  to help you know policy presentation they're looking at controls where they use conventional  
**[0:46:14-0:46:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:46:14):**  methods you know older seedlings close planting flooding and all that compared to the SRI methods  which is young seedlings wide spacing organic matter and no flooding and then they would  assay the nutrients in the plants and then in the grains itself and they had 30 to even 60  
**[0:46:38-0:46:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:46:38):**  increases in iron copper zinc and manganese and one of the three studies sulfur as well  just as a natural process in the first study they looked at uh cyanobacteria  which is a soil organism which was clearly involved in solubilizing micro nutrients and then  
**[0:47:03-0:47:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:47:03):**  you know facilitating the uptake in the plant and the plant in turn then would concentrate  those micronutrients in the grain more so we'd have more nutritious grain to consume for human  beings but you have more and better it's not choosing between quantity and quality these  
**[0:47:23-0:47:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:47:23):**  methods give both more quantity and better quality they also give a better straw or better  fodder for the animal consumption so that's another sort of benefit that can be traced to this  when i when we first did some trials at hickorsad in india the in astro crop research institute for  
**[0:47:48-0:47:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:47:48):**  semi-aerotropics one of the cgiir systems i remember talking to one of their father specialists  who said you know the cattle you know prefer it the the straw from the sri rice and they had  better weight gain from it well that surprised me because one thing we had figured out about sri is  
**[0:48:09-0:48:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:48:09):**  that when you're not flooding the soil continuously there is more uptake of of silicon um or there can  be and then there is uh sri plants are less prone to lodging being blown over by wind one of the  first things i learned from a farmer sri laka who wasn't really complaining but he was explaining to  
**[0:48:31-0:48:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:48:31):**  me and other farmers that you know he couldn't couldn't any longer wear short pants in the rice  paddy he said if he's growing new varieties of fertilizer everything he could he'd like to walk  through his rice field with short pants and feel the leaves you know rubbing softly against his  
**[0:48:51-0:48:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:48:51):**  legs he said he walks through an sri plot he gets leaf cuts on his legs and so he has to wear long  pants when he goes into a sri field that was a sort of a curiosity at first but now we understand  that the rice plants are also taking up more silicon which means they have the tougher leaves  
**[0:49:12-0:49:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:49:12):**  tougher you know stalks stronger roots and so forth and i'm sure the higher silicon levels and  the higher levels of zinc and manganese and copper and iron all contributes to increased disease  resistance as well right exactly chilling insects have you know less free rein on these plants  
**[0:49:31-0:49:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:49:31):**  there's a nice little story we uh in getting this introduced in india uh i i talked to the  secretary of agriculture in andhra Pradesh state and offered to to arrange for local  accommodations cover local costs if he could send two of his special staff to india  
**[0:49:52-0:50:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:49:52):**  to see sri for themselves and one of the persons he asked was this uh very you know i think  wonderful but sort of crusty agronomist actually a plant breeder uh he was farm boy himself and  very dedicated to farmers needs he'd won a national prize for working on combining rice  
**[0:50:15-0:50:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:50:15):**  with black gram and you know been a very great success because he was such an energetic man  energetic person the secretary asked him to take this 10-day trip to sri laka and he put  this as a plant breeder and had worked more on gram than on rice said oh no thank you and when  
**[0:50:35-0:50:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:50:35):**  the secretary asked him a second time he made another excuse and he told me well i was asked  a third time i had to say yes because you can't tell your boss no three times so he came and  uh the secretary assistant secretary of agriculture who was a friend of mine had agreed to host these  
**[0:50:54-0:51:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:50:54):**  two scientists and i uh sat in ryland said in my first two days i saw lots of really beautiful rice  but it didn't really quite you know impressed me all that much that i started changing my mind  uh the third day they went in the evening home to gamani's house to have a good rice and curry  
**[0:51:15-0:51:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:51:15):**  dinner and they took the bus from the city out to this suburban location which is pretty rural  and they got off the bus and started walking up this path to gamani's house and it was a draw  here and the rice fields on both sides of the path are sort of brown and didn't look very good and he  
**[0:51:37-0:51:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:51:37):**  saw this green field at the head of the or the end of the path which was gamani's he because  he's a civil servant and the agronomist wouldn't accept his expertise since he didn't have an  agronomy degree he planted himself to you know get his own results and be able to talk from  
**[0:51:56-0:52:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:51:56):**  experience i had this beautiful green field when all the fields were suffering under the  draw sir they got up at the field and uh sat here and i pull up about you know a a head of rice from  gamani's field and one from neighbor's field and there's 125 grains on the neighbor's head of rice  
**[0:52:17-0:52:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:52:17):**  and 510 on gamani's a fourfold increase and he said even that didn't break through my  i didn't use the word arrogance but i think he was implying it he said but i pulled a leaf out  of gamani's field and was running it through my finger like i've done hundreds of maybe thousands  
**[0:52:37-0:52:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:52:37):**  of times before and i looked at my thumb and he said i cut my thumb on the leaf and it was  bleeding a little bit and he said that persuaded he said i've never cut my finger from a blade or  leaf of rice before because it's usually very tender and soft and that incidence it also told  
**[0:52:57-0:53:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:52:57):**  me that silicon is is going to be uh functioning differently in sri plants uh so that that's about  genetics that's just you know good state for agronomy although i'm sure there's some role of  microorganisms in the soil that will be supporting facilitating maybe accelerating the uptake of  
**[0:53:20-0:53:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:53:20):**  silicon but the silicon is one of those underestimated elements in plant performance  you probably know that from other sources there are lots and lots of elements that have come  together thanks to father launay's work in in this system some are pure agronomy some are  
**[0:53:40-0:53:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:53:40):**  microbiology some may be still other other things but it accommodates both of changes in genetic  expression and other things that you know are just aren't easily explained well by our usual kinds of  agronomic science i think silicon is very important and one of the and not appreciated  
**[0:54:01-0:54:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:54:01):**  enough and one of the things that we have observed in our extensive testing with sab analysis is that  it is actually correlated with microbial activity the better we have a full profile the better  silicon absorption we have so that would correlate perfectly with what you're describing obviously  
**[0:54:17-0:54:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:54:17):**  this this system of sri and this method of thinking about growing plants i believe is  applicable to many different types of crops of reducing plant stress and increasing climate  resilience these are all goals that we would desire for many different types of crops what  
**[0:54:36-0:54:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:54:36):**  are some of those crops that it is most applicable to that it produces the biggest crop responses on  well the first one this is done by farmers with their ngo assistance in indio is finger millet  which is a major crop in both south asia and in many parts of africa its big advantages it's  
**[0:54:56-0:55:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:54:56):**  dolce resistant like more than most other crops and so you can grow with very small amounts of  water and it has the very same kind of response to young seedlings water spacing soil organic  matter that rice does and so we've got a number of places india was actually spreading quite well  
**[0:55:16-0:55:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:55:16):**  uh so i can say we're quite confident about finger millet uh then farmers are doing this with wheat  and we found that one of the part one of the reasons why you get the big benefit in  irrigated rice is that you're stopping the suffocation of roots by continuous flooding  
**[0:55:38-0:55:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:55:38):**  but all the other parts of sri apply to wheat leaving the flooding aside still work  the wider spacing young seedlings and so forth although in wheat we've often farmers have often  found that direct seeding now can be done if you can get enough water at the time of of germination  
**[0:56:00-0:56:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:56:00):**  to get a good growth response we often will in direct seeding put two two seeds for hill  in you know figuring maybe one will get taken by a critter or or one germinate but this is the same  set of principles uh sugarcane is now one of the most successful adaptations in india and we've  
**[0:56:23-0:56:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:56:23):**  taken to kenya and pansy and we're working right now trying to get into cuba where they only have  40 ton per hectare yields well those are pretty poor and our indian colleagues say we should be  able at least to double that without more cost just using the input similar to rice mustard  
**[0:56:44-0:56:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:56:44):**  which is is not a monocotyledon like the grain family also had very good response with mustard  teff in ethiopia is the grain of ethiopian farmers has responded very well the yields  there have gone compared with their broadcasting a traditional method up to the fiber which is one  
**[0:57:07-0:57:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:57:07):**  ton per hectare can go up to five six even seven tons per hectare if you transplant young seedlings  about 20 by 20 centimeters the seed is about 20 days because it's a little different growth  rate for teff compared to rice but that works very well and when i've been in india in bihar  
**[0:57:30-0:57:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:57:30):**  i remember visiting a large vegetable field that women farmers had used sra methods to raise their  okra production and they were very pleased with with that and with themselves for that  we have an organic farmer colleague up in maine who does it for virtually all of his crops now  
**[0:57:51-0:57:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:57:51):**  and especially carrots he has his tremendously successful response to using ideas with carrots  and he's even applied it to his orchard apple orchard in terms of spacing soil management  working on timing and pruning and and so forth he's taking well well beyond where followed  
**[0:58:12-0:58:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:58:12):**  louney had but he knows his his horticulture and it's very experimental and it gets  tremendously good results improving his orchard production there are probably others too but  sunflower even has been used with these ideas in pakistan i'm i'm sure i mean the ideas when you  
**[0:58:37-0:58:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:58:37):**  when you think about developing optimal plant expression the ideas as you indicated and in some  cases they may seem counter-intuitive particularly the case of plant spacing but yet when you begin  really studying plant physiology and what's happening and what's going on inside the plant  
**[0:58:53-0:59:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:58:53):**  they start making a lot of sense right i do want to ask you about developing or applying these  methods to larger scale production agriculture but actually before we go there i want to ask you  there um let's i would like some clarification on the planting spacing you mentioned what you're  
**[0:59:13-0:59:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:59:13):**  doing how the changes have been made with rice what were the prior plant populations what was  the plant population shift before and after well you i it's probably easier to say in terms of  of seed rates uh 70 100 kilograms of seed per hectare was the  
**[0:59:31-0:59:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:59:31):**  normal but up to you know 150 200 kilograms if you're doing uh sort of broadcasting which is  very wasteful of seed we bring it down to about seven and a half to five kilograms per hectare so  it's about a 90 reduction in the populations wow trying to give you plant plant number of plants i  
**[0:59:51-0:59:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=0:59:51):**  usually think in terms of seed rates that's a really significant reduction and that's of course  part of what allows these plants to express themselves is because they're not competing with  each other and they have full access to sunlight it turns out if you have a you know three four  
**[1:00:08-1:00:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:00:08):**  or five x in the hill there's a lot of shading of each other's leaves which really reduces  the photosynthesis uh one colleague in india has done very you know careful work on this and has  talked about different plant architecture so some of the tillers go more horizontal than up  
**[1:00:28-1:00:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:00:28):**  vertically and so they are presenting us better surface for the sunlight to be in his study he  shows about a 15 to 20 percent increase in light interception with these fewer plants  15 plants you know per square meter instead of a 60 70 80 100 plants which will be there otherwise  
**[1:00:52-1:00:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:00:52):**  and it's all about sunlight interception and solar collection using that i mean that's that's one of  the elements again i i should stress it it's it's not any one thing you each one of them has some  justification some benefit but when you put better roots together with more light interception you  
**[1:01:12-1:01:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:01:12):**  get more photosynthesis so it's if you simply did one of these you get a benefit but you wouldn't  um see and these patches because they are so much counterintuitive are ones that probably no farmer  whatever think of doing you know i i really respect farmer knowledge and experimentation  
**[1:01:30-1:01:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:01:30):**  but farmers growing rice have been doing some pretty unproductive things for centuries even  millennia um it looks better and safer if you have you know 100 plants or so that you can  use it it looks better and safer if you have you know 100 plants or square meters instead of 10  
**[1:01:51-1:01:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:01:51):**  but by 10 can proliferate below and above ground in ways to give you more  pillars per square meter and then also more yield per meter not flooding the field if you have  enough water seems like a pretty crazy idea uh you know you you know i know i'm gonna have  
**[1:02:11-1:02:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:02:11):**  to keep water on and keep as long as i can not knowing that if you flood the field the first  month or two you're gonna start to even degenerate your roots so then when the water  stress comes in the third or the fourth month the plant already is set up to fail and when  
**[1:02:30-1:02:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:02:30):**  when local farmers we try to get them to follow the growth of their roots we'd much rather have  them do a combination of traditional methods of their own methods and sri than go all to sri at  once because you know they won't have the the learning of of pulling up different plants and  
**[1:02:50-1:02:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:02:50):**  trying loose sides and root color the fact is that you know if sri plants are have a good water  management they don't turn black and brown the the the tillers of the base of the plant if you're  flooding they'll get dark even black helps you know three four five inches uh you can tell if  
**[1:03:11-1:03:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:03:11):**  there's been good water control by whether the uh stalks tillers stay green all the way down to the  base of the plant so getting people to do so much is different from what they and their forefathers  and foremothers have done uh it's not an easy process and you know the social scientists in me  
**[1:03:34-1:03:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:03:34):**  tries that hasn't been very successful it's fully encompassing our understanding of what we're  dealing with i think that we've now got more confidence in the the plant and microbial side  of things than the human side of things the human side is uh your expert area of expertise and not  
**[1:03:56-1:04:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:03:56):**  mine but it's an area that i'm very intrigued with for certain um i'm telling you that i'm telling  you that the social science i learned you know for my masters and phd hasn't been getting me very far  i've made the comment many times that um changing agriculture doesn't happen in the field it happens  
**[1:04:17-1:04:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:04:17):**  between the ears and well that's good yes and i also there's a hyphen there agra culture because  it's really got you know here's the element of culture and not just culture for the plants but  for the people and their beliefs and desires and their symbols and so forth how do we uh  
**[1:04:38-1:04:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:04:38):**  how do we adapt these ideas and these practices to large scale commercial production agriculture  that's a good question i think i have a fairly good answer though we wish others would  sort of join in and do the further testing and development um this was developed as i  
**[1:04:58-1:05:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:04:58):**  intimated before by father launier working with really small farmers often a fraction of an acre  and they have to get all the production they can get from that little bit of land and because their  population density is so great they often only you get that piece of land every third year every  
**[1:05:17-1:05:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:05:17):**  fourth year they have very complicated inheritance systems to share the rights to to cultivated  fields so our focus really has been on those who have the very least our lowest resource  endowments and helping them to get more benefit from their available resources and uh what do you  
**[1:05:38-1:05:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:05:38):**  say don't necessarily go to zero external inputs but we like to make farmers as you know independent  of outside resources possible uh the farmers you work with don't have you know money anyway we  don't like them to go into debt so we're trying to do a sort of endogenous process somehow a  
**[1:06:06-1:06:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:06:06):**  fairly large fairly rich quite successful farmer in punja province of pakistan  learned about sri and on his own just started adapting it to his large holdings he had about  500 acres and as a side business because his main business was importing and selling farm machinery  
**[1:06:29-1:06:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:06:29):**  ford fiat massifers ferguson etc and for 30 years he was really a very progressive businessman and  sideline farmer he was first farmer in pakistan to do laser leveling his fields because that would  help him save water in a very dry water scarce part of pakistan and uh so somehow he found our  
**[1:06:54-1:07:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:06:54):**  website which i hope you read is will consult is more there than they can probably ever use but  it's it's all there and uh so he wanted to to to take up sri in punja but the two problems there  is that water is scarce and secondly labor is scarce there's a huge population in the country but  
**[1:07:20-1:07:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:07:20):**  agricultural labor is pretty much although the able-bodied laborers have gone up to  the horror garaches someplace so agricultural labor sort of left to the infirm or the older  older women which the labor is a problem for for a seat and so he because he's in machinery  
**[1:07:44-1:07:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:07:44):**  sales his own big machine workshop he could fabricate and adapt equipment for  sri as he understood it and he's this is just something from reading about it i mean  he's really quite quite quite bright and he said he's a really good foreman in his  
**[1:08:01-1:08:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:08:01):**  shop he described what you need and it formally comes back two days later and so it's all there  to try out in the field anyway what he did was take a 44 acre field as his test plot now you know  that's a big test plot he had laser leveled it so it's perfectly flat and he developed the first  
**[1:08:21-1:08:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:08:21):**  machine which made raised beds mechanically so he used furrow irrigation and so he has this machine  is this machine that goes back and forth and just converts the whole field into raised beds 45 inches  wide with sort of a nine inch you know fill on either side of the bed which you run your  
**[1:08:44-1:08:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:08:44):**  irrigation water along and because he wants to save energy he does not lay it out in a way that  he could use siphon to draw water from the main canal and send it down his furrows so he has  no energy costs for that his second machine is kind of a rube goldberg machine tacking three  
**[1:09:05-1:09:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:09:05):**  different functions together it's a it's a so i want to say a tractor it's a machine that drives  down these raised beds it can be designed so that in fact you don't need a driver because you put  little baffles on the front that you know touch the edges of the furrow and it'll correct the  
**[1:09:26-1:09:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:09:26):**  machines movement so you just running up and down these furrows it has seats for two laborers to sit  on this machine and they drop 10-day old ceilings into the holes the machine is punched as it goes  down this furrow at nine inch distance in both directions punch punch punch punch the labors  
**[1:09:49-1:09:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:09:49):**  have these 10-day ceilings in sort of like mats those are carpet they've rolled up and they drop  one ceiling in each hole as the machine goes slowly down the row and then there's a um it's  got a supply of both chemical fertilizer and compost uh it cuts those application rates by  
**[1:10:13-1:10:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:10:13):**  90 but it injects these right in the holes where the plants are put so they're you know very  efficient uptake of those he's working toward fully organic but this feels been heavily  chemicalized in the past so you know he doesn't just go cold turkey and go fully to organic in one  
**[1:10:34-1:10:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:10:34):**  one season and he has a big tank of water on the machine a bowser and after the the fertilizer  put in the hole of the plants been dropped in the hole is filled up you know it's about a  six inch hole and this filled up with water and then that water slowly seeps into the soil  
**[1:10:57-1:11:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:10:57):**  which is dry soil you know planting seedlings into dry soil in the you know sun-drenched  conditions is blows the mind but then they've got the whole field which with seedlings dropping the  holes and they kept these moist he floods the whole 44 acres to one inch above the buns or the  
**[1:11:21-1:11:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:11:21):**  raised beds it's because his laser level didn't get really precise application and that did all  seeps into the soil he doesn't ever cover up the roots but you know when you put that first water  insert serves the sorrow enough so as you get a little quitting so all the plants are growing  
**[1:11:41-1:11:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:11:41):**  and he doesn't do any flood irrigation after that first application of water he uh  uses makes does furor irrigation every four or five days and the nice thing is if you use these  machines which packed on the soil in the furrows that then makes the burrows fairly impermeable  
**[1:12:03-1:12:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:12:03):**  on the bottom and the water will then diffuse laterally into the the raised beds on either side  that's pretty good then he has a weir he's built which goes up and down these rows you know every  10 or 12 days and yet these can also be radio controlled without a driver because you can have  
**[1:12:24-1:12:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:12:24):**  the baffles on the front of the machine that you know track the the sides of the raised beds  and because the precision planning is so exact you get a really good weeding uh but in between  the rows which are each nine inches apart uh he gets five rows on a on the bed and he doesn't  
**[1:12:45-1:12:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:12:45):**  have any cross uh weeding because that would destroy the raised beds but by doing a good  thorough job between the rows um then he gets good results his his yields which would normally be  four to five tons were average 12 tons per hectare with 70 less labor and 70 less water  
**[1:13:08-1:13:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:13:08):**  that's pretty staggering wow um and and the the price for rice is not that good in  pakistan presently so he's diversified to wheat you know melons tomatoes chilies sunflower he's  doing he's doing a lot of prop rotation which is also about a conservation agriculture i should  
**[1:13:28-1:13:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:13:28):**  say that after you discovered fri you also discovered conservation agriculture which has  the three principles of minimum soil disturbance continuous organic cover of the soil and then  rotation of crops to get more diversity now not of crop so much but of soil biota because each  
**[1:13:48-1:13:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:13:48):**  plants has different kinds of exudation and you know it'll help keep a lot of microbial diversity  in the soil so anyway asif has put sri and concentration angles together with organic  agriculture that's his search triad for what he calls paradoxical agriculture  
**[1:14:10-1:14:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:14:10):**  that paradoxical is because you get more yield with less inputs which takes people to a long  time a long time to to accommodate but anyway if you can do 44 acres that way you can do 4400 i  mean it's a thoroughly mechanized operation um and i like the the rotates crops are not just  
**[1:14:33-1:14:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:14:33):**  just rice and he's very glad to share all this information he's a  very generous person environment environmentalist is trying to save water and serve soil he sort of  had an epiphany about 10 11 years ago realizing he'd been contributing to this mechanized  
**[1:14:52-1:15:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:14:52):**  chemicalized agriculture which the soil and you know just destroying his quality so that's why  he set out with you know a good source base to change the way that agriculture is done in this  area he's got hundreds and hundreds of farmers doing it now and after trying for 10 years to get  
**[1:15:14-1:15:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:15:14):**  the government to pay attention he says in the last year or so the new government of in run con  has been indeed very interested and supportive so he's embarking on a lot of training and doing a  lot of lecturing now that is all good news norman where could people go to learn more where can they  
**[1:15:34-1:15:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:15:34):**  learn more about the work that you have done well we have a website maintained here at cornell which  is h h http slash colon colon f r i dot c a l s dot cornell dot edu or if you go and google and just  put in system rights intensification you most probably get our our web page is the first one  
**[1:16:03-1:16:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:16:03):**  because it's the most trafficked of all of them we're based in the college of agriculture life  sciences here cornell and their international programs but i would say that our faculty here  have been less interested in this and have been faculty in china and india taiwan vietnam  
**[1:16:26-1:16:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:16:26):**  indonesia and so we have really a very large number of persons that are doing scientific work  on this and a lot of ngo's doing promotion for a variety of reasons the wwaf oxfam america has been  probably the most active uh read for the world uh you know world neighbors world vision all have  
**[1:16:50-1:16:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:16:50):**  been using since various other programs and that's all reported on the on the website we have country  pages so have information organized by country we have literature page for journal articles  technical reports lots of those we have manuals in 17 different languages already where our  
**[1:17:14-1:17:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:17:14):**  colleagues have translated material and we posted on the internet so anyone can have access to it  there are literally probably six or seven hundred videos now many of them on youtube but other  services as well with probably 500 you know slideshows powerpoint presentations like a very  
**[1:17:35-1:17:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:17:35):**  significant body of work for certain this has been done mostly by my colleague lucy fisher over the  last 20 years she's just devoted huge amounts of time and effort and thought to making this a  repository it's available free to anyone a book that i did on sri in 2015 which has been translated  
**[1:17:58-1:18:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:17:58):**  into chinese and spanish and burmese is available up there free to anyone who wants to download it  we're trying to do is like a land grant operation cornell is a land grant university and one of our  tasks is to provide the best information we can to farmers and producers and consumers you know  
**[1:18:19-1:18:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:18:19):**  anywhere i think this is certainly information that needs to get out there which is why i was  very and very happy to have had you here on the podcast in the course of the conversation  you mentioned a number of different peer-reviewed published papers katayama's work in japan and some  
**[1:18:36-1:18:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:18:36):**  of the asian research that has been done on plant genomics and so forth are those on the website as  well oh yes but probably the best way for the book i mentioned on sri is organized in terms  of frequently asked questions facts and the first 20 pages answers the 20 plus questions in  
**[1:18:58-1:19:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:18:58):**  a few paragraphs that's the short quick answer and then backing up each of those is five to  eight pages with longer answers and with references to the literature with tables and  illustrative pictures and so forth so if you get that book it's called system of rice intensification  
**[1:19:20-1:19:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:19:20):**  responses to frequently asked questions that is probably the best single source so for for all of  our listeners we will include the links to the resources that norman has mentioned in the show  notes here on the podcast so you can find those directly and link through directly to those  
**[1:19:41-1:19:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:19:41):**  norman it's been an absolute pleasure having you here on the pod i want to thank you for all the  work that you have been doing and helping people around the world for your contributions and for  sharing your knowledge and information that you have learned over the years so thank you very much  
**[1:19:56-1:20:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:19:56):**  for being here and i look forward to talking more in the future well there's nothing i enjoy talking  about more than this obviously and we're still learning it's a work progress but you don't have  to wait till you know everything before you share what's been validated in the field and already  
**[1:20:12-1:20:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:20:12):**  starting to produce some benefits i didn't mention that the for irrigated farmers we reduce the  greenhouse gas emissions per hectare by 20 to 30 percent because there's much less methane and  there's not much offsetting nitrous oxide and that's not even kind of carbon dioxide savings  
**[1:20:30-1:20:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:20:30):**  you can make if you're not using a lot of fertilizer and other inputs so it's not just  helping farmers to adapt to the pressures of climate change but also make a contribution to  abating the overwhelming forces that are threatening our our existence to be very  
**[1:20:48-1:20:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:20:48):**  candid all right that was wonderful okay well i'll talk anytime my pleasure i wish everyone success  the team at aea and i are dedicated to bringing this show to you because we believe that knowledge  and information is the foundation of successful regenerative systems at aea we believe that  
**[1:21:07-1:21:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:21:07):**  growing better quality food and making more money from your crops is possible and since 2006 we've  worked with leading professional growers to help them do just that at aea we don't guess we test  we analyze and we provide recommendations based on scientific data knowledge and experience we've  
**[1:21:26-1:21:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:21:26):**  developed products that are uniquely positioned to help growers make more money with regenerative  agriculture if you are a professional grower who believes in testing instead of guessing someone  who believes in a better more regenerative way to grow visit advancing ecoag.com and contact us  
**[1:21:43-1:21:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/achieving-genetic-potential-of-2-3-x-higher-grain-yield-with-norman-uphoff/#t=1:21:43):**  to see if aea is right for you thank you for listening and we look forward to working with you  you  