---
title: Bioenergetics In Agriculture With Steve Diver
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### Regenerative Agriculture Podcast  (2018-06-23)  
### Author(s): John Kempf  

**[0:00:00-0:00:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:00:00):**  Hi friends, I'm Jon Kempf hosting this podcast. I am passionate about developing regenerative  agriculture systems that improve soil health, produce crops that are completely resistant to  diseases and insects, and produce fruit of such an exceptional quality that we can have a legitimate  
**[0:00:16-0:00:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:00:16):**  conversation about growing food as medicine. I've discovered that there are many people with  incredible knowledge and information about soil and plant systems and how to develop regenerative  agriculture systems. However, much of this knowledge and this information is scattered,  
**[0:00:33-0:00:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:00:33):**  it's found all over the place. Some of it has been published in peer-reviewed publications,  but there are many incredible stories and a lot of knowledge that has not been published  and that hasn't been shared with many people. I started Advancing Eco-Agriculture in 2006 to  
**[0:00:49-0:01:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:00:49):**  bring this knowledge together in a more coherent fashion and incorporate it into products and  growing systems that growers can easily put into practice. It's my personal mission to have these  regenerative agricultural systems become adopted globally and become the mainstream, the status  
**[0:01:05-0:01:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:01:05):**  quo against which all other growing systems are compared. To help achieve this goal, I want to  share the knowledge that we have learned in the last decade and make it available to everyone.  While we have developed products at AEA that embody the principles of regenerative agriculture  
**[0:01:22-0:01:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:01:22):**  systems and make them easier for growers to apply, this knowledge and these principles can be applied  anywhere and when they are applied properly, they will always increase farm profitability and  resilience to climate stress. If you have any questions, suggestions, comments, or ideas,  
**[0:01:40-0:01:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:01:40):**  topics that you would like for me to discuss, please connect on LinkedIn or on Twitter,  where my username is at visionbuilder7 or you can also email me at john at johnkempf.com. I would  very much like to hear from you and to hear your feedback. Be sure to subscribe to this podcast and  
**[0:01:59-0:02:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:01:59):**  thank you very much for listening. Enjoy the show. Greetings friends and welcome to the  Regenerative Agriculture podcast. On this podcast, we explore the science and practical application  of regenerative agriculture ecosystems and talk about how to regenerate soil and crop health  
**[0:02:17-0:02:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:02:17):**  and quality and how to increase farm profitability. In this episode, I am very excited to welcome  Steve Dever to our show. Steve has had a fascinating journey working with many different  aspects and facets of ecological agriculture in a number of different endeavors, both in the field  
**[0:02:38-0:02:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:02:38):**  consulting and also with some work at the USDA. Steve, we're very excited to have you. Thank you  for joining us. Hey, good evening, Don. Thanks for the invitation. I look forward to meeting with you  and I've been watching your work and I look forward to continuing our conversation. Thanks.  
**[0:02:57-0:03:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:02:57):**  So Steve, you've done some fascinating work over the years in a number of different areas. So what  have been some of the memorable moments that led you to where you are today and the projects that  you're working on? Yeah, one of the memorable times was I was working as an extension horticulture agent  
**[0:03:15-0:03:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:03:15):**  in Muskogee County, Oklahoma and got permission to go travel to the Anchors USA conference, which was in  1985. And that really set me on a journey of this discovery of what this large topic called  eco-agriculture. Met a lot of interesting people there that led to many long-time  
**[0:03:35-0:03:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:03:35):**  friendships and attending seminars and so forth. But another thing around that same time was  another trip I took also to Missouri to attend a bio-organic orcharding workshop that was led by  Michael Malthus. And basically he was a master farmer, a really great gardener farmer from South  
**[0:03:58-0:04:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:03:58):**  Africa who started a small farm there and was doing biodynamic farming. So I really got a great  introduction to really solid type of organic farming and biodynamic farming. And there was a  dairy nearby called Morningland Dairy that he made their compost and did all the  
**[0:04:17-0:04:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:04:17):**  biodynamic preparations for them and so forth. But as a young extension agent that really impressed  me and really gave me the confidence based on this experience of a really good farmer who could  explain things and show us how superb his soil had improved and how spongy and emissive it was  
**[0:04:36-0:04:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:04:36):**  and so forth. Just all that good stuff. When you attended this workshop and when you attended the  ACRES conference, what were the pieces that stood out to you as being different from the work that  you had been doing up to that point? Well that's the whole introduction. My college education  
**[0:04:55-0:05:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:04:55):**  in horticulture and soil started in the late 1970s and then I started doing work in the early 1980s.  Even when I started in college I was interested in organic agriculture and would go to the library  and pull out the books that were interesting. But the whole ACRES USA experience has stuck with me  
**[0:05:19-0:05:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:05:19):**  and have ended up giving lectures at the conference several times. So just as an example,  the way I frame some of my teaching and workshops that I share with farmers is something that I  taught at the ACRES USA conference in the year 2000. They wanted a presentation on  
**[0:05:41-0:06:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:05:41):**  eco-agriculture. So after many years of getting the conference and seminars and putting two and  two together, the way that I frame eco-agriculture is the three pillars and that is minerals, biology  and bioenergetics. So that minerals including soil testing, either re-mineralization or some  
**[0:06:01-0:06:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:06:01):**  mineral balancing scheme that typically would be associated with Dr. William Albrecht or Harry  Reems. The biology side including humus management, organic matter management, soil biology, soil  biota, soil food web. And then the third leg of the stool would be this bioenergetic physics.  
**[0:06:21-0:06:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:06:21):**  That would include things along the line of photosynthesis and redox and cellular metabolism,  but also include this whole genre of alternative terms like subtle energy, scalar energy,  bio-resonance, coherence, structured water, so on and so forth. So yeah, that early experience  
**[0:06:41-0:07:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:06:41):**  has kind of stuck with me and gelled into a lifelong learning process.  Very often when in the agriculture space, when I hear economists and teachers speak about  the three pillars, what I expect to hear about is the three pillars of soil health being a mineral,  
**[0:07:02-0:07:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:07:02):**  the mineral component, the biological component and the physical component of soil aggregation  and so forth. So you have a slightly different twist on that and the bioenergetic piece seems  like an intriguing perspective. What led you to add that piece to minerals and biology in looking  
**[0:07:22-0:07:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:07:22):**  at what was happening in soil ecosystems? So for example, on this large umbrella that Acres USA  conferences include have many different what I call pioneers who really, you know,  blazed a new trail. And then you have many teachers who are the authors and consultants and  
**[0:07:44-0:08:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:07:44):**  putting on seminars and running labs, working with farmers based on a soil test and putting together  a protocol or a program of fertility regime, trying that out in the field, seeing how it works,  making some tweaks, trying again over many, many years, they're getting these really great results  
**[0:08:02-0:08:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:08:02):**  in comparison like before and after or the comparison between the biological or eco-farming  approach versus the conventional approach. So anyways, this three legs of the stool kind of  emerged out of that. So you have many of these teachers emphasizing soil testing, mineralization,  
**[0:08:22-0:08:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:08:22):**  increasing crop vitality, increasing pest resistance. You have another set of teachers  who are emphasizing the soil food web, compost, compost teas, humus management. And then you have  this other set of teachers, which included people like Phil Callahan, who I would meet in the  
**[0:08:39-0:08:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:08:39):**  hallways, have discussions, go to dinner with him, in the mini lecture volume, who is talking about  paramagnetism, a weak magnetic field, the influence of these energies on cellular coherence and  crop mechanics. The better you can get the paramagnetism in the soil, the better the crop health  
**[0:08:58-0:09:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:08:58):**  is. And then other things, people talking about bricks, people talking about redox. So that's why  I came up with that third leg. And that's why I put that out there to do my workshops and  and have shared that with farmers all over the country.  
**[0:09:13-0:09:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:09:13):**  I'd love to unwrap the bioenergetic piece a little bit. You've mentioned a number of different  areas. And I'm sure each one of these could be a topic for discussion in one of these episodes,  all in and of themselves. But let's just focus for the moment on a couple of the pieces that  
**[0:09:35-0:09:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:09:35):**  you mentioned. One of the pieces that you spoke of was redox. And I find that many growers,  when you talk about soil pH, water pH, almost any farmer will have some degree of understanding  of pH and the importance of pH. And yet there's almost no conversation for the most part around  
**[0:09:57-0:10:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:09:57):**  EH or redox, which from my observation, if anything, it seems to have an even bigger impact  on nutrient availability and possible pathogens in the soil profile than pH does. So I'd love to  hear your perspective on redox. Why is redox important? And why does it matter?  
**[0:10:17-0:10:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:10:17):**  John, you may have to go into my notes and pull all that out of there. But so one thing to start  off with is we do have a meter, ORP meter, oxidation reduction potential, that's when we  talk about redox, that a lot of times what we use to measure that. So for example, you can get an  
**[0:10:35-0:10:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:10:35):**  EC meter or electrical conductivity, you can get a pH meter. But this third one is a little less  known, but it is used, it's popular amongst eco agriculture consultants, and different people  have different ways of using it and comparing the results, getting an understanding and based on  
**[0:10:56-0:11:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:10:56):**  that, making some adjustments. So as one example, one of the microbes I've brewed is a probiotic,  it has lactobacillus and yeast and phototropic bacteria, and we would ferment that with some herbs  and some rock dust, some paramagnetism, and we would then measure the redox, the ORP,  
**[0:11:20-0:11:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:11:20):**  and we wanted that to have a higher negative reading and get a better quality, that kind of  thing. You'll see people also with these various kinds of alkalizing water devices, they're talking  about the same thing, they're doing an ORP reading, getting a redox, and they're looking  
**[0:11:40-0:12:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:11:40):**  for that higher level. So one of the humus management systems that I've worked with is  humified composting, it's also known as LubeKey composting. So a group of us have traveled over  to Europe, to Austria, to study with Siegfried and UtulubeKey and studied how they make compost,  
**[0:12:03-0:12:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:12:03):**  add clay to it, add microbes to it, add rock dust to it, turn it with a really nice turner,  cover the pile with a compost fleece blanket, and really aim for a high-grade premium compost that  has got humified, has clay humus in it, but on the tail end they'll do a whole spectrum of compost  
**[0:12:22-0:12:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:12:22):**  quality assessment and they do various things, but included in that is a redox reading. So  I think I'll just leave it at that. People would have to dig into a little bit more technical  detail on some of those measurements and how you evaluate them.  
**[0:12:37-0:12:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:12:37):**  Okay, great. In the consulting work and the agronomy work that you have done over the years,  what has been something that has surprised you? What was unexpected?  Good question. Well, here's one. This may not be what you're expecting, but this was a  
**[0:12:56-0:13:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:12:56):**  surprising thing that came out of my work in Texas that really led to some really great insights.  That was working with a ranch and doing soil food web testing and finding out that prairies  have a very fungal nature to them. We did some tests on a tall grass prairie southwest of Fort  
**[0:13:19-0:13:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:13:19):**  Worth, that area, and found that the fungal to bacterial ratio was 7 to 1. It was actually 7.5 to 1.  So then we, based on some other work I was doing, we found other prairies. The same thing. It'd be  like 4 to 1, you know, 3.5, 4 to 1, 5 to 1. That led to a really amazing amount of work that we did  
**[0:13:42-0:14:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:13:42):**  with using compost teas and extracts and what we refer to as liquid biological amendments.  So an LBA or liquid biological amendment could be a tank mix with a liquid compost extract plus a  home-brewed microbial inoculant plus molasses plus c-mink acid, seaweed, little rock dust, maybe a  
**[0:14:04-0:14:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:14:04):**  homeopathic energy pattern that was added to the water and then used to manage pastures, orchards,  landscapes, roadside vegetation, vineyards, pecan orchards, and based on that concept of the soil  food succession of the bacterial to fungal ratio. So that little, that little, that was a  
**[0:14:26-0:14:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:14:26):**  little surprise. It was a little unexpected find that we followed that. We did a lot more testing  in different places and we put two and two together and that really became a significant  roadmap. What was the crop response that you observed from those applications? Well again,  
**[0:14:46-0:15:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:14:46):**  say if you're managing a pasture, you've got, you have a really good example of succession in action.  You can, and also, you know, you're, when I refer to managing these pastures, we're usually referring  to some kind of a holistic grazing system as well. So it's the dual combination of using this tool  
**[0:15:09-0:15:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:15:09):**  of a liquid biological amendment and a management practice with some kind of rotational grazing or  some kind of mob grazing. But the two of them together, you can really see really impressive  changes in species composition. And so you're improving the species of the forage mix and  
**[0:15:26-0:15:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:15:26):**  you're increasing the diversity of the forage mix in the biomass production versus, you know,  plain, plain, extensive grazing. So in orchard systems like a pecan orchard, you are totally working with  a perennial tree that is native to bottomland hardwood forests. That kind of environment is a  
**[0:15:50-0:16:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:15:50):**  totally naturally fungal rich dominated type of a system. And so when you're managing for that kind  of a perennial orchard or a vineyard crop, you know that that would be more fungal. So what you can do  is you can select from, for example, two or three different compost substrates and you can do like  
**[0:16:09-0:16:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:16:09):**  a 50-50 blend or a 75-25 blend of a compost and a vermin compost, aiming for a more fungal nature  of your compost extract. So you're adding this biology and then you're also stimulating biology  with these microbial food sources like humic acid and seaweed. Yeah, so once you've got this roadmap,  
**[0:16:29-0:16:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:16:29):**  once you understand this succession, the above ground plant succession is mirrored by a below  ground soil food web succession. That's the roadmap. And then your tool and your management  system can work with that and then you can kind of see change in species composition.  
**[0:16:45-0:17:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:16:45):**  You can see improvement in health of the crop and so forth. So I want to make sure that I'm  understanding you correctly. Are you suggesting that you can, earlier you were describing the use  of these liquid biological amendments. Are you suggesting that you can change not only the health  
**[0:17:06-0:17:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:17:06):**  but also not only the health of the crops that you're growing but also the types of plants that  would become dominant, let's say in a pasture ecosystem for example, based on the application  of biological inoculants to the soil profile? Yes, I am. We had a farm down there we called  
**[0:17:25-0:17:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:17:25):**  the postage stamp farm. It was a property that they, it was a large rectangle of a  bermudagrass based forage system that was surrounded by a larger property of, let's see,  K-hour bluestem. K-hour bluestem is in lower sectional grass, lower quality forage and so  
**[0:17:51-0:18:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:17:51):**  using these liquid biological amendments in this rectangle versus the outer perimeter,  we could establish a healthy base of this bermudagrass, forage and hay fields etc.  And almost do the exact line where we spray these liquid biological amendments,  
**[0:18:10-0:18:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:18:10):**  the K-hour bluestem would not encroach on that. Wow. So that was a good one. That's why we call  that the postage stamp farm because that's what it looked like from an aerial view.  Thank you. So one of the questions that often gets asked is when we consider applying biological  
**[0:18:34-0:18:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:18:34):**  inoculants to a soil profile, how do we ensure that that inoculant that we're applying actually  survives? How do we know that a compost tea for example isn't here today and gone tomorrow?  How many tools can we use to make sure it has a bigger impact for the longer term?  
**[0:18:55-0:19:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:18:55):**  We always work with microscopes and lab testing and just kind of a constant follow-up with  qualitative assessments. But that is a good question and they talk about the soldiers  in Normandy Beach, just hundreds of thousands of these bacteria that are wiped out in the first  
**[0:19:24-0:19:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:19:24):**  wave of the solar ultraviolet light coming down and the harsh environment of the soil and the  plant etc. But some of those will survive, colonize, get established, start creating a biofilm  set themselves etc. So it's the combination of doing microscopic analysis, qualitative  
**[0:19:50-0:20:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:19:50):**  assessment, some lab testing etc. Got it. Steve, what has been something that has puzzled you  for a long time? One of the things that puzzled me is the slow nature of agriculture as a whole.  The industry, the government, the educational system to adapt to new technologies and concepts  
**[0:20:18-0:20:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:20:18):**  more quickly. The very risk averse, very conservative field. So just for example,  just referring to this topic on bioenergetics. Look at the progress of bioenergetics in  complementary and alternative medicine or holistic health practitioners. How far they have adopted,  
**[0:20:43-0:21:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:20:43):**  how far this technology has evolved and it's a parallel to another life science known as  agriculture. But you know because farmers are very risk averse, they have crops that they're  depending on, they have loans that they have to make, they have incredibly expensive operations  
**[0:21:02-0:21:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:21:02):**  that they're managing, they've got bankers who are working with them. The culture is just more  conservative. But you know so that's part of it. I recognize that, that's the plain field. I think  it's just going to take longer for some of these concepts and technologies to be more broadly  
**[0:21:24-0:21:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:21:24):**  adopted. But yeah that puzzled me. When obviously you believe that growers would benefit from  adopting this technology which is why it's puzzling that they haven't. One of the questions  that I have for you is what does the opportunity look like to you? How much opportunity are growers  
**[0:21:48-0:22:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:21:48):**  leaving on the table by not taking advantage of some of these emerging technologies and adapting  them more quickly? Well I think your podcast and your outreach is a good example John. So  you know what we're offering by adapting eco-agriculture, increasing crop vitality,  
**[0:22:17-0:22:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:22:17):**  veering in on minerals, the role they play all the way from cellular metabolism to  pest resistance, improving crop health, crop yield, improving integrating biology  and compost and organic matter, improving the living soil environment,  
**[0:22:39-0:22:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:22:39):**  getting better nutrient cycling, you know the effect of mycorrhizae and rhizobacteria,  how they work in concert with plants and how they have co-evolved over hundreds of millions  of years so it's really a natural thing. And then this whole third leg of the stool, this  
**[0:22:58-0:23:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:22:58):**  bioenergetic or bio-resonants, all that leads to crops that are able to, you know,  they're able to perform well, yield well, better pest resistance, better nutritional profile,  nutrient density, and without relying on so many, you know, chemical inputs. So that's got to be a  
**[0:23:23-0:23:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:23:23):**  plus. So if you think, you know, that's something farmers would really gravitate to, I think there  is a really an amazing new awareness now on the soil health front which is great. You know,  NRCS has done a great job picking that message up, working with soil biology and multi-species  
**[0:23:44-0:24:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:23:44):**  cover crops. That stuff is super exciting. But at the same time, when you follow what's going on in  the soil health field, it's like everything that has been gained, understanding William Albrecht  and Kerry Reems on soil testing and mineral balancing is like it's kind of taking a back seat.  
**[0:24:07-0:24:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:24:07):**  People don't even talk about it anymore. All these different things in play and understand that it's  the integration of all these together. It's not just one. If you focus on one area by itself,  you know, some pioneers, that's what they do. They're really good at it. But when it comes down  
**[0:24:22-0:24:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:24:22):**  to it, you know, you got to have a little bit of this, a little bit of that to make it all work.  One of the pieces I've personally been very intrigued by in just in our own consulting  work at Advancing Eco-Agriculture and also observing other very successful consultants  
**[0:24:39-0:25:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:24:39):**  and agronomists who are in this field is the substantial yield responses and cooperation  and quality responses that these integrated systems are able to produce. So when we talk  about improving disease and insect resistance, improving quality, it's exciting and it's fun  
**[0:25:01-0:25:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:25:01):**  to get to produce higher test weight corn or larger strawberries or larger fruit  or higher protein content wheat. And there is also an economic benefit there as well to producing  higher quality and greater disease and insect resistance. But I think the piece that has really  
**[0:25:21-0:25:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:25:21):**  intrigued me is that in many cases, in fact, I would go so far as to say in most cases,  when these regenerative ecosystems are principles are applied on a farm, almost invariably,  there is a strong yield response. Depending on the conditions in the local situation, that may  
**[0:25:47-0:26:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:25:47):**  take some time for to express itself. But often we find it happens in the first year, definitely  by the second or third year. Many of the growers that we work with observe very substantial yield  responses, usually in double digits and sometimes well into double digits. And I'm surprised that  
**[0:26:05-0:26:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:26:05):**  that piece hasn't been communicated more. And so this is one of the questions that I have for you  is when you look at, you've been describing adding this bioenergetic piece in addition to  the mineral and biological component. When you bring all of those pieces together,  
**[0:26:29-0:26:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:26:29):**  and you implement them on a farm, and they're implemented well, what does the,  well, let me ask the question this way. Based on your experience, how much opportunity do many  commercial growers have left on the table that they have not tapped into? What does,  
**[0:26:45-0:27:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:26:45):**  what does, what do the possibilities really look like?  Well, as you're talking about chemical growers, so let's call that conventional agriculture.  Yeah, let me just go over another angle that I share in my workshops first, and then I'll  
**[0:27:01-0:27:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:27:01):**  talk about that. I'll address that part. So I think it's important we have in modern  portrayal of agriculture as a dichotomy of organic versus conventional. So you'll hear that a lot.  You know, popular in the media, things are framed that way. But let me just go over  
**[0:27:22-0:27:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:27:22):**  things are framed that way. But let's remember that you have, you have organic,  you have sustainable. We've been talking about eco agriculture. There's another system, various  other alternative farming systems called, for example, permaculture, biodynamic farming,  
**[0:27:44-0:28:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:27:44):**  Korean natural farming, zero budget natural farming. And in traditional, just integrated  crop livestock, and holistic grazing. So what I mean is that there's a variation on a theme.  These, these other ones I've been referring to the new term is regenerative agriculture.  
**[0:28:03-0:28:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:28:03):**  I think that's a really good term because it means that you can regenerate and improve the  ecology of the farm. So and then everything else is just lumped as conventional. But what you'll,  what you see is these conventional farmers also vary. Some of them are doing a little  
**[0:28:22-0:28:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:28:22):**  bit of no till, they're doing cover crops, they're adapting various types of sustainable.  So we definitely want to leave farmers some room to breathe and, you know, think about how they're  doing things or portray how they're doing things. But I think for the, what the so called conventional  
**[0:28:42-0:29:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:28:42):**  farmer who's still relying mostly on chemical inputs, there is a whole wealth of information  out there. And also field days, workshops, conferences they can plug into, learn about  these things, go see what other people are doing. Yeah, something as basic as adding cover crops  
**[0:29:04-0:29:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:29:04):**  to a farm has been a huge thing. When the USDA program got started in the early 1990s,  and all the way to now one of the premier things that it has emphasized this whole time is cover  crops. And now you have people that are doing multi species cover crops. And some people are  
**[0:29:30-0:29:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:29:30):**  doing 10 way or 20 way. One of the comments from several people is that if you can get  six different species in your cover crop mix, because of the different root morphologies,  and because of the different kinds of root exudates that come out of these different species.  
**[0:29:48-0:30:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:29:48):**  So for example, you'll have some kind of a cereal in there like barley or rye, a legume in there  like venture or clover, a broadleaf in there like radish or rapeseed or something like that,  or buckwheat or calpe. These different species will exude different things down in the soil,  
**[0:30:09-0:30:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:30:09):**  they'll stimulate the soul food web, the soul food web and the roots will tie together the soil,  improve soil aggregation, porosity, infiltration, deposition of organic matter, nutrient cycling,  it's really impressive. So those are things farmers can adopt. And then there's just a whole  
**[0:30:31-0:30:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:30:31):**  toolbox of things that chemical farmers can plug into. Adding compost extracts.  You can make these in large, large quantities and put them out in 1000 gallon nurse tanks,  pull them behind a tractor, put some saddle mounted tanks on a tractor. You can inject  
**[0:30:55-0:31:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:30:55):**  things into the drill row when you're planting, improve the soil biology and the humus going on  in the soil, the minerals in the soil, etc. So yeah, this bioenergetic one, that's the last one.  It's kind of like the icing on the cake. What I tell people is that you really need to have  
**[0:31:11-0:31:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:31:11):**  the fundamentals down first. It's important to provide proper organic matter management,  proper nutrition, soil fertility. That's the foundation, that is the foundation of health  for the crop and for the livestock. Adding in bioenergetic modality, some kind of bio resonance.  
**[0:31:32-0:31:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:31:32):**  It could be some kind of structured water, or some kind of a scaler energy, or agro homeopathy,  some kind of bioinformatic preparation. These things have various kinds of subtle energy  qualities that they can impart that can tie things together. And it's kind of like the icing on the  
**[0:31:53-0:32:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:31:53):**  cake. And again, it's all about improving the soil health, crop health, livestock health,  livestock health, and vitality and nutrition. Steve, you've had the perspective of working  with many different crops in many different types of environments and many different growers.  
**[0:32:12-0:32:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:32:12):**  What is something that you believe to be true about modern agriculture that is perhaps not  in a mainstream view? Well, many. There's many, there's many, many parts of  modern agriculture that is just waiting to discover what's going on in alternative agriculture.  
**[0:32:36-0:32:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:32:36):**  So I've kind of gone over those alternative farming systems. But let's just take an example.  One of those alternative farming systems I mentioned is Korean natural farming.  Now that's exciting. They're also, that's coming out of Korea, Asia,  
**[0:32:54-0:33:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:32:54):**  it's spreading around, it's really big in Hawaii now. And then kind of a cousin to that is zero  budget natural farming that's grown in India. These guys are taking raw biomass on the farm,  like leaves off of native plants or maybe herbs that they've grown, and then putting them in a  
**[0:33:15-0:33:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:33:15):**  bucket, adding sugar and fermenting them to create a fermented plant juice. They're doing the same  thing with fruit. So they're creating a fermented plant juice, fruit juice, and various other  concoctions that they can make, lactobacillus they can make on the farm, various other kind of  
**[0:33:34-0:33:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:33:34):**  recipes. But let's think about what they're doing. They're taking a raw natural  biomass source on the farm. And by putting together a recipe, adding some sugar to it,  and fermenting it, they're creating both an extract that has soluble nutrients,  
**[0:33:56-0:34:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:33:56):**  it has beneficial microbiology in it, and it has beneficial bio substances in it, things like  enzymes and organic acids and hormones. And so all that can be created right on the farm.  And that can be used for fertility and for pest control and costs very little, very healthy,  
**[0:34:19-0:34:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:34:19):**  very beneficial. And so that's just a few examples. The opportunity really has  never been this good. I think the thing for farmers who are listening, who are in your  audience, John, who are picking up on some of this and curious, yeah, just I think the thing to do  
**[0:34:39-0:35:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:34:39):**  is just read some more books, tap into some of these topics, learn about them, and  try a little bit out at a time. Add it slowly to the farm system, do some test strips,  do some comparison results and see how they work. And usually they find that they'll  
**[0:35:00-0:35:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:35:00):**  go get something beneficial out of it. Just adding cover crops, just increasing the species  of cover crops can really make a big difference. You mentioned that farmers should try to learn  more about these various ideas and systems. What are some resources or books that you often  
**[0:35:21-0:35:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:35:21):**  recommend to growers? Well, that's a big topic, but yeah, I think one thing to do is just get  look at the Acres USA bookstore and go through there and kind of plug in around what I think  is really helpful, these three pillars of eco-agriculture or the three legs of the stool.  
**[0:35:42-0:36:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:35:42):**  Look at some of these books by some of the authors on biological farming, mineral balancing,  in the Albright tradition, people like Gary Zimmer and Neal Kinsey, some of their books.  Then some of the other books by on Terry Reems by Dan Skow, those kind of guys.  
**[0:36:05-0:36:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:36:05):**  Read some different books on soil biology, compost, and humus management.  Then they have other books on there. They have got some books on  bio magnetism and bio-dynamic agriculture. Take through there, find something that's appealing,  
**[0:36:23-0:36:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:36:23):**  read a little bit at a time, and put two and two together. It's a lifelong learning process.  Absolutely is a lifelong learning process. I think in a conversation earlier,  one of the pieces that really stood out for me was that you have to have a lot of  
**[0:36:44-0:37:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:36:44):**  experience. You are the expert on your farm. Study books and try to learn what you can,  but then pay attention. Pay attention to what's happening on your farm. Observe and ask questions  and try to understand why certain things are happening. I think when we begin questioning  
**[0:37:03-0:37:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:37:03):**  what's happening and what's going on, that really speeds up the learning process very quickly.  You know, one thing I've learned about farmers is they are incredibly innovative,  a wealth of knowledge. Take the average farmer, it doesn't matter if they're conventional,  
**[0:37:27-0:37:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:37:27):**  sustainable, organic. Look at all the different things that they do to manage their farm. They  do mechanical work, electrical work, bookkeeping, soil fertility, pest control,  raising crops and livestock, taking care of them, marketing them, keeping the business going.  
**[0:37:48-0:38:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:37:48):**  But another thing is this brain tower. I've had the opportunity to travel to India  and work on small farms in India and see how they do things in different parts of the world  I've been to. One of the things I see is that this real common theme is the brain tower  
**[0:38:12-0:38:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:38:12):**  that farmers have. So just think about a typical day that they're out there working  and maybe they're driving a tractor down some long rows, doing some cultivation or some mowing,  or some harvesting. Think about the time they have to think. That time that they have to think  
**[0:38:29-0:38:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:38:29):**  and observe is a real rich pool of ideas. So they can figure things out. Here's a couple  examples. You're growing some plants, you plant them at the same time, and one plant over here  in this container or in this row is doing way better than this other plant right next to it.  
**[0:38:55-0:39:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:38:55):**  So that's a great question. What's going on there? Is there some fertility issue?  Again, is there some kind of bioenergetic thing that you could do to increase the vitality  of that plant? Another one that I like is observing weeds growing. This kind of goes  
**[0:39:13-0:39:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:39:13):**  back to succession. Why are the weeds growing? What's the history of that field?  Is there something that you could do to change the management history or the cultural practice  to suppress those weeds longer? So those kinds of questions are very interesting. They can really  
**[0:39:32-0:39:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:39:32):**  lead to some new discoveries and try new things out. Steve, what is the question you wish I would  have asked in this conversation? We could have a really long conversation and maybe we need to  follow up on that sometime, John. It is a little more in-depth on some of these bioenergetic  
**[0:39:50-0:40:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:39:50):**  modalities. Let me just throw out some terms. I may have mentioned a couple of those, but  some key terms like bioresonant, coherent, electromagnetic frequencies, vitality. What  do they mean? What can you find out about them? My suggestion is to look on Google or  
**[0:40:12-0:40:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:40:12):**  search engine, look under holistic health, look at what's going on in holistic agriculture.  You can really learn a lot right there on that one. Some of the modalities that I would  point farmers to that are probably, let's say, more practical, more proven. I like scalar energy.  
**[0:40:38-0:40:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:40:38):**  I actually keep a scalar pendant. You can use that to energize and charge water and fertilizers.  There's another field known as agro homeopathy. It's gaining a lot of  let's say, a proven track at various university research now. Structured water is another one  
**[0:40:59-0:41:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:40:59):**  that farmers are really tapping into. Para magnetism, various other ones.  Certainly, I think that can be a topic for an entire in-depth conversation in and of itself,  Steve. We will need to follow up with that conversation at some point because it is  
**[0:41:17-0:41:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:41:17):**  an emerging field. I can speak from experience that there are some of these technologies that  can produce some very profound effects when they are managed well and applied properly.  I've got this concept that we go through different eras. Coming out of World War II,  
**[0:41:41-0:42:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:41:41):**  we've gone through the period of World War II. We've gone through the period of the war.  World War II, we've gone through the chemical era. Right now, we're tapping into the biological and ecological era.  I think that down the road as time goes by and as these terms and concepts and technologies become  
**[0:42:05-0:42:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:42:05):**  more proven that they'll become more acceptable. They're probably considered on the fringe  right now by some people, both medical and agriculture,  depending on their framework. When I started out in the 1980s, organic was like a black sheep.  
**[0:42:28-0:42:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:42:28):**  Now, there's a USDA program for organic. The food industry has widely accepted it.  Soccer moms go to the store and buy organic produce now. I think the same thing is happening in  holistic health now. People can go to local health practitioners. They can get various kinds  
**[0:42:49-0:43:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:42:49):**  of holistic chiropractic development. They can do acupuncture, Reiki, homeopathy. Pretty common now  for people to have that kind of access to holistic health. The same kind of things happening in  agriculture. Structured water is really simple. It can make some real improvements to livestock  
**[0:43:12-0:43:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:43:12):**  health, crop health, just by energizing, restructuring the water, various other things.  I think over time, this will be more commonly accepted. I'd say just give it a couple more decades.  Well, there are many other pieces that we could wrap into and dive into. I'm looking forward to  
**[0:43:36-0:43:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:43:36):**  having those conversations with you, Steve. Thank you very much for joining us here on the podcast.  It's been an honor and a pleasure to have you here and to be able to have this conversation.  I look forward to having more discussions. Thank you for joining us.  
**[0:43:51-0:44:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:43:51):**  Thank you for joining us. Hey, John. Thank you. It was my pleasure. Again, I look forward to  carrying on a conversation with you and your network. This podcast was brought to you by a  great company that I work for, AEA, Advancing Eco-Agriculture, the leader in regenerative  
**[0:44:12-0:44:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:44:12):**  agriculture since 2006. At AEA, we believe in challenging the status quo to find more profitable  and regenerative ways to grow crops. We also believe that healthy plants are resistant to pests  and disease and that to grow healthy plants, we must first think differently about agriculture,  
**[0:44:30-0:44:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:44:30):**  about empowering life instead of suppressing life, about regeneration instead of degeneration.  To achieve this, we formulate and sell products that help growers produce higher quality yield  with less risk of crop failure. In short, we help growers make more money with less risk.  
**[0:44:49-0:45:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/bioenergetics-in-agriculture-with-steve-diver/#t=0:44:49):**  Thank you for listening.  