### Regenerative Agriculture Podcast  (2020-06-04)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:00:00):**  Hi friends, this is John and this is the Regenerative Agriculture Podcast where we talk about the  agronomic science and cultural management practices that regenerate plant health, soil  health and public health.  My guest for this episode is Lauren Steinloggy, who I had the privilege of meeting last winter  at a conference.  
**[0:00:19-0:00:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:00:19):**  Lauren was kind enough to host us at his farm for our first two-day course earlier this  week.  I had the privilege of getting to meet him and his family, spend some time on their farm  and learn more about some of the work they're doing to rapidly regenerate and rebuild soil  health and sequester a lot of carbon and grow some really healthy crops.  
**[0:00:39-0:00:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:00:39):**  Lauren, I'm really happy to have you here in the podcast.  You've had an interesting story, personal journey with your own family and health challenges  that has then led you to begin farming very differently and adopt some practices that  were not at all being considered in mainstream agriculture at that moment in time.  Can you tell us a little bit about your background and story and what brought you to some of  
**[0:01:05-0:01:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:01:05):**  the things that you're working on today?  Lauren, what is the history of relay cropping on your farm?  When did you first begin adopting it and how did that come about?  Thank you for having us, first of all.  Our history has just been kind of one of evolution, I would always call it.  
**[0:01:24-0:01:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:01:24):**  Early in the game, me and my wife always said it seemed about every time we get to the point  we thought we had things figured out, we'd have to re-engineer ourselves, just redefine  what we're doing.  That goes all the way back to short history.  When I was 14, I was hit broadside by a semi.  
**[0:01:46-0:01:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:01:46):**  Over the years, scar tissue led me to the point where I can't be around livestock because  I can actually pick up livestock disease and stuff like that.  Growing up thinking I was going to be a livestock farmer, kind of was thrown out the window  pretty quick and I had the realization that I had to try to make it grain farming.  In our area, the land rent, that's pretty competitive, so we always had to figure out  
**[0:02:10-0:02:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:02:10):**  our little niche to try to make things work better.  About the time we thought we had that figured out, picked up a lot of custom work.  At one point, we were probably doing 1,500 acres of our own work and another 1,000 acres  of custom work through the custom planning, custom harvesting, crop care, all that stuff.  At one point, I'd probably say I was a confirmed workaholic.  
**[0:02:37-0:02:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:02:37):**  Then 2008, my wife convinced me to finally take a vacation.  I've never truly wanted to work since.  At that point, I learned I had to work smarter, a fresh mind is way more competitive than  a tax help mind, which was fortunate because six months later, my son, Roland, was diagnosed  with a brain tumor.  
**[0:03:05-0:03:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:03:05):**  Suddenly we had to figure out how the farm was going to run with or without me because  the high priority was focused on our son.  After that period, we learned what it was like, what people were really like when you  were in your worst of times.  We started losing land just for a simple fact, landlords didn't want us to be overworked,  
**[0:03:26-0:03:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:03:26):**  which is a little scary because I never really thought I left off.  I never backed off doing what we were doing.  We tried to persevere, but we just had to get lean and mean.  Mow continued, I guess is the way I always refer to it.  Currently now our farm, strictly a row crop grain farm, but we do corn, beans, wheat,  
**[0:03:50-0:03:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:03:50):**  rye, barley, buckwheat, got sunflowers this year, had some oats too.  But then as history had shown, mother nature tends to throw us curve balls this year.  Some of the relay cropping and that, we've had to pull the plug on a lot of that, even  the interceding.  We had to pull the plug on that, just mother nature's got bats last, as a lot of people  
**[0:04:10-0:04:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:04:10):**  like to say.  So this year you're not doing any relay cropping, but in the prior years when you have been,  what has your relay cropping been looking like?  What crops are you relaying with each other?  What does your overall relay rotation look like if it can be called that?  
**[0:04:27-0:04:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:04:27):**  It was kind of part of the evolution from, we started interceding 06, I believe it was  in 2012, the whole farm was strong corn on corn back in them days.  So interceding was kind of my way into cover crops.  We started through some of the people, the guy was meeting and stuff like that.  I was introduced to a guy named John Kootz.  
**[0:04:47-0:04:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:04:47):**  And then another guy out in Nebraska that I was focused on was Shane Graving out there  and just started opening a line of communication with them.  We had the equipment to intercede, well, it's the same equipment we needed to set up for  the relay cropping and that.  John up there, Fort Atkinson, Wisconsin has been at it.  
**[0:05:07-0:05:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:05:07):**  I'm going to guess he's pushing 15 years now that he's been doing it.  Started looking at his system and quickly decided that was the guy I was truly going  to follow.  Ended up even borrowing his original blocker guards.  Started seeing what was happening there in our undulating terrain, having steel out in  
**[0:05:28-0:05:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:05:28):**  front of the cutter bar was not a good option for me.  So I quickly converted over to plastic pushers that we just made with a drainage tile.  Then I converted over to bolt type, bolt on type blocker guard.  But even that was limited because you start realizing we can't push the soybeans down.  Now as of last year, we brought in the row crop head and was planning on running that  
**[0:05:53-0:05:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:05:53):**  this year.  But as I said earlier, mother nature kind of made sure we didn't have relay cropping  this year because May 15th, all our cereals were froze brown, laying flat on the ground.  Biggest thing with relay cropping is it builds options into what we're doing.  I guess that's what I like to reinforce to people.  
**[0:06:10-0:06:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:06:10):**  You mentioned just now that you're growing the rye for seed and in our conversation the  last couple of days, you described that the way relay cropping is sometimes done, it doesn't  produce a high enough quality crop to be produced for seed because it doesn't have enough uniform  germination and so forth.  What are the important characteristics in your mind to make sure that relay cropping  
**[0:06:32-0:06:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:06:32):**  does produce the same type of crop quality that just straight cropping might?  The simplest setup is every fall all our acres has twin row cereals, either winter wheat  or rye.  If we don't get the acres covered, then we'll consider like a spring malt barley or even  the spring oats.  
**[0:06:51-0:06:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:06:51):**  We've relayed soybeans into all of them now.  As winter unfolds, then we'll start monitoring stands, stuff like that.  If it's not a good stand, we'll just roll that right over into corn.  If the stand's good enough, then we'll go in and install the soybeans pretty much at  a normal time.  
**[0:07:09-0:07:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:07:09):**  I've used the same drill to put the beans in, but that's evolved now.  We're just using a 30 inch planter to put the beans in because it gives us more room  for the combine and stuff like that.  This spring there, we'll monitor, see if there's any herbicide needed.  Usually with cereal rye, generally I like to cereal rye just because it's simple and  
**[0:07:31-0:07:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:07:31):**  we have a very good market for cereal rye around here with cover crops.  We'll come in and install the soybean.  About July, usually about this week is when we'll be starting to harvest.  If we have winter wheat, that usually goes first.  Cereal rye will go the following week.  
**[0:07:48-0:07:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:07:48):**  Malt barley will go about another week or two.  Then if weather dependent, if we get a window, then we'll slip buckwheat in there.  That window's about July 15th to 20th for me.  Then we'll harvest buckwheat and soybeans together if we get that window.  When you think about producing uniform germination, obviously you need uniform seed maturity.  
**[0:08:11-0:08:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:08:11):**  How does relay cropping sometimes fail to deliver that?  To pay the bills here, from day one we decided we had to focus on seed quality, food grade  quality.  Every guy that's hardcore on something like that, the first thing they start telling me  is the uniform emergence is critical.  
**[0:08:32-0:08:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:08:32):**  Then that plays all the way through harvest.  If you watch your heads as you're coming to harvest, you want them all to mature about  the same time.  We will actually push harvest and try to catch the cereal.  As it dries down, we will try to catch it on the way down to harvest it because from  
**[0:08:53-0:08:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:08:53):**  what everybody has showed me and told me from the testing we've seen, once that cereal crop  dries and rewets, you start losing your quality and germination.  That's why we, seeding rate wise and that, we tend to push the limit.  I'd much rather sell our malt barley there for a couple of years.  We were seven or eight dollars a bushel if we could make the cut.  
**[0:09:15-0:09:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:09:15):**  If we run everything through the seed side, food grade wheat is usually two, three dollar  premium.  If we run it through the grain cleaners and stuff like that, we can push up to almost  double the value or eight to ten dollars we can sell winter wheat on the seed side or  cereal rye.  
**[0:09:33-0:09:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:09:33):**  Ten dollars usually is a minimum.  We've had as high as 18 to 20 dollar cereal rye seed.  Just now you mentioned controlled traffic and I know you were an early adopter of using  CTF on your farm and have seen some quite remarkable results with it.  What led to your adoption of controlled traffic and what's the story behind that?  
**[0:09:58-0:10:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:09:58):**  Actually we've been finding it easier with our setup.  If I can help it, we will not drive on the crop or anything with our controlled traffic  and that we can just set up with the guidance and that we're running.  Very little damage to any cereal crop installing the beans even if we have to put a herbicide  on and we just run the tram lines.  
**[0:10:17-0:10:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:10:17):**  Some of that really became evident when we started playing with the malt barley guys.  Their goal is to have all the seed germinate within hours.  I don't know all the details.  I just know what they're telling me.  For a fledgling malt barley company to win quality awards off the first batch, I thought  
**[0:10:38-0:10:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:10:38):**  that was pretty cool.  It showed we did our research and paid attention.  What results have you observed from controlled traffic?  You've now been doing it on all your fields for at least 11 years and some of them almost  two decades.  
**[0:10:53-0:10:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:10:53):**  So what have the effects and what have the improvements been?  Controlled traffic, it was just kind of a natural fit for us, the way our field layout  is and stuff like that.  It just was part of the mindset early in the game.  I didn't know there was such a thing as controlled traffic when we started going down the path,  
**[0:11:09-0:11:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:11:09):**  but it just had the mindset if we don't create compaction, we shouldn't have to spend any  money to alleviate compaction.  There's a lot of guys out there spending a lot of money trying to solve compaction issues  and it's as simple as don't create it in the first place.  The CTF gives us that option.  
**[0:11:30-0:11:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:11:30):**  We never went out of our way to get there, but matching up the implements as we traded  was the simple option.  The combine jumping a 12 row head was the final key to the puzzle.  Most of our fields have been on the same tram line since at least 09, some as far back as  02.  
**[0:11:49-0:11:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:11:49):**  I would have to say we were very early in the game on the parallel tracking for John  Deere.  I mean, actually the first wiring harness we had in a tractor through John Deere had  a hand part numbered serial number on it.  How have your water infiltration rates shifted over time?  
**[0:12:08-0:12:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:12:08):**  I would say a lot of it comes back to just the simple observation and feel of the soil.  It just flows different.  It acts different.  Our field are smooth.  When we do custom work, you can just tell the difference.  
**[0:12:21-0:12:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:12:21):**  Now for the more professional minded, we've got data going all the way back as we watched  infiltration and stuff like that, but the biggest thing I usually watch is aerial imagery.  I like to, well before drones and that were popular, we'd get up in the air in a helicopter  or something and fly the fields and just kind of look and see what you see out there in  the fields.  
**[0:12:43-0:12:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:12:43):**  The eyeball can tell you quite a bit what's going on out there.  Biggest reason I like to aerial is you get the whole picture and not just a snapshot  in time.  Fast forward to where we're at now.  Now we have soil probes and stuff like that telling us the moisture levels in the soil  
**[0:12:59-0:13:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:12:59):**  all the time and temperature.  If you watch where we're at, it's really been fun this summer.  I watched all the rainfall events and within, I think it's like three, four hours, we have  half inch of rain, we can have moisture 30 inches deep.  We've done a lot of them and I like watching them, but like I said, I don't even care to  
**[0:13:20-0:13:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:13:20):**  take the time to do them.  We've got the eight second inch, inch and eight seconds.  We've seen a lot of that go right next into the tram line and it's three to four times  easily I would say.  2012 is some of the first time we did some of the infiltrations and I have the data on  
**[0:13:39-0:13:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:13:39):**  that.  The neat part in 2012 when NRCS came out to do the first ones of them, our tram lines  were better than most neighbor's fields.  What do you attribute that to?  Just the consistency of the soil.  
**[0:13:55-0:13:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:13:55):**  We were doing earthworm current.  They did the full soil health spectrum, what was considered norm in 2012.  The one I remember most is they did like the Drager tube test, which was kind of the precursor  to Solvita.  Nobody that even took the test could kind of decipher what it was telling us.  
**[0:14:17-0:14:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:14:17):**  That led me to meeting Dr. Jo Clapperton over the years and then she kind of helped understand  what we were seeing on some of that.  The scary part is some of that data is getting sold.  Eight, 10 years old already on some of that stuff.  We can duplicate the test all the time, but the evolution shouldn't tell me.  
**[0:14:34-0:14:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:14:34):**  We've got the access to technology and the sensors now.  I can go out and pound a ring, but that doesn't tell me as the weather pattern changes how  quickly things can change.  A hand test is so subjective it's a little scary.  The guy running the test can actually influence the outcome pretty easily.  
**[0:14:53-0:14:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:14:53):**  You mentioned your water infiltration rate right beside the tram lines being an absorption  of an inch of rainfall in eight seconds and being three to four times higher than that  away from the tram lines, if I understood correctly.  The tram line is lower infiltration than the rest of the field.  How has with these infiltration rates and moving water down deeply, moving half an inch  
**[0:15:17-0:15:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:15:17):**  of rainfall 30 inches deep, how has your soil's water holding capacity changed over time?  Do you have more water storage capacity today?  Yes.  The first time we saw my soil on the rainfall simulator, the easiest observation I noticed  was that our soils held a third of the moisture compared to the ideal setup or the worst setup.  
**[0:15:43-0:15:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:15:43):**  If you're familiar with the rainfall simulator, you want it to end up in the back jug, not  the front jug.  Well, every time they'd run it, they'd see either the back jug would be full or the front  jug would be full where ours would only... There was only two-thirds of the moisture in the  jug completely.  
**[0:16:00-0:16:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:16:00):**  Well, I told you that little story about that time and I forgot to finish it off because  the guy, when he ran the first time I seen the test, he's like, Warren, I apologize.  We didn't set it up right.  The pan actually flipped and broke in pieces.  That first test, because I was ashamed when I seen the first time because a third of the  
**[0:16:18-0:16:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:16:18):**  moisture ended up in the front jug, third ended up in the back jug.  Then when he followed through and told me that he flipped the pan and it actually broke  in half and it was almost like tilled dirt, well, that explained why we ended up with  so much moisture in the front jug.  Every time we've seen my soil on the rainfall simulator since then, we've actually duplicated  
**[0:16:40-0:16:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:16:40):**  that every time.  Then fast forward to now, a couple of years ago, the RC&D office that we worked quite  a lot with, we were part of a tile line monitoring program and they monitored 40 outlets in our  county.  Everybody's tile lines ran all summer except for ours.  
**[0:17:01-0:17:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:17:01):**  Only four times that summer our tile lines ran and all four times were after a two-inch  rainfall event.  Your soils are holding and absorbing so much water that it's not even reaching the tile  line.  That's exactly what we're looking for.  
**[0:17:16-0:17:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:17:16):**  Actually, I'd like to hear from you also the story of the soil pit that you dug for Dr.  Jill Claperton.  I was there on your farm just a couple of days ago and I see this depression in the  soil that's approaching a foot deep, at least 10 inches deep and several feet in diameter.  What's the history of that and how did that come to be?  
**[0:17:37-0:17:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:17:37):**  I believe it was 2016 when Dr. Jill Claperton was here and we actually moved the field day  that we'd been working on for a couple of years to our farm just to give us the latitude  to do stuff like the root pit and showcase what we're doing.  We dug that root pit, back filled it, all the soil went back in the pit.  That following spring, the first thing I noticed was we had a depression there.  
**[0:18:01-0:18:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:18:01):**  Every year since then, we still have that.  If you look closely, you can see the outline of the root pit.  I'm bullheaded enough.  I want to see how many years it takes for that soil to heal.  The only explanation I can figure is we built that much air into our soils due to the lack  
**[0:18:20-0:18:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:18:20):**  of compaction and stuff like that.  You can see it the other day there when we popped the shovel full of soil out of there  versus it's just tillage induces air, but it also collapses once it settles in.  Yeah, tillage collapses, aggregate structure and crumb structure and so forth.  Conversations that people have about ideal soil being a chocolate cake and having 50%  
**[0:18:43-0:18:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:18:43):**  air space and pore space, it's quite an accomplishment to dig a root pit and put all the soil back  into the root pit and have that actually be a depression in the field because it now no  longer has enough pore space.  It's quite a pronounced visual.  You can see this pool.  
**[0:19:00-0:19:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:19:00):**  It's now a wet spot, now turned into a wet spot because of the depression in the field  from this collapsed soil structure where the root pit was.  It's really remarkable.  Given that, Lauren, given the remarkable improvements in soil health that you have observed and  soil porosity and no longer having compaction with controlled traffic farming, why has it  
**[0:19:20-0:19:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:19:20):**  not become more widely adopted?  It takes management.  It takes forethought and setting things up and full-width tillage, mask, a lot of that.  As a good friend of mine said, the more precise we get, the more precise we have to be.  Things show up a lot quicker when you're in controlled traffic.  
**[0:19:40-0:19:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:19:40):**  We start picking up on our planners, the row unit, the down pressure, the closing system,  all that is more evident as we go.  When I was in Australia there two, three years ago at their field demos, the biggest thing  they had was their tram line mediation program or however you want to call that where they're  actually back filling the tram lines and that because they're getting the depressions.  
**[0:20:06-0:20:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:20:06):**  They couldn't believe in our wet environment that I've never had the need to fill in our  tram lines because we're squeezing it out.  The only place I could see that is in our waterways and stuff like that.  Just for the simple fact, we're running mostly tractors in the field.  That's another step to alleviate compaction.  
**[0:20:25-0:20:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:20:25):**  I used to have pictures, I still got them somewhere, but our top two to three inches  will get like asphalt, but then it's just like driving on a road the rest of the season.  Now we've got to the point where my goal is we never, even if we're in corn on corn, we'll  never shift more than three, four inches.  Basically keep on the tram line and we'll zigzag back and forth in that three inch zone.  
**[0:20:47-0:20:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:20:47):**  I want to go back to your comment where you talked about the planter and wheels and so  forth showing up now more than they have historically.  Am I understanding correctly that you're saying that the soil surface and soil system has  less forgiveness now than it did earlier?  Well it's probably more forgiving, but it's also you can mess it up easier I would say.  
**[0:21:15-0:21:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:21:15):**  Some of the technology we're running makes that a lot less apparent, but usually every  year that's why I'm getting so critical on that.  I want to get as little shift as possible because that tram line is so evident.  The row right now, depending on which way I shift, there'll be a row that shows up.  Yield wise I don't know if we're losing a lot, but you have to remember that would be  
**[0:21:40-0:21:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:21:40):**  masked by the compaction all the way across the rows.  Broad acre tillage would induce a little compaction on everything, but that's one of the challenges  I'm still seeing.  It almost makes me wonder, go back to what I've seen in Australia, they're so far ahead  of what we're doing.  
**[0:21:57-0:22:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:21:57):**  They don't even see their tram lines generally.  It's just the tram line and then your rows accommodate that.  As my equipment evolved, that's kind of where we're getting to.  Now I'm running three different planting rigs just for the simple fact, the 30 inch corn  planter set.  
**[0:22:16-0:22:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:22:16):**  I have the relay planter that shifts side to side 15 inches.  Them rows are offset from the corn rows, but then the interseed driller, when we're setting  up for the relay, that drill runs in between the corn rows.  You're never planting in a stock, but is my goal.  That start to help us alleviate some of what I was seeing early in the game.  
**[0:22:38-0:22:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:22:38):**  It really shows what the compaction does.  With our planter, we've got the down pressure sensors and all that.  I can see that.  It's just learning how to manage that better.  As you started down this pathway of using controlled traffic, it's my understanding  
**[0:22:54-0:23:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:22:54):**  that you were the first farmer in North America, as far as I'm aware, to really start looking  at growing corn in wider rows.  How did that come about?  What's the story of growing corn in rows significantly wider than 30 inches?  That's one of those deals.  
**[0:23:11-0:23:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:23:11):**  Again, the old boys used to do stuff like this.  I remember in my youth, guys in dry land, Colorado, Kansas and that, they were looking  at the wide rows, never thinking that would be something that would work in Iowa.  Over the years, I met a guy named Bob Recker.  We tend to challenge each other through our peer group and stuff like that.  
**[0:23:34-0:23:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:23:34):**  We do testing together.  We had the opportunity once upon a time to set up a tram line study.  To push it to the next level, we went as far as pushing it into a prescription tram line.  What the goal was, the planter was going to shut off a row and then push that population  to the two rows aside of it.  
**[0:23:55-0:23:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:23:55):**  The rest of the planter was running variable rate population.  John Deere didn't even think that would work, but we did it.  There was about five or 10 farmers involved in that study and I was the only one using  interseed cover crops at that time out of the group.  The first thing we noticed was the value of the extra biomass that we saw in the tram  
**[0:24:14-0:24:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:24:14):**  lines.  The 60-inch gap was just phenomenal cover crop.  The two rows on either side was very pronounced better than the rest of the field.  Seeing all that as we're looking through the data and that that fall, my mindset was 30,  60 corn.  
**[0:24:37-0:24:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:24:37):**  That's how I plan to set up my plot.  During that same timeframe, Chris Teachout and myself were heading to Ireland.  As we landed in Ireland, I've seen all the sheep over there.  I'd heard the stories of guys getting semi-loads of ewes in from Montana, turning them loose  in standing corn when it was knee-high, stuff like that.  
**[0:25:01-0:25:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:25:01):**  It was a weed and feed program, we always joked.  But I never actually sat and talked to somebody that had done it.  Here Chris Teachout's family used to do that out in Western Iowa.  He had firsthand knowledge.  When we got back to the States, had my after action report with Bob Rucker there and told  
**[0:25:22-0:25:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:25:22):**  of what I was planning on doing.  He's like, Lauren, there's a problem there.  He's like, you're going to waste a third of the soil surface.  I was like, no, no.  We had pictures and all that.  
**[0:25:32-0:25:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:25:32):**  We were comparing everything.  I was like, look what's happening here.  This is a no-brainer.  Bob's the kind of guy, I tell everybody, the best part about Bob Rucker is he's the kind  of guy that's going to push it right to the limit.  
**[0:25:46-0:25:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:25:46):**  The first true 60-inch plot was supposed to be the failure.  Fast forward through the season there, we started watching the cover crop.  We're out there monitoring, measuring biomass and all that stuff.  Bob, I'll give him credit, in his plot he had what he called the barcode plot that year.  It was just all different, four row with one row skip, four row with two row skip, three  
**[0:26:09-0:26:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:26:09):**  rows, one row, just all random.  It looked like a barcode from there.  Come fall, we started comparing everything and sure as heck Bob was right.  But 30, 60 corn, the foliage was so much pronounced that the 30-inch gap just did not have the  boost in the growth, but the 60-inch gap was just phenomenal.  
**[0:26:34-0:26:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:26:34):**  My ultimate goal was to get the sheep in there, but I have that little caveat through history  there that I can't bear on livestock.  About three, four year stretch there, I tried to work with neighbors, get the sheep in and  stuff like that.  The only takers I could get was 4H kids.  
**[0:26:50-0:26:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:26:50):**  I just decided at one point, it's like I'm not going to risk a 4H kids prize lamb to  get a photo op.  I've kind of dropped the ball on that the last couple of years.  I still put the 60-inch plot in every year to help Bob.  But then this year, our 60-inch plot, I finally realized it might be the piece of the puzzle  
**[0:27:14-0:27:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:27:14):**  that I've been missing to help set up for the relay crop better.  My goal is this year we're going to relay our cereal crops into standing 60-inch corn  this fall through my work with Dawn Equipment Underground Ag.  We've actually built a little 60-inch drill that's set up to put the twin rows.  Bob's got the little tractor on RTK.  
**[0:27:36-0:27:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:27:36):**  We're going to run that down.  If the corn's standing good enough, we did have a pretty good wind event here.  It's kind of goosenecked a little bit, but I think that's just a minor detail that we  can engineer around it.  We're going to set up and do the relay crop in standing corn.  
**[0:27:51-0:27:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:27:51):**  At the same time, we've got 30-inch corn right next to it.  We're going to be running the robot in there, putting our cereals in that black layer on  corn this year.  For some reason, whatever is going on in the world, we're to the point we're not getting  a fall anymore.  
**[0:28:08-0:28:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:28:08):**  That's why we had to drop out of the relay crop game this year.  We're having a hard time getting our cereals into the fall timely to get a good enough  crop worth harvesting.  It makes a great cover crop yet, but in that deal I'm doing tonight, that's what we're  going to talk about.  
**[0:28:23-0:28:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:28:23):**  We've got to be careful.  So many of us have got the mindset we're going to do this, but we've also got to recognize  the signs when mother nature says, hey, time to pull the plug, pull the plug.  Don't ride the horse right over the cliff.  Lauren, what is required, you're talking about growing corn on 60-inch rows instead of 30-inch  
**[0:28:42-0:28:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:28:42):**  rows and you and I have had conversations about what is needed to achieve the same yields  and that in many cases, farmers may not be observing the successes with 60-inch corn  that you have been observing.  What are the things that needs to be done right?  What are the things that you can't screw up?  
**[0:29:00-0:29:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:29:00):**  I'm also curious, what yield performance are you observing from 60-inch corn versus 30-inch  rows?  Every time we've took it to yield, we've actually matched or beat yield in our plots with the  60-inch rows versus the 30-inch rows.  I think a lot of that is due to the fact we're running an electric drive corn planter, I  
**[0:29:23-0:29:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:29:23):**  can set the population and that's what we actually end up with.  A lot of times when I look at the fine details of the plot work, a little bit, if we're going  for yield, they just don't quite get the plant population where it needs to be and to do  that you might have to slow the planter down.  Having that planter performance optimized is critical.  
**[0:29:42-0:29:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:29:42):**  It's just like any other thing.  When you start pushing the boundaries, you're going to start highlighting all the little  nuances that are going wrong.  When you've got a plant an inch apart in row, every little thing is going to matter.  Some of the other things you've got to stop and ask yourself, is yield the ultimate goal  
**[0:30:02-0:30:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:30:02):**  though?  Can you sacrifice 10% of the corn yield to get better grazing opportunity in the fall?  If livestock is your main operation, maybe you don't quite need to push that ultimate  yield goal just so you can optimize your cover crop in there and get an extra month of grazing  in the fall.  
**[0:30:24-0:30:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:30:24):**  Jeff  How are you varying populations on 60 inch rows compared to 30 inch rows if you're trying  to go for ultimate yield?  Are you matching the exact same population?  Mark  
**[0:30:34-0:30:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:30:34):**  Yes.  Last year, one of the things Bob wanted me to test on the 60 inch rows was the maximum  population.  Bob and I had a little miscommunication.  He tends to talk in row population or I talk field average.  
**[0:30:48-0:30:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:30:48):**  He texts me what he wanted me to plant.  The text clearly came 35,000, 45,000, 55,000, 65, 75, 85,000.  That's what I punched in my monitor as I planted.  Well, essentially we were double of everything he wanted us to be.  It was very neat watching the plot last year because early on the 85,000 or as Bob speak  
**[0:31:11-0:31:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:31:11):**  would be 170,000 in row.  That's where we had the plants just less than an inch apart.  Them plants started growing faster earlier.  They were putting it all to all their energy was going towards vertical growth.  You had the bell curve.  
**[0:31:27-0:31:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:31:27):**  That side of the plot was growing faster.  Then finally, as we started hitting the moisture limit, the middle of the plot started excelling.  The high populations started stalling out.  In the end, when it comes to ultimate yield, all the plots were within a bushel an acre.  Mark  
**[0:31:45-0:31:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:31:45):**  Wow.  Genetic fluidity.  I watch a lot of guys, they're like, oh, you need an upright leaf.  You need flex ears.  You need this and that.  
**[0:31:54-0:31:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:31:54):**  When you start cramming that population, the plant will naturally express itself different.  It's going to be one of those deals.  I think a lot of guys are trying to run before they walk and focus on the fundamental details  to get that population and that optimized and perfect seed placement, all that wonderful  stuff.  
**[0:32:14-0:32:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:32:14):**  Jeff If you are doing livestock, which you are not able to on your farm, so you haven't  actually experienced this yet.  If you're willing to sacrifice a little bit of yield and go with slightly lower populations  and then to build cover crop biomass, what is possible in building a biomass?  You mentioned an additional month of grazing, but at what population densities?  
**[0:32:36-0:32:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:32:36):**  How much additional dry matter can you produce on an acre?  Mark  I know some of the guys that are doing that.  It would probably be best to let them speak for themselves, but I know guys 50, 60 miles  south of here doing it, generally you might get a month of grazing in the fall here, but  
**[0:32:54-0:32:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:32:54):**  I would say they're getting two, three months of grazing through the winter.  Two, three months of extra grazing is a lot less hay they got to feed.  If you get it overwintered, then you can get the cattle back out there in the spring sooner.  Like I said, I probably better defer to some of them guys.  I forgot a lot of livestock stuff, I guess is what I'm saying.  
**[0:33:14-0:33:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:33:14):**  That's the one thing over the years I've realized, my focus is on what's happening now.  I used to focus on livestock just as intently as I do the row crop side, but anymore it's  getting a little... Age is doing scary things to a guy.  Steve  Well, being willing to sacrifice 15 or 20 bushels per acre on yield or 10 bushels per  
**[0:33:36-0:33:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:33:36):**  acre on yields to get an additional two or three months of grazing seems like a very  economical trade off.  That's an easy decision to make.  Lauren, you've adopted as you've been on this pathway, this evolution as you call it, looking  at different cultural management practices and controlled traffic farming and growing  
**[0:33:54-0:33:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:33:54):**  wider corn, some of the different crops and relay cropping that you're looking at.  You've developed a different perspective on what is possible with cropping and grain cropping  from an agronomic perspective and also from an economics perspective.  I enjoy hearing from people who've developed really different perspectives.  One of the questions I'd love to ask you is, what is something that you believe to be true  
**[0:34:17-0:34:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:34:17):**  about mainstream agriculture that is very different from the mainstream view that many  others might not believe to be true?  Steve  Probably that kids have a place in ag today.  I was the only kid in my graduating class in the 80s that came back to the farm and  
**[0:34:38-0:34:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:34:38):**  been in survival mode ever since.  But I'm seeing and hearing a lot of the same things right now that we heard back in the  80s.  The parents were encouraging the kids to go to college and stuff like that.  I'm a firm believer that self-education can trump formal education.  
**[0:34:57-0:35:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:34:57):**  We need them kids out to promote them kids that are out there trying to do that.  Just last night on Facebook, I seen a young guy, a friend of mine out in Pennsylvania,  his son Nate Criswell, at an event, got up and told the family story, their farm story.  My kids can tell them stories when they get given the opportunities and we need to promote  stuff like that.  
**[0:35:25-0:35:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:35:25):**  Kyle  How can we promote that?  How can we have our children have a desire to come back to the farm and be more engaged  rather than encouraging them to leave?  Steve  
**[0:35:36-0:35:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:35:36):**  In our own experience, through some of the stuff we did, we started a 4-H kids program  here right on the farm.  That hasn't been easy, but we have some beautiful success stories out of it.  That's partially why we do a bunch of the field days.  This year, with everything going on, we had to back off.  
**[0:35:55-0:35:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:35:55):**  Yesterday, there was supposed to be a big kid component at the fairgrounds and stuff  like that.  Just empowering kids with the want to learn, the desire, and self-promotion goes a long  ways.  One of the best stories I'll ever remember with the kids deal is some of the young ladies  
**[0:36:16-0:36:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:36:16):**  that we've had involved here work with Jill Claperton, Chris Nichols, stuff like that.  They want to become soil scientists now and stuff like that.  A city kid that started coming out here, his mom one day, she's like, I never dreamt my  kid would want to go to an ag school, stuff like that.  That's in our own kids.  
**[0:36:36-0:36:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:36:36):**  The reflection of what we've done is going to show up in our kids.  All three of my kids want to come back to the farm.  We got to figure out how to make that happen.  That's part of why I'm doing what I'm doing now is getting ready to step out of the way  to give them the opportunity.  
**[0:36:49-0:36:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:36:49):**  That's what I see.  A lot of people don't want to step out of the way and give the next generation a chance.  I think I told you quite a bit the last week here that the biggest thing lacking in our  operation right now is that young mind.  I hope we're inspiring that.  
**[0:37:03-0:37:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:37:03):**  A moment ago, you used the word opportunity.  Where do you see the opportunity in agriculture both for existing farmers that are here now  and for this next generation of farmers?  In some ways, there is a despondency in agriculture and an acceptance of the status quo and a  lack of looking for inspiration and other additional opportunities.  
**[0:37:28-0:37:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:37:28):**  Where do you see opportunities in agriculture in the future?  Right now, I would say it would be the niche markets.  One has to be very well aware of the risk in them style markets.  If a company wants to make a difference right now, figure out how to position themselves  to help fill the voids.  
**[0:37:46-0:37:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:37:46):**  Currently, many are afraid to do that.  The critical learning from my experience is that folks that build an operation will excel  in that environment.  The people that have the mindset that they're just going to step in and buy somebody else's  dream and tweak it and make it their own tend to fail.  
**[0:38:06-0:38:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:38:06):**  A lot of times, experience is the best teacher in the school of hard knocks.  The only problem with learning from experience is that you get the test first and then the  lesson afterward.  Something experience will teach you though is you don't just dive in whole hog.  The calculated risk, I'm sure a lot of the things we've done in the past look like we're  
**[0:38:25-0:38:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:38:25):**  diving over the cliff, but you get to the point where you can reason things out in your  mind and deduce what's going to work, what's not going to work.  Yes, you're going to take a test right from day one, but the calculated risk is going  to be the deciding factor.  What most limits farmers from achieving the potential their farms are capable of?  
**[0:38:48-0:38:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:38:48):**  We know that with your operation, you're achieving some really remarkable results with soil health  and you're maintaining or even increasing yields because of that soil health and better  water infiltration, water storage capacity and so forth.  What do you observe that is limiting farmers, both yourself and others from achieving their  full potential?  
**[0:39:08-0:39:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:39:08):**  That would probably be the letter I.  More people need to learn W.E. is more capable.  As I've been around the world, that's the one thing I've listened to a lot.  A lot of the most successful people, they talk and everything in terms of we did this,  we did that.  
**[0:39:30-0:39:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:39:30):**  The minute a person starts saying I, it kind of brings it down to the focal point.  None of this would be capable if it wasn't for the team aspect.  I couldn't do what I'm doing if it wasn't for my dad.  Set me up to learn.  To me, it was kind of hereditary.  
**[0:39:51-0:39:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:39:51):**  He had to fast forward learning, upgrading technology and all that in his career.  Otherwise he wouldn't have been farming.  Through my background, I told a little story the other day of maybe in the receptionist  at the hair salon.  We've got to be able to do every position available but let people express themselves  
**[0:40:12-0:40:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:40:12):**  and use their strong suits.  A lot of times everybody thinks when I'm talking about our operation, I've got a herd of people  out here.  But usually it's me putting the crop in, taking it out.  My wife makes that possible.  
**[0:40:30-0:40:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:40:30):**  She takes care of a lot of things so I can do my thing.  In the fall, she jumps in and helps me.  My dad, up until about two years ago, he would still show up and do the help with harvest.  It's down to me and her now.  Hopefully the son-in-law shows up once in a while.  
**[0:40:47-0:40:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:40:47):**  Now I've got the son-in-law to candidate.  Hopefully we get him fired up, showing up and helping a little bit.  Also looking forward to trying to make a place for Roland to show up and help our son Roland.  He's got the passion and desire to understand a lot of this.  Lauren, agriculture has constantly evolved and changed.  
**[0:41:08-0:41:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:41:08):**  Every year there's new technologies and new ideas developing.  It seems that we're in a moment right now where that is perhaps changing faster than  ever.  Earlier in our conversation, you mentioned that you're starting to use robots to plant  seeds in row and 30-inch corn to plant rye.  
**[0:41:28-0:41:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:41:28):**  I find this interesting because when you look at the way technology has revolutionized our  world in general, this has largely been a, if you will, a software evolution or revolution.  But we haven't had affordable robotics that could easily be adapted to agriculture in  the last couple of decades.  We're now in the place where that is no longer the case.  
**[0:41:52-0:41:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:41:52):**  All of a sudden robotics are becoming very affordable and the software is there to essentially  do whatever we can imagine it can be created.  When I look at the agricultural landscape and how it's changing and evolving very quickly,  what I come away with is that farmers also need to change and perhaps our models of agriculture  need to change.  
**[0:42:15-0:42:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:42:15):**  Of course, I'm personally very enthusiastic about having regenerative agriculture becoming  the mainstream, which is also going to require significant change.  The question that I would have for you is what do you see as the leverage points for  changing the way crops are produced to a much healthier state of affairs for the ecosystem  and for the environment?  
**[0:42:38-0:42:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:42:38):**  If you could change one thing in agriculture, what would that be?  Government intervention, is that going to be a hot one?  The current government intervention has skewed us towards where we're at today.  I went to bat over this a few times and I've been chastised a little bit, but zero is a  fair number.  
**[0:43:09-0:43:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:43:09):**  Anything above that invites outside market influences.  It's going to be that simple.  I've been to other countries, I see what zero has done.  If you truly want to inspire innovation in that, we've got to give the guys that are  willing to step it out there versus relying on a guaranteed paycheck the chance to thrive.  
**[0:43:32-0:43:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:43:32):**  Part of the reason we have this focused system, streamlined cornbeans in Iowa is you can almost  guarantee a profit.  That's just going to speed up consolidation, all that stuff.  If we put some inherent risk back into the farming, you will see the competitive spirit  come back.  
**[0:43:57-0:43:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:43:57):**  Yeah.  This has been a recurring conversation with colleagues who I've visited with from other  countries around the world that our crop insurance and crop supports and so forth have effectively  stifled innovation because it is easier to just keep doing what we're doing and have  that comfort, not assume any risk.  
**[0:44:21-0:44:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:44:21):**  Of course, that has also led us to the place where today we're overproducing corn and soy  beans.  I don't know, when I consider that 40% of the United States corn crop goes to ethanol  production, there seems to me to be a lot really, really wrong with that picture.  It's so wrong that it almost doesn't need to be explained or shouldn't need to be explained.  
**[0:44:44-0:44:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:44:44):**  Lauren, you've adopted different mindsets, different approaches to agriculture.  What is something that you wish all farmers knew?  Something I wish all farmers knew was the knowledge of how folks made it through the  Great Depression.  The chance to learn from those that lived that are dwindling.  
**[0:45:05-0:45:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:45:05):**  Our grandparents, our forefathers, they lived in a time when you had to manage everything  around you to make a living.  Now we supplement with products and stuff like that.  Cleaning manures and simple covers was the way they created fertility in a period shortly  after the Dust Bowl.  
**[0:45:27-0:45:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:45:27):**  I think that was significant in the fact that it was right about the advent of commercial  fertilizer occurring about the same time.  I've had that conversation with some people.  That's where my mindset has been all these years.  If we can go back to that point in time and pick and choose the best practices then and  
**[0:45:48-0:45:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:45:48):**  combine them with what we know now, that's a big deal.  A lot of forgotten knowledge from that time frame.  There is a lot of forgotten knowledge about cultural management practices and how they  develop fertility and manage soils, absolutely.  Lauren, you're a fairly directly spoken individual, which I really enjoy.  
**[0:46:09-0:46:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:46:09):**  We don't have a poll question.  This next question is either maybe not as appropriate or it strikes really deeply.  The question is, what is a topic that you would like to speak more about but you often  don't because you sense that many farmers may not be ready to hear it or may be uncomfortable  with the conversation?  
**[0:46:30-0:46:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:46:30):**  The future.  Facing consolidation in a commodity production, low cost producers are going to win.  We need to figure out what side of the fence you want to be on.  Do you want to be a commodity producer in a mature industry or do you want to figure  out how to maximize nutrient availability and use them keys to compete with the higher  
**[0:46:51-0:46:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:46:51):**  input cost that's bound to happen as mine fertility becomes scarce?  If we can figure out how to maximize nutrient availability and understand which plants help  us release what we have, we'll be critical.  Would you say on your farm that you are a low cost producer?  I'm not afraid to say that.  
**[0:47:11-0:47:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:47:11):**  I guess I know it's a little weird this year as everybody came around this past two weeks.  I keep telling everybody I'm so close to a conventional farmer this year, it's almost  scary.  I'm starting to complain a little like a conventional farmer, which is totally unlike me.  I consider this year a rebuild year and I'm not afraid.  
**[0:47:35-0:47:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:47:35):**  That's going to be what I want people to know and see.  You might just need to take a reset year and that's what I'm calling this year, a reset  year.  What I'm seeing right now has been a two-year landslide and we just couldn't get ahead of  curve ball.  
**[0:47:51-0:47:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:47:51):**  Hey, bite the bullet, we're going to reset this year through some of the connections  and that.  That's how we're going to figure out how to rebound from this.  Like I said, that brings us right back around to talking about the future.  I think the future of agriculture is bright.  
**[0:48:08-0:48:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:48:08):**  We just need to figure out our niche and be involved.  Thank you, Lauren, very much for sharing your thoughts and your wisdom and insights and  experience.  Really appreciate having you here.  It's been a pleasure having you here and doing this podcast with you.  
**[0:48:21-0:48:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:48:21):**  It's been kind of an honor.  Thank you, Lauren.  The team at AEA and I are dedicated to bringing this show to you because we believe that knowledge  and information is the foundation of successful regenerative systems.  At AEA, we believe that growing better quality food and making more money from your crops  
**[0:48:42-0:48:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:48:42):**  is possible.  And since 2006, we've worked with leading professional growers to help them do just  that.  At AEA, we don't guess, we test, we analyze, and we provide recommendations based on scientific  data, knowledge, and experience.  
**[0:48:58-0:49:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:48:58):**  We've developed products that are uniquely positioned to help growers make more money  with regenerative agriculture.  If you are a professional grower who believes in testing instead of guessing, someone who  believes in a better, more regenerative way to grow, visit advancingecoag.com and contact  us to see if AEA is right for you.  
**[0:49:17-0:49:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Building_Soil_While_Cash_Cropping_with_Loran_Steinlage.mp3#t=0:49:17):**  Thank you for listening, and we look forward to working with you.  