---
title: Developing Disease Suppressive Soil with Jill Clapperton
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.

---

### Regenerative Agriculture Podcast  (2020-03-31)  
### Author(s): John Kempf  

**[0:00:00-0:00:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:00:00):**  Hi friends, this is John and this is the Regenerative Agriculture podcast. Today I'm  delighted to have with me Jill Clapperton who I'm certain many of you have heard of and if you have  not then you're really missing out and you're going to enjoy this conversation. Jill has done  
**[0:00:15-0:00:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:00:15):**  a lot of fascinating work over the years in the plains in Canada on developing disease  suppressive soils and microbial populations and a broad range of fascinating topics. Jill,  I don't want to diminish the broad array of work that you have done. I think it would be best for  
**[0:00:33-0:00:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:00:33):**  you to share a little bit about your pathway and the scope of the work that you've done  in agriculture and agronomy over the last few decades. Okay, yeah we can do that. I started,  I actually, I have a PhD in plant ecophysiology so I'm actually more of a plant physiologist than  
**[0:00:52-0:00:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:00:52):**  anything else with a fascination with the rhizosphere. So although it was plant  ecophysiology I studied the effects of air pollution, sulfur dioxide air pollution,  on plant photosynthesis and then how that affected mycorrhizal fungi and then how that affected the  
**[0:01:12-0:01:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:01:12):**  biochemistry of the rhizosphere. And I was very lucky early on to be mentored by Dr. Dennis  Parkinson who was a renowned soil ecologist and then later on by Glyn Bowen and Albert Rivera  from Australia. Well Albert Rivera in the 50s published the first papers on rhizosphere ecology  
**[0:01:34-0:01:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:01:34):**  so I've been very fortunate in my career to be mentored by really brilliant scientists in their  field. And then you know I sort of went on from that after I graduated with my PhD I went on to  work for agriculture in Agri-Food Canada as the rhizosphere ecologist. So rhizosphere ecologist  
**[0:01:55-0:02:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:01:55):**  means that I was studying the interactions between plants, soil organisms and soils  and not just microorganisms. And there I was very fortunate to meet Dr. Valerie Bien-Peltier  who is a renowned acrologist so she studies mites, soil mites and I started to become very aware  
**[0:02:19-0:02:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:02:19):**  that the soil fauna were just as important as all the microbes that we were studying  and eventually I started to work on earthworms and I founded the worm watch program and also  had the methodology developed through the worm watch program accepted by the FAO for ecological  
**[0:02:39-0:02:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:02:39):**  monitoring. So what it really came down to is we started to really understand that the plant,  well we've I guess we've always understood that the plant really drives everything that happens  in the rhizosphere. So the rhizosphere being the root, the soil attached to the root and then the  
**[0:02:57-0:03:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:02:57):**  soil that's influenced by the roots. When we do that you can really see that your most biologically  active area in your soil is in and around the roots. So if you think about a crop then it's  in the crop row. It's not in the bulk soil it'll be in the crop row. And then once we're in the  
**[0:03:14-0:03:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:03:14):**  crop row we also start to understand that every different plant species that you grow in within  your community or a crop row whether you're growing companions or covers or you know doing  multi-cropping, multi-species cropping, then each one of those plant species that are there  
**[0:03:34-0:03:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:03:34):**  exude their own signature of carbon compounds. And when I say that I'm not just talking about sugars,  I'm talking about amino acids and lipids and nucleic acids and anything that the plant makes  and when the plant makes things they always have carbon backbone or carbon skeleton. So let's call  
**[0:03:54-0:03:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:03:54):**  them carbon skeletons. And then when we start putting meat on the bones and we start adding  you know mineral nutrients and oxygens and hydroxyl groups like OH groups and things like  that that make these very long or very short carbon chains, skeletons functional so that they  
**[0:04:14-0:04:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:04:14):**  have this ability to do things within the rhizome here. And some of them will actually call to  action, like so examples for nematodes that can parasitize insect larvae that are feeding on the  roots of a plant. Or they'll call to action the rhizobium because they have a legume and it wants  
**[0:04:35-0:04:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:04:35):**  to fix nitrogen. So it's not just about sugars and a lot of people focus on sugars but it's not just  about sugars. And there's this whole interaction that happens in the rhizosphere which is all about  predator-prey reactions. So soil fauna acting as the predators and not just them but also the  
**[0:04:56-0:05:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:04:56):**  nematodes and the protozoa which we also predators feeding on the bacteria and the fungi. Now this is  really really important because if we just had microbes in around the roots of plants, the  microbes would out-compete the plant for the nutrients that we put down with our crops because  
**[0:05:16-0:05:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:05:16):**  they're very good at growing new generations in less than 24 hours. And so they use it all up and  so a lot of people will say okay well microbes just need sugar. Well actually they don't. They  need a carbon source which would be like the exodutes from the plants but actually they need  
**[0:05:34-0:05:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:05:34):**  amino acids and they need lipids and they need all the things that the plant produces but they also  need iron and manganese and boron and calcium and all these other mineral elements the same as the  plant does in order for them to grow their skeleton. Grow you know a skeleton and then grow  
**[0:05:54-0:05:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:05:54):**  the meat onto the bones. For example if we are looking at things that are beneficial rhizosphere  organisms, the things that promote plant growth like a lot of the Pseudomonas bacteria, they need  a lot of iron. They produce a fluorescent compound that requires them to have iron so they will  
**[0:06:12-0:06:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:06:12):**  actually use the iron in and around the roots which means that the plant actually has to compete  with the microbes for that iron. So if you think about it now if we go to the next step then if we  have these predators coming in and eating them and then pooping out the minerals and that the other  
**[0:06:30-0:06:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:06:30):**  form of carbon then we actually the plant can have access to it. So the predators are really  important in the nutrient cycling. In fact they're more important than anything else because somebody  needs to recycle all the bacteria and the fungi that are hoarding a lot of the nutrients from the  
**[0:06:48-0:06:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:06:48):**  plant. So I started working on that and then I started to understand this whole idea of signatures  and how all these different plants like plants that I would grow between the rows or the cover  crop that I would grow as a fallow replacement would affect the nutrient density in the subsequent  
**[0:07:06-0:07:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:07:06):**  crop and then it was like well that's really interesting. If I put separate like keep the  plants as monocultures of the cover then I have a different nutrient density in the wheat but if I  mix these plants they have another different nutrient density so how does that work? And  
**[0:07:23-0:07:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:07:23):**  it became really obvious that plants exude root exudates that allow them to have access to mineral  nutrients that they wouldn't get if they didn't exude like acids or bases or calcium or things  like that so that they could bind up the things they need and then bring them in through the plant  
**[0:07:43-0:07:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:07:43):**  root and then shuttle them up to the shoot. And microbes are very much involved in that process  as well. So the rhizosphere is really this factory if you want to call it this very big  city around the roots that has all these multiple functions that is driving your plant health. But  
**[0:08:04-0:08:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:08:04):**  it's also driving soil health because the mycorrhiza when plants are colonized by mycorrhiza  the mycorrhiza actually changed the whole physiology of the root including photosynthesis.  So they will actually stimulate photosynthesis and then they stimulate the movement of amino acids  
**[0:08:24-0:08:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:08:24):**  and organic acids over sugars to the root in order to bathe the whole rhizosphere in a substrate that  attracts plant growth promoting rhizobacteria and excludes a lot of your pathogens because  yes the roots can actually do that too. They can actually make the root environment or the rhizosphere  
**[0:08:45-0:08:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:08:45):**  so it excludes plant pathogens or they can make it because we haven't given them enough nutrition  they can't produce those compounds or they can't defend themselves and so then we  offer openings to some of these pathogens. So I started to really as I was a scientist with  
**[0:09:02-0:09:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:09:02):**  Ag Canada I started to really understand how earthworms were affected by agricultural practices,  how crop rotation were so important for disease and then we started to play with cover crops and  companion crops and multi-species cropping and really understand how when things grow together  
**[0:09:22-0:09:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:09:22):**  sometimes they actually grow better than they do by themselves. Eventually that led me to working  on my own and moving to the United States with my family and starting my own company Rise of Terra  so that I could explore more of the things that I was really interested in and also to work less  
**[0:09:41-0:09:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:09:41):**  in academia but more with farmers because I also realized that in a lot of cases I was actually  hampered as a research scientist. I was always pushing back against boundaries and pushing  back against ideas that people thought were a lot of my colleagues thought were kind of crazy but  
**[0:09:59-0:10:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:09:59):**  farmers were already implementing very successfully. So it was about being able to work on concepts  that were at least 20 years in the future so for me that was always my goal was to always look  forward you know 15 or 20 years and think about where farmers should be or where farmers thought  
**[0:10:19-0:10:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:10:19):**  they should be and then actually work towards an understanding so that by the time all the growers  got to that place we would know a lot more about it and they'd be able to implement things  immediately or perhaps even before that and certainly some of the innovative growers in  
**[0:10:37-0:10:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:10:37):**  the world have already sort of surpassed a 15-year window and started doing things you know within 10  years of us knowing some of these things. So I was doing a lot of work with Dr. Ross Welch from ARS  at Cornell. He was very helpful in steering me well into nutrient density and the understanding  
**[0:11:01-0:11:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:11:01):**  of what nutrient dense food was and how to look at the minerals in food and what that meant and  I'd already seen changes when we had different crop rotations and different cover crops and  different companions but wasn't really fully understanding of it and was thinking strongly  
**[0:11:20-0:11:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:11:20):**  about staying in academia to work on this and he was the one who really encouraged me to step out  and start working on nutrient density as part of my consulting business and that was  a little over 10 years ago almost 15 years ago and now we're really starting to understand  
**[0:11:43-0:11:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:11:43):**  more about nutrient density. We have tools that will measure it fairly easily and I've been very  lucky to work with Dr. Bruce Kaiser on that and the tracer and XRF to understand how we can  measure nutrient density in food grains and various other samples very quickly like 30  
**[0:12:01-0:12:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:12:01):**  seconds quickly. You know that's led me to the Real Food Campaign and and Ben 7 and a lot of  other really great people who are really interested in food quality and how do we  create more nutrient dense food including Chef Dan Barber. Jill that is an excellent  
**[0:12:22-0:12:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:12:22):**  outstanding overview and invites about three dozen follow-up questions that come to mind. I  scarcely know where to begin but perhaps one thought that comes to mind you mentioned  the need to have protozoa and soil fauna to grade on the soil microbial populations.  
**[0:12:44-0:12:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:12:44):**  A phenomena that we have observed a number of times with vegetable growers who've chosen to  constantly spoon feed sugars through their irrigation systems during the growing season  and some soil types we've observed significant nutrient deficiencies with this practice. It's  
**[0:12:58-0:13:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:12:58):**  very easy to produce a calcium deficiency even on calcareous soils for example  by constantly spoon feeding sugar. So in in this type of ecosystem what would be an appropriate  management response? Obviously you discontinue constantly spoon feeding the sugar that's step  
**[0:13:15-0:13:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:13:15):**  one but then from a microbial management perspective what are the practices that could  be used to shift the microbial population and to release some of those tied up nutrients?  First off yeah so one thing I'll say about that is that when you feed sugars you can  
**[0:13:32-0:13:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:13:32):**  feed sugars you feed the weedy bacteria in your soil and when I say weedy ones I mean the ones  that can grow really quickly on available nutrients which is the same practice as weeds  like weeds in the fields are really good at growing any kind of available nutrient they can  
**[0:13:49-0:13:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:13:49):**  just you know germinate and grow like crazy. Well these bacteria are exactly the same you give them  free sugars and they grow like crazy a bit like giving your kids candy and then watching them zoom  so they their populations grow very quickly and that means that a lot of so the other thing that's  
**[0:14:09-0:14:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:14:09):**  happening there is that the function of your rhizosphere has changed because these things  being like weeds are just growing really quickly and using up every mineral nutrient that they can  find if we don't have really good and even the predators are going to take a while to get up to  
**[0:14:27-0:14:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:14:27):**  speed because you are really like putting the bacteria on red bull and getting them to go really  fast and metabolize really quickly and grow big populations that are overwhelming everything else.  So this is a case of now we need to think about this as stopping that but now we need to get the  
**[0:14:46-0:14:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:14:46):**  mineral nutrients and our trace elements into that fertigation so that what we're doing instead  is making sure that the plant gets some trace elements or even macro nutrition especially if  we see an immobilization because that's what you're experiencing at that point is immobilization and  
**[0:15:04-0:15:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:15:04):**  eventually things will grow out of it as long as we have good soil structure and we have the you  know because it's predator-prey relationship so it means the prey has to really increase before the  predator population starts going up with it so we don't have to delay you get a lot of prey and then  
**[0:15:21-0:15:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:15:21):**  you don't get the predator you have a delay until the predators can really get in there and start  working. However if we do things more in a regenerative sustainable way then we maintain  a predator population at the same time so we always have some prey so we've got you know good  
**[0:15:38-0:15:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:15:38):**  soil health we've got bacterium fungi in there but we're feeding them complex substrates that they  have to work for and we're also maintaining that soil ecological function so we have the nitrifiers  working we have the manganese reducers we have the iron reduced we have all these different  
**[0:15:56-0:16:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:15:56):**  bacteria groups working their best and those in that sort of what we're gearing for so what we  need to do if we start to see mineral nutrient tie up we need to get the mineral nutrients in  there because the bacteria well we need to stop the sugars we need to get the mineral nutrients in  
**[0:16:15-0:16:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:16:15):**  ideally you put them in in a you know in a humid form so we still have the carbon chains but  they're more complex carbon chains and you'd be even if you had a compost tea you'd be putting  that in in hopes that you'd start to out compete some of the things that you grew up with all the  
**[0:16:34-0:16:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:16:34):**  sugars and you'd certainly be one of the things that i would certainly be doing is i'd be adding  manganese iron and zinc and the reason i'd be doing now is because i'd be looking for  those reducer populations which are all plant growth promoting bacteria so we need to change  
**[0:16:53-0:16:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:16:53):**  the population back to being a functioning population to assist the plant in its quest for  optimum growth over the last six or eight months i've been well for the last several years for that  matter i've been working deeply to try to better understand the functions of redox and reduced  
**[0:17:12-0:17:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:17:12):**  trace mineral availability in the profile and my understanding at this moment i'm seeking  clarification on this my understanding is that as a general rule of thumb the organisms which have  a reducing effect also tends to be disease suppressive and provide nutrition to plants  
**[0:17:30-0:17:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:17:30):**  and whereas those that have an oxidizing effect have the potential to be more pathogenic or  enhance a disease or produce a disease enhancing environment is that a correct understanding it is  and that comes back to a bit of our understanding about our own bodies so the reason that we  
**[0:17:49-0:17:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:17:49):**  want to eat antioxidants right is because we don't want to be in that oxidized state  we actually want to absorb some of the extra oxygen that may be produced from peroxidases  and some other things which are enzymes that can actually cause intracellular damage and cell  
**[0:18:08-0:18:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:18:08):**  damage and they're produced from inflammation and plants get inflammation too by the way just  differently so one of the things we still need some oxidizers because there's there's some  reasons that you know ecologically that we need them because we need everything in there we just  
**[0:18:26-0:18:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:18:26):**  need to function in a way that supports plant growth as opposed to detracting from plant growth  and the one thing we don't need is we don't need plant membranes being split apart or we don't need  leaky cell walls or things like that that allow pathogens to get in and the one thing that we need  
**[0:18:44-0:18:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:18:44):**  all the  to understand that was like, well, if we manage the rhizosphere really well and we think about  rhizosphere processes in a different way, then we don't actually need any of this stuff because  
**[0:19:24-0:19:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:19:24):**  we can create these healthy rhizosphere which will keep these plants really strong. And part of that  was my understanding, you know, we need to make sure that we have some of these minerals. We have  enough manganese and we have enough iron and zinc and even to a certain extent selenium in order to  
**[0:19:44-0:19:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:19:44):**  facilitate these reactions. And it's the same in our bodies. We need the same thing in our bodies.  We need manganese, we need iron, we need zinc, we need a lot of zinc. Zinc is the gatekeeper for all  the iron in our bloodstream. It controls our immune system to a certain extent. And so we need to make  
**[0:20:04-0:20:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:20:04):**  sure that we have enough zinc in our system in order to fight these things if we get them. And so  in many ways, plants and people and animals share a lot of the similar pathways in terms of immune  response and fighting diseases. You mentioned that plants are exuding much more various different  
**[0:20:26-0:20:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:20:26):**  photosynthesis other than sugars, but also amino acids and also lipids and other compounds.  I would like to better understand how do plants, what is the profile of the various compounds that  plants produce at different levels of plant health? You've been looking at nutrient density.  
**[0:20:43-0:20:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:20:43):**  Has anyone been looking at how lipid profiles or carbohydrate profiles might change in the root  exudates at different levels of plant health and nutritional profiles? A little bit, but not very  much. I mean, there's a number of people like to Grayson who have been studying, you know, root  
**[0:21:00-0:21:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:21:00):**  exudates and looking at root exudates with different changes in plant health. But, you know,  we haven't been doing a lot of that with crops. And I think we're at a point now where people are  interested in lower inputs and doing things in a slightly different way. Like, I think that's part  
**[0:21:17-0:21:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:21:17):**  of the regenerative movement. People are interested in plant health and looking at it a different way.  So I think we're going to start looking at that a little bit more. But I mean, I know from my own  work that we saw very clearly that when plants are colonized by mycorrhizal fungi, you know,  
**[0:21:35-0:21:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:21:35):**  hell, my tracer studies, we saw very clearly that the photosensates were completely changed  and the plant was doing things in a very different way. So it had much higher rates of photosynthesis.  The composition of the root exudates was shifted very much towards amino acids and organic acids.  
**[0:21:55-0:22:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:21:55):**  So there was a pH shift as well. And then when you start to look at what's living in there in the  communities around it, they were really shifted towards plant growth promotion, which you can  understand because if you're a mycorrhiza, you need that host, an endomycorrhiza, you need that  
**[0:22:12-0:22:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:22:12):**  host to be the best host that it can be because you can't grow without the host. You're going to  protect your host at all costs because you have to. I mean, you're relying on it to finish your  own growth cycle. This is a really complicated relationship because you need certain things as  
**[0:22:30-0:22:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:22:30):**  a mycorrhiza. I need certain things in order to grow my hyphae. I need to have slightly more acid  root exudates because I'm going to gather zinc and iron and manganese and phosphorus and all  these other and calcium and all these other minerals, including boron, so that I can transport  
**[0:22:47-0:22:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:22:47):**  them into the plant and trade them for more amino acids and more carboxylic acids and more  organic acids and then just enough sugars to keep me going. I think this is a teachable moment at  this point. What do you think? Yes, the outcome of photosynthesis is glucose, but that molecule  
**[0:23:11-0:23:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:23:11):**  is used in so many different ways. It's sort of like you start with the engine and then you just  keep adding cars onto the train. Well, it's kind of the same thing. You start adding cars onto  the train and building these very different molecules from photosynthesis. The photosensates  
**[0:23:36-0:23:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:23:36):**  are transformed into many different compounds, which are shot to the roots and some of them are  formed in the roots and then sent back up. The plant is actually creating so many different  compounds on a daily, hourly, minute-by-minute basis that it could blow our minds. Even these  
**[0:23:55-0:24:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:23:55):**  secondary plant compounds that are used for disease fighting, if they make a whole bunch  of them and they go, ah, don't really need them, then they break them all down and break them into  other compounds. It's this constant, oh, I don't really need this. I'll make something new out of  
**[0:24:12-0:24:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:24:12):**  that. Or, oh, I really need this because the roots are requiring that right now.  The plant is really assessing itself chemically, signaling all the time, going, oh, I've got  something on my leaf. I've got an aphid on my leaf and it's poking a hole in my leaf. Oh my goodness,  
**[0:24:29-0:24:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:24:29):**  I need to ramp up secondary production because I need to lignify my leaf. It's sending out all  these signals to do that. The plant is this great big chemical factory that's sensing what's going  on in the roots. I've got Collembola pruning my roots. Okay, that's probably okay. But no,  
**[0:24:49-0:24:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:24:49):**  I've got this nematode poking a hole in my root now. Now I have to send all these secondary  metabolites down to the roots because I need to actually lignify the roots so that the nematode  can't go any farther. I think the thing that I really want to convey to people, John, is that  
**[0:25:03-0:25:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:25:03):**  there's a lot of really complicated signaling going on when things start happening. Or even  when they're not happening, there's still a lot of complicated signaling going on within the plant  and a lot of messengers going back and forth between the shoots and the roots to make sure  
**[0:25:19-0:25:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:25:19):**  that plant has optimum nutrition. It's really our jobs as growers, farmers, producers, ranchers,  to make sure that the plants have enough of that or live in a community that can provide enough of  that, of whatever they need in order to be at their optimum. The reason I ask that question  
**[0:25:39-0:25:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:25:39):**  is because it's my understanding, we know that each plant has a symbiotic community,  that it has a symbiotic relationship with. Some of these communities, as you mentioned several  times, are very disease-suppressive. And that is my understanding that the communities of some of  
**[0:25:55-0:26:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:25:55):**  our crop plants may not be disease-suppressive, but may be disease-enhancing. What I'm really  trying to understand as I'm connecting some of the dots in the literature or trying to connect some  of the dots, it appears possible, although it hasn't been well studied that I have read it,  
**[0:26:11-0:26:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:26:11):**  it appears possible that some plants may have a disease-enhancing associated microbial community.  And that can shift to a disease-suppressive microbial community dependent on the degree of  nutritional integrity that the crop has itself. So that's the dots that I'm seeking to connect.  
**[0:26:32-0:26:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:26:32):**  I would love to have your insights on that. There are. I mean, there's also parasitic plants,  and they use root exudates to change the community around other roots. There are plants that grow in  a community that will take over, for example, like spurge and things like that, that will,  
**[0:26:52-0:26:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:26:52):**  in a range community, which will exude exudates that actually totally mess up the microbial  community of their surrounding plants and then create this inhibition zone around their own  roots so that they can be very competitive for their own resources. So they'll actually  
**[0:27:11-0:27:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:27:11):**  sabotage plants around them and make them more susceptible to disease in order to further their  own competitive advantage. And then there are plants. I mean, we've been playing a lot with  technology, and there are plants that are genetically modified. And I'm speaking of  
**[0:27:30-0:27:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:27:30):**  trans-genetic plants. So plants where we have used agrobacterium cumefaciens to place genetic  codes into other plants and use them from bacteria or insects or things like that. That's a really  interesting concept too, because those plants produce a lot of opines or opines, however you  
**[0:27:54-0:28:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:27:54):**  want to say it. And in doing so, those compounds, as I understand it, are like organ rejection  drugs. And normally, plants wouldn't have those in their rhizosphere. They're kind of peculiar  compounds, and they wouldn't have them sustained. And we really don't understand what the  
**[0:28:14-0:28:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:28:14):**  consequences of that are. I mean, there's been a number of studies that have been released  recently talking about changes, but certainly there were a lot of studies early on about how  community function didn't change. But I mean, everybody knew that there were some changes in  
**[0:28:31-0:28:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:28:31):**  the rhizosphere community. But I have to be honest, in a lot of ways, we didn't really,  and I think we still don't understand what that means. Because, I mean, even now with all our  technologies and all the genetic markers and stuff, we still, there are so many things. The  
**[0:28:47-0:28:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:28:47):**  biodiversity in the rhizosphere is so huge, so huge, way bigger than anything you could imagine  in any environment on Earth in a terrestrial environment, above ground environment, I should  say. And we don't even know what half of these things are. They're just sort of like weird  
**[0:29:03-0:29:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:29:03):**  sequences. We know they are from something, but we don't even know what they're from.  So we are still trying to understand what these changes are. But I think the most important thing  right now, yes, it's important to understand those changes. The important thing to understand  
**[0:29:21-0:29:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:29:21):**  is that you have healthy soil and you have a really beneficial rhizosphere, you are going to  make your plant the best that it can be, no matter what. I mean, even transgendered plants need good  soil to grow in. And we need to have the soil functioning, which means that we have to really  
**[0:29:43-0:29:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:29:43):**  think about, if we're always just growing one plant community, we also have to think about,  well, what was growing there before? Like, did we have a tall grass prairie? Well, that meant  that we had a lot of mycorrhiza, we had a lot of diversity. And if we're just rotating two crops  
**[0:29:59-0:30:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:29:59):**  all the time, we can't expect to have the healthy soils that we had previously. And we can't expect  to have close cycles of nutrients, which most people want, because that's not possible because  we're always exporting off our farms. So we need to think more about the fact that we can use soil  
**[0:30:18-0:30:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:30:18):**  health, certainly, to generate the nutrition in the plants and to keep healthy plants,  we can use diversity to mess up the organisms that are in there that are trying to cause disease.  Because if they don't have a pure stand of something, it's really hard to find what you're  
**[0:30:37-0:30:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:30:37):**  looking for. And if all the roots are growing fast, they can't jump on because they're terrible  sprinters. They don't move very fast. They don't reproduce very fast. So if our roots grow fast,  and our plants are really vigorous, we can outcompete most of those disease organisms  
**[0:30:53-0:30:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:30:53):**  really easily. As long as we maintain our nutrient density in the soil, and maintain the  nutrition that the plants need in order to fight them up, we'll be okay. But yeah, I mean, plants  are always looking for an advantage for space, water, light, oxygen, nutrients, they have to compete  
**[0:31:13-0:31:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:31:13):**  in the ground for those nutrients. So they produce also a lot of really nasty chemicals to inhibit  the neighbors, or to take out the neighbors so that they can have it all for themselves.  It's not always a synergistic environment at all. And that's why when we start putting plants  
**[0:31:32-0:31:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:31:32):**  together, like when we're intercropping, we have to think about, well, does this plant actually  like each other? Because there are some plants that actually don't like each other. It's like,  I don't like you at all. And I'm going to do my best to inhibit your growth. And watch me do this.  
**[0:31:49-0:31:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:31:49):**  There's a growing interest in developing these disease-suppressive soils and cropping blends  that can suppress disease. What are some of the best management tools and practices to develop  that and to accomplish those? It's really interesting. In fact, actually, I think just  
**[0:32:04-0:32:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:32:04):**  on Friday, I was having a discussion about suppressive soils. We have to understand that  the inoculum density of diseases is always in our soils. We always have a large disease in our  soils. Once we have had disease, it's always there. We never get rid of it. So that's the  
**[0:32:21-0:32:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:32:21):**  first thing we need to understand as we go forward in this conversation. The other thing is that we  need to create an environment where plants can grow roots very quickly. And we need to put our  seeds in the ground with optimum temperature. Because not all plant roots like to grow in cooler  
**[0:32:38-0:32:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:32:38):**  temperatures. And some of them don't like to grow in hot temperatures. And nothing really like has  optimum root growth over 75 degrees Fahrenheit. So we need to think about how we're growing things.  So we need to stay within that. If you can stay within the 15 degrees Celsius to that 25,  
**[0:33:03-0:33:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:33:03):**  30 degrees Celsius window with your cool and cool seasons on the cool side, and your warm seasons  on the warm side, and let that seed germinate very, very quickly, you will create an environment  for those plants. The other thing is to really think about, and honestly, there's not a lot of  
**[0:33:24-0:33:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:33:24):**  data on this, but you're gonna have to experiment on your own. So you have to think about things  that you might want to put together. Now there are things that I can tell you do not grow. So don't  try and grow corn and canola together because they don't like each other at all. Not even close. Corn  
**[0:33:38-0:33:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:33:38):**  likes legumes. Give it a legume and it's like, woohoo, we're together. And the mycorrhizas benefit  each other. And the microorganisms both like each other. So it's a good combination. Peas and  canola like each other, but warm seasons and canola don't like each other. And we know that  
**[0:33:58-0:34:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:33:58):**  things like lentils and flax, chickpeas and flax, they like each other too. They like each other a  lot. So some of those are the kinds of things that we can use to our advantage. I can also tell you  that sorghum can be very, cannot like a number of things. And so that's the kind of thing that you  
**[0:34:17-0:34:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:34:17):**  need to figure out. Some of the warm season legumes will grow very well with it. The cool  season legumes will not. They do not like sorghum Sudan very much. If we tried to evaluate some of  these blends and combinations, what are the characteristics that we would look for to see  
**[0:34:34-0:34:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:34:34):**  whether they do well together or not? What should we observe? Well, one of the things you'll notice  is like if you get, if you, what you can do is a study that's actually called a removal study.  And plant ecologists have done this for a long time. Is that what you can do is, you know, split  
**[0:34:51-0:34:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:34:51):**  up your plots down into, you know, like let's do split plots and remove certain species. Like  actually go in and hand weed them. And you can remove them at different percentages, or you can  just remove one species and then remove the next species and then remove the other species. And  
**[0:35:08-0:35:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:35:08):**  then look at what happens to the release of the plants. If none of them do well, then you go,  okay. But if some of them all of a sudden start to take off, which is what happens to us, we,  we noticed is that we got a bunch of blister beetles that took out some of our cool season  
**[0:35:23-0:35:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:35:23):**  leggings with our sorghum Sudan. And all of a sudden the Sudan took off. So we knew it was like,  oh, those guys are all suppressing sorghum Sudan. But that can be an advantage too, because if you  don't want really tall sorghum Sudan, you know, grow some cool season leggings with it and it'll  
**[0:35:40-0:35:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:35:40):**  not grow very tall. There's lots of management practices that need to be perfected. I think a  point that is worth making to a comment that you made earlier, there's still very much that we  don't know about soil biology. There's still very much we don't know about the impacts of various  
**[0:35:55-0:36:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:35:55):**  plants and soil biology and interactions. We do know enough. We already know enough,  but if we simply implement what it is that we already know, we can already begin having  very significant successes in developing more disease resistant crops, improving our soil  
**[0:36:10-0:36:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:36:10):**  profiles and so forth. There's many areas that we don't know as much about as we might like. And  one area in particular for me is the area of nutrient density. You mentioned that at the  beginning of this conversation, something you've been working on for the last decade or more.  
**[0:36:26-0:36:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:36:26):**  What is the interaction? What is the effect of growing different synergistic crop combinations  on nutrient density? And also what is the effect of nutrient density on disease and  insects' acceptability? Oh, wow. Loaded questions, John.  
**[0:36:44-0:36:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:36:44):**  Yes, straight for the juggler.  The one thing that I have studied is the effects of, and it was on wheat because we're working  left for Alberta, Canada. So that's Southern Alberta, Canada, sort of the northern part of  
**[0:37:01-0:37:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:37:01):**  the Northern Great Plains. We saw that when we replaced the fallow with cover crops,  depending on the mixture, and we weren't very fancy. We had two and three species together.  But we had 12 combinations. Actually, we had 14 combinations. The one thing that we saw was every  
**[0:37:22-0:37:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:37:22):**  one of them changed the nutrient density of the wheat in the subsequent crop. The yields were very  similar. But the, well, they were similar in some of them where we had things like chicory  in the mix. They were very poor. And in some of them, there was clearly an inhibition on the wheat.  
**[0:37:44-0:37:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:37:44):**  One thing that we saw was when we had oats, and remember that we're talking about like  hard red spring wheat, which would be the same, I think, for most wheat. What we saw was that  fava beans and oats and some other legume together grew really well. Cecilia and lentils, buckwheat  
**[0:38:05-0:38:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:38:05):**  and lentils. Buckwheat and lentils was really interesting. It totally ramped up the iron in  the wheat. I mean, it was the highest iron content of any of the wheat was after we had  buckwheat and lentils. And from there, we were just experimenting with, well, what other ones  
**[0:38:21-0:38:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:38:21):**  can we put together? And that's when we started to see more people starting to experiment with  maybe five, six, seven, eight species. And now people are getting fancy with a whole lot more.  But we found that with our cropping system, we could change the nutrient density within a year,  
**[0:38:37-0:38:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:38:37):**  like just from one crop to the next crop. And now we're seeing with these multi-species,  we have the same thing. So for example, when we grow flax and chickpeas together, flax and garbanzos  together, neither flax doesn't tend to be alive diseases, but the garbs do. And they don't get  
**[0:38:59-0:39:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:38:59):**  nearly the fungal problems with ascochyta, for example, that they would if they were growing by  themselves. If you grow disease, chickpeas, which are more of a wild type chickpeas with flax, I  mean, neither one of them have problems. When we grew, when there was like wheat and faba beans  
**[0:39:19-0:39:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:39:19):**  together, the faba beans had no problems and neither did the wheat. I mean, it was just fine.  I mean, it's like there's no disease. I can't explain it. All I can tell you is that I think  that when you mix species up, there's a lot of confusion. One of the things like with insects,  
**[0:39:40-0:39:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:39:40):**  for example, if you grow just 18% barley, for example, or oats or anything with your canola,  and that would include growing bees with your canola, you don't have the same amount of flea  beetle or lydus bug damage because when the insects are flying over, they don't see a really  
**[0:40:00-0:40:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:40:00):**  good resource patch. I mean, the intensity of yellow that they would experience from a monoculture  is like, you know, okay, dive, dive, dive. Whereas it's like, oh, that's not very good.  We won't be able to do really well in there, but oh, look, the neighbor, that field next to that,  
**[0:40:17-0:40:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:40:17):**  oh, that's really intense yellow, let's go there. Every organism is looking to optimize and maximize  its reproductive potential. Right? They all are. And so, you know, if we can mess up the diversity  a little bit or mess up what they're used to, in terms of ecology, we call it disturbance hypothesis.  
**[0:40:43-0:40:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:40:43):**  So it's a way of disturbing the norm. And when you disturb the norm, everything has to come to  a new norm. They have to start figuring out what is that or well, how do I get the resources I need?  And maybe they have to share or maybe they have to start working together. Maybe some organisms  
**[0:41:01-0:41:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:41:01):**  just have to go into, you know, maybe they get a little bit of something, but they essentially get  excluded from the team. And that's what we're looking for is we're looking to exclude the  pathogens from the team. We know we still have them. We know it will still have some on the roots,  
**[0:41:16-0:41:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:41:16):**  but they won't determine the outcome. And that's the most important thing is that at this point,  we're going, yeah, we acknowledge that you exist and that you're in the soil and you're going to,  you know, have some infection on the roots for sure, but you're not going to be able to overwhelm  
**[0:41:33-0:41:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:41:33):**  everything. And that's our whole goal with diversity is that, yeah, we'll still have some  free beetles and we'll still have some ligands, but they aren't going to do economic damage in  the same way that they would as a monoculture and nutrition. Well, nutrition is important in every,  
**[0:41:51-0:41:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:41:51):**  in everything. If you have adequate nutrition, your chances of fighting off disease and fighting  off anything are far better than they would be if you do not have adequate nutrition,  because it means that your body or in this case, your plant body has all the nutrition  
**[0:42:12-0:42:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:42:12):**  it needs to provide to produce tannins and maybe produce some other compounds that will fight  other infections off. It's getting what it needs. Now, here's the best thing about all that is that  if you don't have to use a lot of energy all the time to be fighting things off, then you can go  
**[0:42:31-0:42:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:42:31):**  on offense, right? So it means that you're doing preventative. So now I'm maintaining a preventative  environment in my plant, which means that the plant can actually be going on open and putting  a lot more energy into reproductive and into its reproductive structures and into growing  
**[0:42:54-0:43:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:42:54):**  more yield if it's not always trying to fight diseases and fight off insects, because think  about how much energy that costs. Think about if I have compacted soils, how much energy I have to  use in order to go through them and get nutrition and stuff. And then that takes away from my yield.  
**[0:43:14-0:43:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:43:14):**  If I have well-structured soils and I have any nematode that's trying to puncture my root being  parasitized by a fungi or preyed upon by a fungi, and I have any insect that's trying to eat my roots  being preyed upon by nematodes and fungi, I'm going to be a lot better off. And I'm not going to have  
**[0:43:34-0:43:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:43:34):**  to waste near as much energy on fighting everything. So what we want to do is make sure plants can be on  the offense and they're not always spending a lot of energy on defense. I mean, they have to do some  defense, but if they can really grow fast and grow vigorously and they have enough mineral nutrition  
**[0:43:51-0:43:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:43:51):**  to do all that and to rapidly produce all the secondary metabolites that they need in order to  defend themselves when that becomes necessary, we're going to have a lot more yield and we're  going to have a lot more nutrient density. And if we have more nutrient density, then that also means  
**[0:44:07-0:44:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:44:07):**  that the plant cells and the cell walls are really tight. And it means that it's really hard for  anything to get in that wants to get in or you can't, it's sort of like you create a fortress  that you can't break into very easily. Like I said, most pathogens are not very competitive  
**[0:44:24-0:44:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:44:24):**  and they're not very strong. So if I make a strong wall, they're going to waste too much energy  themselves trying to break it. So they'll move on. They'll try and move to something else.  When we think about all the implications of nutrient density and nutritional integrity,  
**[0:44:39-0:44:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:44:39):**  as I like to call it, when we think about mineral nutritional integrity,  it obviously becomes really important to manage that. And of course, if we want to manage it well,  that means we need to measure it. You mentioned that, and I've been familiar with your work of  
**[0:44:54-0:44:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:44:54):**  measuring nutrient density with the XRF device. Can you tell us a little bit about  the work that you have done there and where it is leading, what you've discovered and  what the next steps are? Oh, yes. Well, we have been measuring, I've been using X-ray fluorescence,  
**[0:45:11-0:45:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:45:11):**  and it's a portable device that I've been using. And actually it's becoming more popular. I'm  seeing more papers on XRF, but we've been, I've developed the calibrations for the XRF. Now,  I like it because if you're going to do mineral nutrient density, you don't have many choices.  
**[0:45:28-0:45:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:45:28):**  You're either using XRF or you're using ICP or perhaps atomic absorption in order to analyze  for nutrient density. The beauty of the XRF is that its footprint is the size of an eight and  a half by lemon paper. So it sits right on top of that. It's very portable. So you could be in the  
**[0:45:53-0:45:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:45:53):**  field, anything. The prep time, like for example, for grains is when you need like a coffee grinder,  you can use a wide email if you have one, but you grind it up and you put like a half a teaspoon  over the detector and in 30 seconds later you have the full mineral nutrient density if you have a  
**[0:46:14-0:46:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:46:14):**  calibration. And as far as I know, I'm one of the few people calibrating these instruments,  but there's only one that I understand can be calibrated and that's the Bruker Tracer 5i.  And so I've been calibrating them so that you can see the parts per million and then start comparing  
**[0:46:33-0:46:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:46:33):**  them between treatments. And I mean, what we've seen is that depending on what we're doing,  we actually have changes in the mineral nutrient density within one season.  If we have companions, for example, and we're comparing like potatoes with companions, without  
**[0:46:50-0:46:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:46:50):**  companions, we can see there's a shift in mineral nutrients, but there's also a shift in some of the  other sugars and things like that too, which the XRF can't measure. I started with the XRF just  because it was something that was portable. It was something I could afford. A lot of these  
**[0:47:07-0:47:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:47:07):**  other instruments are, you know, you're looking at 60 or $100,000, whereas in the XRF I can buy  one for $40,000. It's also rugged enough that you can take it places, but it also gave me results  really quickly. And I could look at the number of photons because that's what the instrument does.  
**[0:47:28-0:47:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:47:28):**  It looks at the light given off, or the energy given off by the photons when we give,  when we add more energy to the atoms in the sample. And what we can do is like, even if we  don't have a calibration, we can look and go, ah, I have twice as many calcium photons in this  
**[0:47:47-0:47:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:47:47):**  treatment as I do in this other treatment. So I put more calcium into this grain or into this plant  compared to the other plant. And we see that with potatoes too, that, you know, if you have  grown a cover crop before you grow your potato crop, and this is work we've done in Finland,  
**[0:48:04-0:48:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:48:04):**  then we actually see the change in the potatoes. And not just in, you know, just the mineral  nutrient density, but also in the taste. The chefs that have been tasting these potatoes have ranked  them really high. They say that they taste really a lot different, even the same variety grown in  
**[0:48:23-0:48:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:48:23):**  other ways, that they taste different after they've been grown after a cover crop or with companions.  And that is, I mean, that has to also be our goal. So not only do we see an increase in nutrients,  but we also see an improved taste. And ideally we would marry the two. I mean, that would be our  
**[0:48:43-0:48:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:48:43):**  goal. But we're starting to see now, there's more people looking at this, we're starting to see more  impetus on it. And one of the people who've been working on this for a really long time is Ishmael  Tafak, from Turkey. And, you know, he's looked at things maybe in a little different way. But,  
**[0:49:02-0:49:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:49:02):**  you know, he's looked at, like wheat varieties, aging wheat varieties, and why are some of them  zinc, like why do some of them have really high zinc concentrations and other ones have  low zinc concentrations in the same soil? Some of that's because of mycorrhizal, some of that's  
**[0:49:18-0:49:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:49:18):**  the genetics. But these are things that we can look at and go, okay, so maybe I need to fertilize  this one a little bit more, because we know that it's not going to be as good as taking up zinc  as this other variety is, but we want it because it has these other baking quality things that,  
**[0:49:36-0:49:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:49:36):**  you know, so it's a way of also blending things together so that when we bake bread or  when we put a meal together, that we actually have the nutrient, the new mineral nutrition that we  want, and that we are creating the same mineral nutrition within our blend, no matter what year  
**[0:49:57-0:50:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:49:57):**  it is. So maybe we need to add more of this grain from North Dakota with a high selenium and into  this other grain so that we maintain a selenium profile in our flour or in our fermented grains  that is consistent with what the nutritional outcomes we want. And the other thing that  
**[0:50:16-0:50:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:50:16):**  I've really seen a change in was that when we analyze these grains, if they're being used for  seed, you can really, you can almost predict the vigor of a seed based on nutrient density of that  seed, because ideally your seed should be able to germinate in water without anything else and  
**[0:50:36-0:50:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:50:36):**  survive for 10 days if it had to. And seeds that we see like, and this I can only say on wheat,  and the wheat that we've tested, the wheat that really had high nutrient density when we germinated  and left it in water, it grew really rigorously for, you know, eight to ten, eight to twelve days,  
**[0:50:55-0:51:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:50:55):**  and then it needed to be fertilized. The stuff, the seeds that had lower nutrient density  succumbed to fungus and had cesarean and all sorts of things within eight days, right before eight  days, some of them were like four days. So we're setting ourselves up because the new generation  
**[0:51:14-0:51:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:51:14):**  that we're counting on to grow our plants, if the nutrient density isn't there, then we can't  expect a vigorous plant. I've had many conversations about the importance of seed  quality and how we're setting ourselves up with the need for fungicide applications and  
**[0:51:31-0:51:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:51:31):**  fungicide seed treatments. And really the conversation that we've been having,  when we connect all these different dots, the place we arrive at eventually is a completely  different model of agriculture and agronomy and a completely different way of thinking about  
**[0:51:47-0:51:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:51:47):**  plant and soil interactions from what has been the mainstream for the last seven or eight decades.  And within all of that, one of the, there are many people, of course, who desire,  I being one of them, who desire to see this system change a bit more rapidly for all the ecosystem  
**[0:52:06-0:52:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:52:06):**  benefits that really need to be brought about. So one of the questions that I have for you is,  if there was one thing that you could magically change about the agriculture systems and growing  systems as they exist today, what would that be? Oh, wow. Someone gave you a magic wand.  
**[0:52:24-0:52:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:52:24):**  Yeah. Sprinkled fairy dust and fairy glitter. I know there's that long pause, but  you know, to think about that, I first think that there's so many things that come to mind almost  instantly, but some of it would be is, I'll break it down into pieces. Culturally speaking,  
**[0:52:46-0:52:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:52:46):**  I would like all of us to be more open-minded about opportunities to use these, these  techniques to use our understanding of natural ecosystems, to not be afraid that we won't yield.  And that's a very tough thing to say to somebody when you require all your income comes from this  
**[0:53:08-0:53:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:53:08):**  one crop. So I'd like us to all be open-minded. If I could change anything, one of the things I  would do is change the crop insurance regulations so that farmers who wanted to try things and had  done enough test plots could actually do it and still be insured so that they didn't have to be  
**[0:53:30-0:53:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:53:30):**  afraid of it for their income. Because I think that sometimes it's actually the bureaucracy  and the policies that make it more difficult to be innovative than it should. And I think  there's a limit on innovation. Yeah. Yeah. And so you and I can talk about these things,  
**[0:53:49-0:53:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:53:49):**  but if I'm going to lose all my crop insurance because I try it, it's hard for me to implement  that. The other thing I would say to farmers themselves is that try things on a small space.  You don't need to do 30 acres. You don't need to do 10 acres. You can actually do one acre.  
**[0:54:09-0:54:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:54:09):**  You can even do half an acre or quarter an acre with some of these things and learn how to grow  them together. Practice it until you actually feel confident that you could put it in the field  at a bigger scale and be absolutely confident that you're going to grow something providing mother  
**[0:54:28-0:54:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:54:28):**  nature, you know, whether it's reasonable. Because it doesn't matter if we use old techniques or new  techniques, if, you know, something really something a large climactic event happens,  it's not going to matter how well we did things. We're going to have a problem.  
**[0:54:44-0:54:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:54:44):**  Are we going to recover faster? Absolutely. But we're still going to have a problem,  maybe a different problem, but a problem. I really like people. I know it's a little bit more  trouble, but there's a lot of organizations out there that would love to put in trials for you.  
**[0:54:59-0:55:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:54:59):**  All you have to do is say, hey, I think I'd really like to try this. I just don't know how.  And somebody say, maybe we could put them in for you. Is there something in particular you'd like  to do? So I think there's a lot of resources out there for growers to try some things on a small  
**[0:55:14-0:55:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:55:14):**  scale and start to take the first step towards trying these other practices and getting to know  them and getting to not be afraid of them. That's one of the biggest things I would say.  I would agree that there are many resources available for growers to collaborate with.  
**[0:55:31-0:55:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:55:31):**  And then, of course, the commitment needs to be made to actually measure and to measure what  happened. And that's often where, in my personal experience and observation, where things fall  short because harvest season comes, we get super busy and with nothing happens, we don't actually  
**[0:55:51-0:55:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:55:51):**  measure. And if you don't measure, all your entire effort was wasted. I agree. And so one of the  things is that if you're going to do this, I agree with John here, you need to make a commitment that  you're actually going to do it. And then you have to work with an organization that is going to put  
**[0:56:08-0:56:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:56:08):**  boots on the ground and actually, because farmers are busy. And if they say, and that's part of the  reason why some of this doesn't happen is because it's like, I'm too busy to do that. I've got all  these other things to do. I've got to make my living for the year. But if you see an organization  
**[0:56:24-0:56:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:56:24):**  that comes in, then just make sure that they're going to put boots on the ground and they're  going to monitor and then make sure you're going to get some data at the end that you can make a  decision on. Because in the end, it's about making an informed decision based on science. Too often,  
**[0:56:38-0:56:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:56:38):**  you know, as farmers like, oh, control. Well, what is that? Oh, I did the whole 30 acres. Did you  compare it to something? Oh, no, because I figured it would work. So I just did it.  These things, there's researchers, there's extension, there's NRCS. A lot of them are  
**[0:56:53-0:56:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:56:53):**  out there to try and help you make these experiments. But you have to insist that they  be responsible. You can put them on your land, put up the land, but make sure that they're  responsible for collecting the data and monitoring the data and then giving you the report at the end  
**[0:57:07-0:57:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:57:07):**  of the year. So that's the advice I'd say there. Jill, we've discussed a lot of very important  topics lightly. And I would love to have more follow up conversations to dive a bit more deeply  into some of these. But in the meantime, where can people go to learn more? I recommend to people,  
**[0:57:25-0:57:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:57:25):**  there's a book by Walter Larster. It was translated from German. It's ecological. What is it? The  ecological physiology of plants. It's an outstanding resource. It's written quite simply,  the new version is a textbook, the old one is a paperback. But regardless of which one you get,  
**[0:57:47-0:57:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:57:47):**  it sort of ties a lot of the dots together. If you're interested in plant disease, of course,  the book for you, Mineral Nutrition and Plant Disease is an outstanding book talking how  mineral nutrition actually input affects disease and that's by Dr. Don Huberter. And then the  
**[0:58:08-0:58:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:58:08):**  Mineral Nutrition of Higher Plants, which is the new version, has a lot of input by Petra  Marciner, of course Marciner's daughter. And that book is something that if you want to understand  what mineral nutrition does to the plant, that is an excellent one. The one by Larster actually  
**[0:58:30-0:58:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:58:30):**  even talks about organisms and how important organisms are for changing things. And then,  of course, there's the standard soil book by Brady. I think it's Wilds and Brady.  And that book also talks about soil fauna. It talks about interactions with mycorrhiza  
**[0:58:50-0:58:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:58:50):**  and bacteria in terms of the whole soil structure sort of thing. So I think that there are some  standard resources out there that can really make a difference. And then, of course, there are a ton  of YouTube videos by people who are talking about these things. Of course, there's always the Dave  
**[0:59:12-0:59:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:59:12):**  Brown work. You can go to various organizations and they have YouTube videos. I have YouTube  videos out there I know talking about basic soil biology and how all these things fit together.  Dr. Chris Nichols, she has some great stuff. Christine Jones has talked about some good stuff.  
**[0:59:32-0:59:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:59:32):**  I know there's a new book out by Nicole Master. But people who are talking about interactions and  researching interactions and then transforming them. And of course, there's your work too, John,  and the people that you're interviewing and some of your own work that you're publishing.  
**[0:59:47-0:59:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:59:47):**  And just organizing the work of others largely, it seems.  And that's okay.  Yeah. A lot of incredible work out there.  
**[0:59:54-1:00:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=0:59:54):**  Yeah. And I think that the new book by David Montgomery and Ann Bickley talking about  neuro-nutrition is going to show all the gaps, like a lot of gaps in what we know. And so I  think there's going to be... I hope that I see that there's going to be a lot more work on  
**[1:00:13-1:00:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=1:00:13):**  neuro-nutrition. But some of it is just where we look. And I think you might agree on this is that  there's work in other places that we don't normally check. So work in other fields that  you're like, oh, well, that actually would apply here. There's a lot of work on medicinal herbs  
**[1:00:32-1:00:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=1:00:32):**  that would totally apply to what we're talking about in journals of alternative plant medicine.  Things that a lot of agronomists would never look at, but are there. And if you get your head  outside of agronomy and actually read plant physiology journals or soil ecology journals,  
**[1:00:52-1:00:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=1:00:52):**  then you get start to see some more of the bigger picture because scientists tend to publish on  their own discipline and be very strong in their discipline, but not multidisciplinary. And so  you need to read in all the different disciplines. And then people like you and I,  
**[1:01:09-1:01:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=1:01:09):**  John, try and put it all together in a bigger picture. And I think that's actually one of my  strengths is I see the big picture. I see where the holes are. I see. And then I start reading  something and go, oh, that piece sticks over here in that great puzzle. And it's a puzzle.  
**[1:01:29-1:01:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=1:01:29):**  It's just, you've got to be a puzzler. You have to be able to collect and identify the puzzle  pieces and see where they fit. And I agree with you. That is an underrepresented skill in our  scientific community and a very necessary and important one in the agricultural space  
**[1:01:43-1:01:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=1:01:43):**  in particular, because there are so many overlapping fields that all tie in and  connect together. There's also plant pathology and botany and entomology and understanding all  those interactions and what's happening, what's going on becomes very necessary and important if  
**[1:01:59-1:02:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=1:01:59):**  we want to put together regenerative and sustainable ecosystems. I mean, think about how  plants and insects talk. I mean, there are some great YouTube videos on that where you can  actually learn about how plants talk to insects and insects talk to plants and how they fight  
**[1:02:17-1:02:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=1:02:17):**  each other off or how they work together. And it blows your mind when you first start looking at it  and you're like, wow, look at that. That's pretty amazing. Going back to the comment that I made  once earlier, there is no shortage of information today. Yes, there are additional things we might  
**[1:02:32-1:02:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=1:02:32):**  like to know, but we already know enough that if we simply implement what we already know,  we would be in a very different space agriculturally and as a society as well in  many different ways and many different levels. Jill, this has been a wonderful conversation.  
**[1:02:45-1:02:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=1:02:45):**  Thank you so much for sharing your thoughts and your wisdom and insights. And I look forward to  having more discussions with you in the future. And I enjoyed myself very much. So thank you.  The team at AEA and I are dedicated to bringing this show to you because we believe that knowledge  
**[1:03:02-1:03:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=1:03:02):**  and information is the foundation of successful regenerative systems at AEA. We believe that  growing better quality food and making more money from your crops is possible. And since 2006, we've  worked with leading professional growers to help them do just that. At AEA, we don't guess, we test,  
**[1:03:21-1:03:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=1:03:21):**  we analyze, and we provide recommendations based on scientific data, knowledge, and experience.  We've developed products that are uniquely positioned to help growers make more money  with regenerative agriculture. If you are a professional grower who believes in testing  
**[1:03:36-1:03:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/developing-disease-suppressive-soil-with-jill-clapperton/#t=1:03:36):**  instead of guessing, someone who believes in a better, more regenerative way to grow,  visit advancingecoag.com and contact us to see if AEA is right for you.  Thank you for listening and we look forward to working with you.  