---
title: Disease Resistance and Regenerating Soil with Michael McNeill
---

### Regenerative Agriculture Podcast  (2018-04-14)  
### Author(s): John Kempf  

**[0:00:00-0:00:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:00:00):**  Hi friends, I'm John Kempf, hosting this podcast. I am passionate about developing regenerative  agriculture systems that improve soil health, produce crops that are completely resistant to  diseases and insects, and produce fruit of such an exceptional quality that we can have a legitimate  
**[0:00:16-0:00:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:00:16):**  conversation about growing food as medicine. I've discovered that there are many people with  incredible knowledge and information about soil and plant systems and how to develop regenerative  agriculture systems. However, much of this knowledge and this information is scattered,  
**[0:00:33-0:00:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:00:33):**  it's found all over the place. Some of it has been published in peer-reviewed publications,  but there are many incredible stories and a lot of knowledge that has not been published,  and that hasn't been shared with many people. I started Advancing Eco-Agriculture in 2006 to  
**[0:00:49-0:00:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:00:49):**  bring this knowledge together in a more coherent fashion and incorporate it into products and  growing systems that growers can easily put into practice. It's my personal mission to have these  regenerative agricultural systems become adopted globally and become the mainstream, the status  
**[0:01:06-0:01:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:01:06):**  quo against which all other growing systems are compared. To help achieve this goal, I want to  share the knowledge that we have learned in the last decade and make it available to everyone.  While we have developed products at AEA that embody the principles of regenerative agriculture  
**[0:01:22-0:01:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:01:22):**  systems and make them easier for growers to apply, this knowledge and these principles can be applied  anywhere. And when they are applied properly, they will always increase farm profitability  and resilience to climate stress. If you have any questions, suggestions, comments, or ideas,  
**[0:01:40-0:01:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:01:40):**  topics that you would like for me to discuss, please connect on LinkedIn or on Twitter,  where my username is at visionbuilder7, or you can also email me at john at johnkempf.com.  I would very much like to hear from you and to hear your feedback. Be sure to subscribe to this  
**[0:01:58-0:02:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:01:58):**  podcast, and thank you very much for listening. Enjoy the show. Well, greetings, friends, and  welcome to the Regenerative Agriculture podcast. On this podcast, we work to explore the science  of growing really exceptional crops and to describe why you have crop challenges and how  
**[0:02:16-0:02:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:02:16):**  we can resolve them. Our goal is to give you really clear and easy to understand and actionable  information that we can actually implement in the field. Many of us as growers have had experiences  where we have these unusual and intriguing observations where we observe that we have major  
**[0:02:35-0:02:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:02:35):**  pest problems in one part of a field, but not in another part of the field, that has been managed  in exactly the same way. Or we grow a given variety of a crop in two fields with the essentially  the exact same management and same types of products being applied, and yet sometimes get  
**[0:02:53-0:02:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:02:53):**  completely different results, sometimes dramatically different results where we get much higher yields  in one field or in one section of a field than we do elsewhere. Why is that? Why is that happening?  And how can we replicate that level of success over a much broader area? These are the types of  
**[0:03:09-0:03:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:03:09):**  questions that we work to unravel and unwrap and really understand why, what's going on, how things  are happening, and how we can replicate that level of success on a much larger scale. So today, I'm  excited to welcome onto the podcast Michael McNeil. Michael is one of these wise elders of agriculture.  
**[0:03:33-0:03:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:03:33):**  Michael has been a very close mentor as I have been learning about crops and growing amazing  crops in the agricultural field and has also become a very close friend. Michael has a very  impressive background in agronomy, has a degree in plant physiology and in genetics, and has spent  
**[0:03:50-0:03:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:03:50):**  a very long and very successful career in the Midwest working with many growers on a broad range  of different challenges and has a very interesting background. So Michael, welcome to the show. We're  excited to have you here. Thank you, John. It's fun to be here. Michael, can you, can we perhaps begin  
**[0:04:09-0:04:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:04:09):**  by understanding a little bit more of your work? Can you begin by giving us, telling us a little  bit about your background and the work that you are doing on a day-to-day basis on your operation?  Well, I was born and raised on a farm northwest of Algona, Iowa, and I'm still farming that farm today.  
**[0:04:29-0:04:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:04:29):**  I have watched it go from pretty much all horses and horse-drawn equipment to our modern-day  tractors that are GPS guided across the field. So it's been quite a transition that I've gotten to  see, and I've learned a lot along the way. I have had the fortune, I guess, to see that kind of  
**[0:04:57-0:05:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:04:57):**  farming, and I see perhaps a need to return to a portion of what my grandfather was doing back in  those days. And I don't necessarily mean you got to sell our tractors and buy horses, but some of  the things that he did to improve soil health and maintain soil fertility are things that we really  
**[0:05:20-0:05:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:05:20):**  need to be thinking about today. In my operation, I've, the past couple years, have decided to go  totally organic with it, which makes it a bit unusual, but somewhat commonplace for around  our community. We have, I think the last numbers I saw was around 42,000 acres of organic crop in  
**[0:05:46-0:05:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:05:46):**  the two-county area here where I live. Wow, that's grown quite substantially. It's a huge change, and  I know that there is a sort of a stigma if, when you talk about organic farmers, many times they  think of the guy that's farming a 20 or 40 acre patch that's just covered with weeds, and the  
**[0:06:13-0:06:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:06:13):**  farmers in our community that we're working with range all the way from a half section, 320 acres  of land, to 15,000 acres of land, and they're pretty much weed free. Very, very excellent farmers.  They've learned a lot about weed management, weed control, soil fertility, soil health, so I'm pretty  
**[0:06:37-0:06:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:06:37):**  excited to see that change, but it does remind me a bit of the things that my grandfather taught me  years and years ago, and that's the way he took care of his crops. So I really, I want to, I want  to circle back and dig into that a bit more, but before we go there, can you tell us a little bit  
**[0:06:56-0:07:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:06:56):**  about your professional work and what you do professionally in addition to the farming operation?  Okay, well I left the farm for a few years and went to, I guess you call it formal education at Iowa State  University, where I majored in agronomy, got my BS degree in soils and soil fertility, and then I  
**[0:07:22-0:07:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:07:22):**  became quite interested in how that impacted plant growth. So I had my master's degree in plant  physiology, and then I was intrigued with how genetics worked and how the environment impacted  on genetics, so I ended up getting my PhD in quantitative genetics, and along that same path,  
**[0:07:43-0:07:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:07:43):**  I also became interested in plant diseases and had a minor in plant pathology, and  after leaving the university, I spent some time with a facility located in Frederick, Maryland, where  we studied the impact of diseases that could be used as a weapon and how we could defend our  
**[0:08:07-0:08:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:08:07):**  crops against that type of thing, and learned a great deal about how fertility and genetics and  things like that create an environment that we can protect ourselves from any pathogenic  invasion, if you will. Wow, that sounds intriguing, and then where did that lead you from there?  
**[0:08:31-0:08:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:08:31):**  Well, I became a corn breeder and I worked for a major company for 12 years, managed a  corn breeding research station. I started their soybean breeding project as well as continuing  the corn breeding project. I did that for about 12 years, and during that time, farmers would ask me  
**[0:08:56-0:09:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:08:56):**  probably more fertility and soil fertility questions than they did genetic questions,  and I kept trying to explain how the two kind of worked together, and that was about the time  that GMOs were being invented, and we were using gene guns and blasting gold dust through genes and  
**[0:09:23-0:09:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:09:23):**  trying to move them from one thing into another thing, and we started taking genes out of them  started taking genes out of different species and moving them around, taking genes out of bacteria  and putting them in a corn plant. That whole thing really didn't fit with my, I guess, thoughts about  
**[0:09:49-0:10:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:09:49):**  how our species were created and why they were created and who was man to mix with them and we're  into opening Pandora's box to who knows what when you started doing that, and so I chose to step out  of that type of breeding work, sticking still mainly with my quantitative genetics approach  
**[0:10:20-0:10:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:10:20):**  versus the gene gun approach, and got more into soil health, soil fertility, and genotype by  fertility interactions, and that led me into a profession of agricultural consulting. I started  working with farmers and explaining how all this worked, and it got to be a pretty exciting  
**[0:10:44-0:10:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:10:44):**  adventure. I started with a farmer, he had 160 acres, and then his neighbor added another 160 to it,  and I'm now up to about 165,000 acres that I work on, so that's sort of a history of how I got to  where I am today. And when you say you have about 165,000 acres that you work on today, what is  
**[0:11:09-0:11:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:11:09):**  the scope of the work that you do on each of these farms? Most of it is working with soil health and  soil fertility and helping them select the right genetics for the fertility programs that they're  working with. Soil health is becoming a bigger and bigger issue for me to deal with. When I first  
**[0:11:29-0:11:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:11:29):**  started it wasn't a really big issue, it's huge now, and so I'm devoting more of my time now  to soil health than I ever thought I would. So I'd love to talk about that a little bit.  When you say that soil health didn't used to be a big issue, now you're spending a lot of time on  
**[0:11:49-0:11:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:11:49):**  that. What has changed with soil health? How are you managing it differently today from what  you needed to 20 or 30 years ago? Well interesting that you would ask me that, John. The other day I  was cleaning out a drawer on my desk and I found some old pictures that I had taken back  
**[0:12:11-0:12:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:12:11):**  1972, 1973 of crops that were growing. I had some close-ups and some kind of overviews of the field.  And the thing that I noticed was how healthy the plants were. There were no disease lesions on them  anywhere. The corn plants were just perfect and the whole field was that way. It's really hard  
**[0:12:36-0:12:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:12:36):**  to find a field today that is that way. And I got to looking at the weeds that were going along the  fence rows and they were big and healthy and looked great. They don't look so good today, comparatively  speaking. And you say, well maybe that's a good thing. No it's not. The whole area that we're farming  
**[0:12:58-0:13:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:12:58):**  is unhealthy. And so I asked the question, well what's changed? And what I really see the big  difference being from that era until today is that farmers have been drawn into, I guess I call it  big ag, and you need to use herbicides. You don't want to use a cultivator. You got to get over more  
**[0:13:23-0:13:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:13:23):**  land. So you use herbicides and these herbicides then are doing things to the soil because they're  all chelators. So now the plants become a little bit imbalanced in the nutrition that they're taking  up and you find more disease. You find more insect pressures. So we start using fungicides  
**[0:13:45-0:13:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:13:45):**  and insecticides, more chelators, more poisons being dumped onto the ground. And we were pretty  impressed with how they work. Boy the field was perfectly clean, weed free, excellent. The diseases  were dramatically reduced. The fungicides worked really well. The corn borers and some other the  
**[0:14:07-0:14:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:14:07):**  insects that were issues went away. It was magic. The chemistry was totally magic and looked  beautiful. But as time went on, it started poisoning the good things that were in the soil.  And so today I am called out to look at farms where the guy's production has dropped off dramatically  
**[0:14:30-0:14:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:14:30):**  and the soil is virtually dead. When you say the production has dropped off dramatically,  what have you observed? What I have seen is looking at 10-year crop insurance records,  the guy was getting 190 to 210 bushel per acre at around 200 bushel 10-year average.  
**[0:14:50-0:14:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:14:50):**  Excellent, excellent yields. Now it's getting 70 and 80 bushel yields. Wow. That's dramatic.  And we'll put him out of business very quickly. That is very dramatic. This isn't like, oh this  is a little field here, a farm there. I mean I'm seeing eight and ten thousand acre farms that this  
**[0:15:12-0:15:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:15:12):**  has happened to. And that really, really woke me up. I started seeing this about five years ago.  So I've been working with these growers and can I remediate that? Can I bring it back?  And in a three to four year period we've had pretty good success. I would say we're back  
**[0:15:34-0:15:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:15:34):**  we're back now into where we were when this crashed. But the farmers are excited that they  can now take it to a different yield plateau in the 250 bushel range or greater. And they can see  growth and potential in doing what they're doing. And they've moved away from GMO crops and  
**[0:15:58-0:16:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:15:58):**  particularly moved away from the use of glyphosate. So I think these are the very important pieces for  us to talk about and to understand Michael is when you have a degraded, and so the question I have is  when you have a degraded system like that where you have suppressed yields and suppressed soil  
**[0:16:15-0:16:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:16:15):**  health as you're describing it, how do you go from depressed yields of 70 to 90 bushels per acre back  up to 200 with aspirations of going back up to 250 bushels per acre? How do you achieve that?  Well it's a long hard task really. There's no silver bullets. You got to kind of figure out what all  
**[0:16:37-0:16:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:16:37):**  what all was going wrong and stop doing that, number one. Number two, you're going to have to look at  at what is it going to take to remediate the soil? Is the soil become really hard?  Just and I mean hard like the road. I get penetrometer readings. It takes 500 pounds of down  
**[0:16:59-0:17:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:16:59):**  pressure to penetrate the top two inches of soil. That's hard. That's just like a gravel road. It's  just well a crop will not grow on that. When they're tilling it, it's breaking up into  chunks and then when it rains, it puddles and just seals over. And so we get no oxygen into the soil.  
**[0:17:19-0:17:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:17:19):**  So you have to maybe incorporate some tillage things and then start getting some food for the  microbial life that's almost non-existent. It's not non-existent because you can bring it back  and that's the good news. If you don't let this thing go too long, you can bring it back.  
**[0:17:39-0:17:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:17:39):**  Now whether we're bringing all of it back or not, I don't know. But once you get it started coming  back, then you can look at inoculating with mycorrhizae and some of the things the  cunamona adds, the kennel mycetes that could be missing and get them stimulated to growing.  
**[0:17:58-0:18:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:17:58):**  But you got to first get the oxygen in the soil, get the water working correctly, get the food right  before you, there's no magic inoculating the soil if it's loaded with poison. It'll just kill your  inoculant. So you got to kind of fix that problem first before you try inoculating and getting  
**[0:18:19-0:18:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:18:19):**  an inoculation. You wouldn't have to do that, but it does speed it up. You gain about a year,  maybe two years when you do that. I see people thinking they're buying a magic silver bullet  and inoculating and then continuing to do the things that caused it to die in the first place.  
**[0:18:38-0:18:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:18:38):**  They're not winning, they're losing. So let's go back to that for just a moment because you've  iterated several times that you have to stop doing what inflicted the damage in the first place.  When you were, from my summary, what I heard you saying just in synopsis was that it's really  
**[0:18:56-0:19:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:18:56):**  the herbicides and the fungicides, the insecticide applications that are causing this degradation of  soil health. I heard you mention that these herbicides, these various pesticides that people  are applying are actually chelation agents. I guess the question that I have is why do you  
**[0:19:15-0:19:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:19:15):**  believe that these products are the causal agent for the suppression of soil health? Couldn't it  also be the extensive tillage that we had for a number of decades and some of these other  contributing factors? Well I have some farms that I feel are way over tilled. They're organic  
**[0:19:37-0:19:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:19:37):**  farmers. They really do, I almost feel as excessive tillage doesn't seem to be bothering the soil at  all. It isn't quite as good as I'd like to see it, but as long as they're keeping their organic  matter up, preventing erosion, using cover crops and that sort of thing, the tillage in itself  
**[0:19:58-0:20:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:19:58):**  doesn't seem to be doing as much damage than I originally thought. Now having said that,  you have to be careful which tillage tools you use. A disk is not a very good tillage tool to be using.  It causes compaction, it fractures the soil structure much worse than a tined implement  
**[0:20:20-0:20:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:20:20):**  that would, you could pull through it, whether that be a, I call it a tined implement, but a V-ripper  a narrow pointed field cultivator, not a sweep. These kinds of things do not seem to do  the structural damage that I see with things like a disk or even like a moldboard plow  
**[0:20:45-0:20:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:20:45):**  or a field cultivator with sweeps on it. So in essence you're saying that tillage doesn't have  the damaging effects on soil health as the herbicides do from your perspective?  Not as bad as the herbicides, not as bad as anhydrous ammonia, and not as bad as the high  
**[0:21:03-0:21:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:21:03):**  salt fertilizers. They tend to be more of an issue and when you put them all together it overwhelms  the soil life system that's going on. So I guess I understand the impact of anhydrous ammonia and  salt fertilizers, obviously both of those are very oxidizing and can have the potential to produce a  
**[0:21:28-0:21:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:21:28):**  lot of damage to the soil's microbial community and to organic matter and so forth, but I don't  understand that herbicides would have that same effect. So you mentioned the herbicides being key  to me because I guess the question that I have is from your perspective, how is it that herbicides  
**[0:21:47-0:21:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:21:47):**  and these various pesticides have such a damaging effect on soil health? Well we have not paid a lot  of attention to micronutrients in the soil. Micronutrients are extremely important to plant growth  and they're readily chelated and easily chelated by the pesticides that we use. And once you tie  
**[0:22:10-0:22:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:22:10):**  those up, you start shutting down significant pathways and that's where my physiology training  and background kind of came into play when I started seeing a lot of these physiological processes  being shut down. For example, one that probably is pretty familiar to a lot of people  
**[0:22:30-0:22:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:22:30):**  is if you chelate manganese and tie that up, shut down the shakimic pathway. When you shut that down  then diseases can move in very quickly because that's sort of the plant's immune system, if you  will. You shut that down, then you have to buy fungicides. You put on the fungicides to protect  
**[0:22:50-0:22:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:22:50):**  from disease, it's invaded that, and then you start killing more of the fungal life in the soil  and it's a vicious vicious cycle that you set up. You mentioned you believe that perhaps we should  go back to some of the practices that you learned from your grandfather. What are the things that  
**[0:23:10-0:23:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:23:10):**  you learned from him that you think would be relevant and appropriate today? Well, one of the  things was he was very good at crop rotation and we've gotten ourselves into, as I'd almost call it,  a monoculture, a biculture if you will, where we go corn and soybeans or soybeans and corn or  
**[0:23:28-0:23:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:23:28):**  corn and soybeans. It's just that's not working well with the soil microbial life and back in the  day he was using horses so he needed feed for those horses. He raised those. Those have a real  good way of cleansing the soil, bringing more silica available for plant growth, taking toxins  
**[0:23:54-0:24:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:23:54):**  out of the soil, and so he was keeping the soil clean just because he needed to produce fuel for  his power. Well, we don't need that today so I get a lot of guys, well why do I grow oats? I don't  need to grow oats. And I say, well think about that as an excellent cover crop. So plant those,  
**[0:24:15-0:24:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:24:15):**  get them growing. The winter will kill the oat plant so you don't have to use a herbicide to kill  it in the spring and you've got all these good benefits. You've retained nutrition in the soil,  you've retained the nitrogen, you've gotten a very fibrous root system that is going to improve the  
**[0:24:36-0:24:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:24:36):**  soil structure, plenty of food there for microbial life, you're going to have some suppression of  weeds in the spring with that cover that you have there from the oats. So yeah, we can still use that  crop today, we can rotate, but think about using it as a cover crop. He also grew clovers and  
**[0:24:59-0:25:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:24:59):**  alfalfas and other legumes that of course benefited the nitrogen for production of the corn.  Can we do that? Yes we can, but we need to change the way we look at our land. We have a need  for livestock in the cropping areas and we've kind of taken them out because it's, you can grow  
**[0:25:25-0:25:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:25:25):**  huge numbers of cattle, cattle feedlots better in a warmer climate and that's true, but then you're  shipping all that nutrient into that area where it's more of a waste product than it is a fertilizer  and there is no better fertilizer than animal manures. Michael, we've been talking about,  
**[0:25:46-0:25:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:25:46):**  we've been circling around this topic of soil health and the impacts of tillage and herbicides,  animal manures, cover crops and so forth. If I heard you correctly at the beginning, you mentioned  there is a correlation between soil health and the diseases that are present and if I heard you  
**[0:26:08-0:26:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:26:08):**  correctly, you mentioned some work that you were doing in Maryland studying diseases as a weapon.  What did you learn from that experience and how does all of that tie into what we are talking  about? Well if you, for example, let's just pull an example out of the air. Let's say you want to use  
**[0:26:28-0:26:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:26:28):**  a fungal disease, you know, as a weapon and then you can get that introduced into the soil  and not only does it kill the crop this year, it'll continue to kill it into future years.  So hey, that's a pretty good weapon. Check down the people's food supply, they have a problem.  
**[0:26:46-0:26:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:26:46):**  Well if you have good cunimonids, the cunimonus bacteria in the soil, they kind of act as a  policeman in the soil, if you will, and they'll take out the excess pathogenic fungi that can arise.  But if you use products like glyphosate, that's an antibiotic type product, you're going to kill  
**[0:27:08-0:27:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:27:08):**  all the cunimonids and so then you have no protection and it's very easy to get a huge  population of fusarium going in the soil which probably is a pathogenic fusarium or pythium or  phytophthora. You've lost the natural balance that keeps everything in balance and so if you have that  
**[0:27:30-0:27:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:27:30):**  balance present, inoculating it with a pathogenic fungi is not going to do much for you. It'll just  clean it right up. Wow, so you can actually have a disease-suppressive soil where you don't have  challenges with those, but I think I also heard you mention that you were working on developing  
**[0:27:49-0:27:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:27:49):**  solutions to those diseases as weapons. What were the types of solutions that you were working on?  Well, I mean there's all kinds of approaches. If you need a fast cure, you know, of course you're  going to look at chemistry and the fungicides and that sort of thing, but what you find is if you get  
**[0:28:09-0:28:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:28:09):**  the soil contaminated, how do you fix that? Because if you put anything on that, you're going to kill  everything in the soil. Using a soil sterilant is not necessarily a great idea and so what you do is  there are things, microbial life in the soil that will hold everything in balance and so if you have  
**[0:28:32-0:28:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:28:32):**  the right nutrition available, those will develop and then everything will take care of itself.  It's sort of, I'll use you as an analogy, John. If your nutrition gets pretty poor, you're going to  get pretty run down and you're going to be very susceptible to all kinds of diseases. Would you  
**[0:28:51-0:28:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:28:51):**  agree? Oh, I think that's just the story of the people who are trying to sell me supplements.  No, I'm making a joke. That's the story of, I understand, but when that occurs, you can say,  okay, well I'm going to take this supplement or this drug to prevent me from this disease,  
**[0:29:13-0:29:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:29:13):**  but you're still improperly nourished. You're going to get another disease and then you're  going to get another disease, but if I get your nutrition back and properly, you're going to get  everything back and properly balanced and at everything at correct levels, your immune system  
**[0:29:30-0:29:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:29:30):**  then starts to function properly. A good share of your immune system is in your digestive tract.  A lot of microbes working for you and so the soil is no different. You get those microbes working  for you, you're going to stay healthy. The soil is going to stay healthy and so are the plants.  
**[0:29:47-0:29:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:29:47):**  Are you saying that when you manage the nutritional balance of the soil and the microbial population  that it's possible to grow crops that don't have disease? Yes, when a plant is perfectly healthy,  it's very hard to get a disease to invade it and an insect will not even stop to look at it.  
**[0:30:10-0:30:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:30:10):**  Why is that? It's because an unhealthy plant cannot convert the sugars that it's produced  into complex sugars, starches, and lignin, which insects and diseases can't use. They can only use  the simple sugars, the nitrate and nitrogens in the plant. The nitrate and nitrogen is taken up by the plant,  
**[0:30:34-0:30:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:30:34):**  it's converted into amino acids and proteins immediately in a healthy plant. In an unhealthy  plant, a plant that does not have the right mineral balance to make all those processes and cycles work  will have a pretty heavy load of nitrate in it. Fantastic food for the insect. They can detect that  
**[0:30:53-0:30:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:30:53):**  and they will land on that plant and feed on that plant. So really disease and insects are mother  nature's garbage collectors. They're getting rid of the bad stuff, the weak plants. Yeah, these are  pieces that we have spoken about and I've spoken about quite extensively in describing some of the  
**[0:31:10-0:31:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:31:10):**  things that we've observed happening where we developed this diagram called the plant health  pyramid where we describe how plants become resistant to different types of diseases and  different types of insect pests at different stages of physiological development. So this is  
**[0:31:28-0:31:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:31:28):**  something that we've observed in the field very clearly and it's really exciting and a lot of  fun when it starts functioning the way that it was designed to function because all of a sudden  disease and insect pressure dramatically reduces and in many cases you can say that it completely  
**[0:31:45-0:31:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:31:45):**  disappears and that's really exciting. That's a lot of fun. It really is and that's what takes me  way back into the early years when I looked at the plants and they were not having any of these issues.  Micronutrient levels were excellent. All the processes were functioning properly and there's  
**[0:32:03-0:32:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:32:03):**  very little disease or insect pressure. Yeah, it's very interesting to hear your perspective  over time of how things have changed over a 40 year, 50 year time period. And I didn't really realize  how much it had changed until I pulled out those photos and was looking at them the other day.  
**[0:32:22-0:32:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:32:22):**  It was just like wow, it's really, really different. You don't suppose that those photos are just one  off of a really exceptional year? No, they were not taken for that reason. Some of these photos  were taken of pictures of livestock that were going to be sold and they were standing, you know,  
**[0:32:44-0:32:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:32:44):**  in the field or by a fence and I was just kind of looking beyond that and looking at the crop.  Wow, check that out. You know, otherwise if there's a photo that was taken of an exceptionally good  crop or something, I would say yes, you have a point. But no, these photos were taken up and  
**[0:33:00-0:33:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:33:00):**  focused on other things. The crop was in the background but as I observed it, it's like,  check that out. It's really looking good. Wow. Well, Michael, there are a number of different  areas in your expertise and your background that we haven't had the chance to explore deeply yet.  
**[0:33:18-0:33:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:33:18):**  So, I'm going to move on to a bit of a different question. What has been something that you puzzled  over for a really long time until you and trying to figure something out? What has been something  that really caught your attention in the agriculture space that you've been working on?  
**[0:33:36-0:33:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:33:36):**  Well, something that I've already then finally figured out, I think, was the impact of the lack  of availability of the micronutrients in our crops. You know, I mean, it was kind of, yeah,  we should know about that. But until I figured out why that was occurring, I couldn't quite figure  
**[0:33:57-0:34:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:33:57):**  out what happened because I was doing tissue testing, for example. I had adequate copper and  iron and manganese and magnesium and calcium. Everything looked good. What I didn't realize  was a lot of those minerals were chelated and tied up into a form that the plant could not use.  
**[0:34:15-0:34:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:34:15):**  They yet showed up on a chemistry test when we tested the tissue. And when I finally  figured that out, then everything started to gel for me.  So, I think what you're saying is that these various minerals and trace minerals were being  
**[0:34:33-0:34:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:34:33):**  chelated inside the plant tissue by herbicides and fungicides that growers were applying?  Yes. And so, when I test them, test the plants, they had adequate levels. But yeah, when I looked  at the plant, it was showing deficiency symptoms. I mean, you could look at that and say, well,  
**[0:34:54-0:34:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:34:54):**  that's a zinc deficiency or that's a manganese deficiency, just obvious. But when I tested,  it was fine. Why is that? And it's when I learned about this chelation issue and how it can be such  a problem. This is something that we've been monitoring and paying attention to for a number  
**[0:35:12-0:35:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:35:12):**  of years. And we believe it seems that in some cases with SAP analysis, it reports those a bit  more accurately, but perhaps doesn't take all the chelation into account. But of course, it's still  extracting nutrients that are held within the plant SAP and it's still possible for them to be  
**[0:35:32-0:35:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:35:32):**  chelated. So we do see the SAP analysis correlate more accurately to what the plants are actually  showing visually than... I would agree. I would agree. I think the SAP analysis has been a good  step forward. But until I kind of figured out this chelation effect, that's when it really gelled for  
**[0:35:51-0:35:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:35:51):**  me and I could understand why I was seeing deficiency symptoms and what looked like on paper  to be an appropriately healthy plant. Yeah, got it. What do you believe to be true about modern  agriculture that many other people don't believe to be true? We've been talking about a number of  
**[0:36:11-0:36:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:36:11):**  different things that you seem to have a very different framework and a very different model  of thinking about what is happening in soils and plants. And so I'm just trying to understand the  the fundamentals and the foundational principles behind that. What are the things that you believe  
**[0:36:30-0:36:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:36:30):**  to be true that many other people don't believe to be true? I believe that the soil can grow  an extremely healthy high yielding plant with minimal additions of inputs. That there's plenty  of minerals in the soil if you treat it properly. And I think you'd find most people would disagree  
**[0:36:56-0:37:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:36:56):**  with me with that. We have proven you have to put on fertilizers to get good yields. Wow. I'm going  to stick with that because I've proven it to myself that you can do that. So you're saying that  you can actually grow healthy high yielding crops without adding fertilizers? Yes. So how do you do  
**[0:37:18-0:37:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:37:18):**  that? How does that work? That's a complex question and a very complex answer. If that were real simple  I'd have to charge you for this information. But you know it's creating the healthy  soil that allows the plant roots to go deep into the soil to extract the minerals that it needs.  
**[0:37:46-0:37:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:37:46):**  I mean it's a vast sea of minerals available and if you're starting to see suppression of crop yield  and then you add fertilizer and the yield comes back that's because you're only using the top  few inches if you will of the soil. The roots are not healthy enough to penetrate deeper  
**[0:38:07-0:38:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:38:07):**  to actually mine the minerals that are there. I mean all of our soil is nothing but minerals.  So this is something that I've talked about as well and the question that I often get is aren't  you going to deplete the soil of minerals if you're not adding fertilizers? Well my quick reply  
**[0:38:25-0:38:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:38:25):**  to that is always that's like trying to take all the salt out of the ocean. Wow. All right. Well  you can deplete it. You can deplete it in a rooting zone and I'll grant you that. But what you need to  do is expand your ability to search a bigger rooting zone and you need to add mycorrhizae  
**[0:38:49-0:38:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:38:49):**  into that equation because you want a really big rooting zone let the mycorrhizae work for you.  Oh this I think this is a much bigger topic that we perhaps need to unwrap at some point in the  future but this is... I think you're right but it is an exciting one. It's a very exciting one the  
**[0:39:08-0:39:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:39:08):**  the idea that we can grow really healthy crops without constantly adding inputs. I mean when  when we talk about developing regenerative agriculture ecosystems today there's a lot of  discussion about sustainability and I've made the comment that we can't have a legitimate  
**[0:39:26-0:39:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:39:26):**  conversation about sustainability and a sustainable agriculture as long as we are constantly importing  such large volumes of inputs that we first need to have a regenerative model where we regenerate  soil health and plant health to a much higher plateau of performance and only at that point can  
**[0:39:44-0:39:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:39:44):**  we have a true conversation about sustainability. And so for me this is this is really exciting  because what you are describing is really the foundation of what I would describe as true  sustainability. That's correct. I'm going to circle back and I want to come back to that piece and  
**[0:40:01-0:40:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:40:01):**  explore it a little bit more but I'd love to also ask the the counterpoint of the question that I  asked which brought out that answer which is what is it that you do not believe to be true that  many other people do believe to be true? Well as I think about that it's almost the same question in  
**[0:40:19-0:40:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:40:19):**  a sense that most people believe that you have to put a lot of inputs in in order to get a decent  yield and they're not understanding how the system works. The way the system will work is not what  we're trying to do today. We're trying to, I don't know, we're trying to swim upstream with it and  
**[0:40:42-0:40:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:40:42):**  it's just not working. Yeah there certainly is I would agree with you that we are we're trying to  we're trying to force things to move in a direction that they don't naturally want to flow  and when we get I mean we can talk about science the science behind developing exceptionally healthy  
**[0:41:01-0:41:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:41:01):**  crops and we can make it sound really complicated but at the end of the day the reality is that it  was designed to work and it did work very successfully for a very long period of time  and if we can give it the framework and the management that it needs to really flow well  
**[0:41:17-0:41:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:41:17):**  then it can work very effectively. We just need to allow that to happen. Yes I agree. What technology  or ideas what are you really excited about? What are you excited about in the future of agriculture?  I think probably one of the big things is getting more involved in food production. We've done a  
**[0:41:40-0:41:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:41:40):**  lot of work with our corn soybean game if you will and we've tried to make foods out of that  and then these foods are not necessarily very healthy for us and I think if we started  concentrating on food production agriculture has a fantastic opportunity here. When we're wasting  
**[0:42:02-0:42:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:42:02):**  some of the best soils on earth produce fuel for our vehicles we're really missing it. So just a  moment ago you mentioned the word opportunity. So what where do you see the big  opportunities in agriculture today? I see the most success right now in growers that are looking to  
**[0:42:27-0:42:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:42:27):**  improve sustainability of their farming operations and when they do that they're finding that they're  they're relying on less and less inputs. They're having higher quality food and feed production  at a lower cost and they are profitable in a time when right now agriculture is struggling  
**[0:42:51-0:42:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:42:51):**  in profitability right now. It really is but those growers are not struggling at all. So in your  assessment the opportunity for growers is really to develop sustainability and reduce inputs so  that they can become more profitable. Is that what you're saying? Yes. If you were to recommend to  
**[0:43:11-0:43:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:43:11):**  growers to learn more about these various pieces that you are talking about what is the  one book that you would recommend the most often? What is one resource that you would recommend  most people and different growers to learn more about? Well a book that I really like is  
**[0:43:29-0:43:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:43:29):**  Mineral Nutrition and Plant Disease that was edited by Lawrence Dattinoff, Wade Elmer, and  Don Huber. I find that to be a really useful book in helping you understand how minerals affect  plants and when you get a feel for that and how that all works then all these things that you're  
**[0:43:50-0:43:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:43:50):**  not talking about for the last hour all of a sudden start making a lot of sense. So that's a  pretty good book to start with. Yeah it certainly is one of the in terms of agronomic sciences and  so forth it's I would say it's in the top two or three that I personally reference the most often  
**[0:44:07-0:44:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:44:07):**  so it definitely is a very valuable resource. And I think for people who haven't done anything  but that's a really a pretty decent one to start with and then once they sort of have that  under their belt then they can start delving into some of the books and I don't have a particular one  
**[0:44:24-0:44:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:44:24):**  in mind to talk about the microbial life in the soil and what it takes to improve that.  Now there's actually a... Because once you're doing the plants the rest of that sort of  it all falls into place for you. Yeah the plants are certainly the engine the photosynthetic engine  
**[0:44:42-0:44:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:44:42):**  that drives soil biology for certain. There's a really great book that was written that was  published back in the 70s if I'm not mistaken by the Russian Academy of Sciences titled  Soil Microorganisms and Higher Plants by N.A. Krasilnikov and we actually have a PDF of that  
**[0:45:01-0:45:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:45:01):**  that we make available on our website at Advancing Eco-Agriculture that is incredibly powerful  incredibly insightful reading. It's a fairly in-depth book but it's kind of amazing both  how much we have already learned back then 40 years ago and how much we have failed to put  
**[0:45:18-0:45:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:45:18):**  into practice. There's a lot of knowledge there that we haven't applied consistently in commercial  scale production agriculture for sure. Michael what is the one action that you would advise that  all growers should take right now? They should take immediately. What's the one thing that people can  
**[0:45:37-0:45:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:45:37):**  do to make the biggest difference on their aberrations? Stop poisoning the soil. I guess that  was easy. Real simple just stop. So that sounds simple it sounds easy to do but how do you  manage that if you're if you're it's a challenge to do if you spent most of your life doing that  
**[0:46:00-0:46:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:46:00):**  stopping it is not necessarily easy. Are there the one action they need to do to be successful?  Are there transition steps that can be taken to kind of move away from that? What are some of your  growers doing that have moved away from using herbicides and so forth? I would say I have a full  
**[0:46:20-0:46:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:46:20):**  array of actions from taking baby steps to jumping off the cliff and just 100% stop and I have seen  growers from anywhere from the smaller three four hundred acre growers to the ten to fifteen thousand  acre growers step off the cliff and have it work really well for them. I was really concerned about  
**[0:46:44-0:46:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:46:44):**  some of the larger growers but I found that they had they had the management ability and the  resources to really make it happen and once they understood what they were doing and why they were  doing it they could be very successful. So are you suggesting? I think that's something that most  
**[0:47:00-0:47:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:47:00):**  people don't believe because I mean I get that thrown in my face almost every day well I can't  do that. I have too big an operation I can't do that and I just really enjoy throwing it back  while I know somebody who asked and then they've not really changed they have not necessarily added  
**[0:47:18-0:47:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:47:18):**  more hired men or anything. The one thing that they have added is that if they make a mistake  or a failure they've had to employ a large number of people for a short period of time to hand weed  a field. If they made a mistake that's the only fix there is. So this is actually yeah I'm  
**[0:47:39-0:47:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:47:39):**  struggling with this a little bit myself is so when you say that when you use the words stepping  off a cliff are you talking about eliminating 100% of all herbicide applications right out of the gate?  What does that mean exactly? All pesticide applications. Aren't you going to lose your crop to  
**[0:47:57-0:48:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:47:57):**  a potential disease and insect pests when you do that? When you do that you better have read that  book that I just suggested so that you understand that you have the right micronutrient balance  to keep that plant healthy enough to protect itself. So I and you can do that through  
**[0:48:15-0:48:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:48:15):**  you know starter fertilizers, foliar feeding, multiple foliar feedings and you can pull it off.  So what have been some of the failures of growers who have tried to do this and what have been  what has been their degree of success as well? By and large I've had all successes. I'm trying to  
**[0:48:35-0:48:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:48:35):**  think of a failure. I really don't think of any but I make sure that they really understand and  know what they're doing when they do it. I've had a few where they missed a field or two timing wise  you know a rain caught them and they didn't get in and get it taken care of when they should have  
**[0:48:54-0:48:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:48:54):**  some weed issues that haunted them a little bit but they were able to get it cleaned up to the  point where it did not suppress yield. Wow. How do their yields compare? I think that their yields  have been going up. That's what's been somewhat shocking you know and I want to be sure that  
**[0:49:10-0:49:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:49:10):**  that's attributed to that not just necessarily a good growing season because we've had some  good growing seasons recently but their yields have continued to climb quite quite rapidly. They've  moved to a different yield plateau. So you're saying that their yields are actually higher now  
**[0:49:28-0:49:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:49:28):**  than they were when they were using herbicides and pesticides regularly? Yes. Well that's exciting  because that's exactly those are the same types of things that we've observed in the fruit and  vegetable production world and those are one of the types of regenerative systems that we  
**[0:49:43-0:49:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:49:43):**  seek to create and to establish and I absolutely agree with you that those are possible. I think  the one piece that we from a management perspective often do a bit differently on fruit and vegetable  crops that we are working on is we don't usually advise people to step off the cliff to borrow your  
**[0:50:03-0:50:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:50:03):**  terminology but rather to manage nutrition and to regenerate soil health to a higher plateau  of performance where we kind of earn the right to eliminate pesticides where all of a sudden  we don't have problems with powdery mildew anymore, we don't have problems with spider mites  
**[0:50:20-0:50:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:50:20):**  anymore, we don't have problems with leaf hoppers anymore and so when we get to that much higher  plateau performance and we no longer have the problems then we start cutting and eliminating  pesticide applications. So it seems a bit scary to me when you're managing a crop that  
**[0:50:38-0:50:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:50:38):**  is really valuable to suggest eliminating all pesticide applications immediately but obviously  you've been successful in doing so. Yes it's worked. It was really scary when we first started  doing that and so that's why I've kind of learned the few things that you have to be sure that gets  
**[0:50:59-0:51:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:50:59):**  accomplished and that's getting the soil as healthy as you can and the plants as healthy as you can  and that's pretty hard to do with just one step off the cliff but it can be done. Wow. Well Michael  this has been very encouraging and very enlightening. Thank you very much for joining us  
**[0:51:15-0:51:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:51:15):**  here on this show and we will look forward to hearing from you again sometime soon in the future.  Thanks for joining us. Thank you John. I've enjoyed speaking with you and it's been challenging  questions that you ask so good luck with your venture. Thanks Michael. This podcast was brought  
**[0:51:31-0:51:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:51:31):**  to you by a great company that I work for, Advancing Eco-Agriculture, the leader in regenerative  regenerative agriculture since 2006. At AEA we believe in challenging the status quo to find  more profitable and regenerative ways to grow. We also believe that healthy plants are resistant to  
**[0:51:48-0:51:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:51:48):**  pests and disease and that to grow healthy plants we must first think differently about agriculture,  about empowering life instead of suppressing life, about regeneration versus degeneration.  To achieve this we formulate and sell products that help growers produce higher quality yields  
**[0:52:04-0:52:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/disease-resistance-and-regenerating-soil-with-michael-mcneill/#t=0:52:04):**  with less risk of crop failure. In short we help growers make more money with less risk.  If you are not yet an AEA customer go to advancingecoag.com and use the code  REGENERATE10 for 5% off your first order. Thank you for listening.  