### Regenerative Agriculture Podcast  (2018-00-20)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:00:00):**  The question that I always ask farmers that come up to visit is how often can you lose  a crop and make more money than the neighbors do?  The answer is every single time when you're farming regeneratively.  Hi friends, I'm John Kempf, hosting this podcast.  I'm passionate about developing regenerative agriculture systems that improve soil health,  
**[0:00:25-0:00:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:00:25):**  produce crops that are completely resistant to diseases and insects, and produce fruit  of such an exceptional quality that we can have a legitimate conversation about growing  food as medicine.  There are many people with incredible knowledge and information about soil and plant systems  and how to develop regenerative agriculture systems.  
**[0:00:44-0:00:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:00:44):**  However, much of this knowledge and this information is scattered.  It's found all over the place.  Some of it has been published in peer reviewed publications, but there are many incredible  stories and a lot of knowledge that has not been published and that hasn't been shared  with many people.  
**[0:00:59-0:01:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:00:59):**  I started advancing eco agriculture in 2006 to bring this knowledge together in a more  coherent fashion and incorporate it into products and growing systems that growers can easily  put into practice.  It's my personal mission to have these regenerative agricultural systems become adopted globally  and become the mainstream, the status quo against which all other growing systems are  
**[0:01:23-0:01:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:01:23):**  compared.  To help achieve this goal, I want to share the knowledge that we have learned in the  last decade and make it available to everyone.  While we have developed products at AEA that embody the principles of regenerative agriculture  systems and make them easier for growers to apply, this knowledge and these principles  
**[0:01:41-0:01:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:01:41):**  can be applied anywhere.  When they are applied properly, they will always increase farm profitability and resilience  to climate stress.  If you have any questions, suggestions, comments, or ideas, topics that you would like for me  to discuss, please connect on LinkedIn or on Twitter where my username is at visionbuilder7  
**[0:02:03-0:02:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:02:03):**  or you can also email me at john at johnkempf.com.  I would very much like to hear from you and to hear your feedback.  Be sure to subscribe to this podcast and thank you very much for listening.  Enjoy the show.  Words and phrases are powerful.  
**[0:02:19-0:02:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:02:19):**  Think about the phrase food allergies.  Why have we come to accept as normal that people should be allergic to food?  In this episode, Jonathan Lundgren brings a similar phrase to mind, food safety.  Jonathan brings an interesting perspective as a professional evaluator of pesticides  and genetically modified organisms in agriculture ecosystems.  
**[0:02:38-0:02:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:02:38):**  We talk about how we have the potential and the capacity to develop agriculture ecosystems  that are incredibly resilient and can produce crops that are completely resistant to insect  pests that are present in the field.  I'm here with an agroecologist, entomologist, very respected researcher and someone whose  work I have been reading and following for some time.  
**[0:03:00-0:03:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:03:00):**  I'm very honored to have him here, Jonathan Lundgren.  Jonathan, welcome to the podcast.  We're very excited to have you.  Well, thanks for having me.  It's great to be here.  
**[0:03:08-0:03:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:03:08):**  Jonathan, you've done some very interesting work looking at agroecology and the ecological  implications of pest management strategies and some of the tools that we use today.  You've had a really interesting journey.  What are some of the memorable moments that led you to the spot where you are today?  Can you tell us a little bit about your journey and your pathway?  
**[0:03:28-0:03:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:03:28):**  Sure.  I was trained as an entomologist and a lot of times scientists are trained to focus in  their study area and within their particular group to specialize.  I was no exception.  I'm a predator ecologist, I guess, and I really like lady beetles, so ladybugs, as good predators  
**[0:03:52-0:03:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:03:52):**  and we would study those.  But the deeper that I dug into those, that organismal level, I started to ask questions  that couldn't be answered at an organismal level.  That forced me to start to expand my thinking about the research that I was focusing on  and including more of a community approach.  
**[0:04:16-0:04:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:04:16):**  And then the more I focused on insect communities, the more I realized that in order to answer  some of the questions that we needed to be addressing, it required that I not just think  about entomology anymore and start learning more about the agroecosystem in general.  I still study insects an awful lot, but I realize now that they're a good learning tool  for telling us about the greater system rather than being an entity in and of themselves  
**[0:04:46-0:04:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:04:46):**  or isolated.  When you speak of insects as being an indicator of a greater system, what are they telling  you?  What have you observed that surprised you?  One major change in my thinking that kind of gets at your question is realizing that  
**[0:05:03-0:05:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:05:03):**  I can't be focusing on one particular group of insects.  We all want a dipstick to tell us whether our practices in soil health are working.  What I came to understand the more we researched this topic is that insect communities were  an entity that we needed to be focusing on rather than individual indicators.  insect communities were so dynamic and they changed pretty dramatically, but at the same  
**[0:05:32-0:05:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:05:32):**  time all of those changes were really representing key niches.  The diversification of that community allows that community to function as we change the  habitat or the farmland, so that there's always somebody sitting in each piece of the puzzle.  That's where biodiversity really comes into play.  That was what was so surprising, just how important biodiversity within our agroecosystems  
**[0:06:01-0:06:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:06:01):**  really is.  We need life in all of its forms, don't we?  That we do.  What did you observe that really drove this point home for you?  We started at bio inventory cornfield.  
**[0:06:13-0:06:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:06:13):**  A lot of the work that I did when I first started with the USDA, I began my career as  a scientist with the USDA.  I swore that I wasn't going to work on corn because a lot of entomologists worked on corn  at the laboratory that I was working on.  It was always this crop that I was like, oh geez, I want to work on something different.  
**[0:06:35-0:06:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:06:35):**  But the more I dug into it, I look back at a career of 20 years in entomology and in  ecology now and it's like, God, a lot of that was working in corn.  Corn has been the system that really opened my eyes to the importance of diversity.  What happened was that we kind of landed this little grant to study communities in corn,  like insect communities and how landscapes affect those communities and the resilience  
**[0:07:07-0:07:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:07:07):**  of those communities to invasive species in cornfield.  One thing led to another.  We led this whole team.  Part of it was entomologists and then the other half was economists from all over the  world.  
**[0:07:21-0:07:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:07:21):**  My colleague in the project was an economist.  We went out and we surveyed these 53 cornfields all over eastern South Dakota.  Every cornfield, we applied the same method and we looked at all of the species that were  living on corn plants, all of the insect species.  We collected them up and then we brought them back to the lab.  
**[0:07:42-0:07:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:07:42):**  That was a huge monumental effort.  This was a lot of work.  It ended up identifying, by the end, probably hundreds of thousands of insect specimens  down to species level.  Tons of work.  
**[0:07:56-0:08:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:07:56):**  The more I dug into it, the more it opened my eyes to the fact that this has really never  been done before.  Entomologists always just focus on the past and maybe a couple of key natural enemies  of the past.  But we never really looked at the actual community in itself in all of its glory, right?  
**[0:08:14-0:08:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:08:14):**  Because it is.  It's so much work to get this data.  But we did it.  And in looking at the data, the patterns in the data became so clear that when we had  more insect species within a cornfield, there just wasn't pests.  
**[0:08:32-0:08:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:08:32):**  We did not have pest problems anymore.  And at the same time, there was a couple of other papers that were starting to come out  that were suggesting that this diversity was, or lack of diversity, was really important  in creating pest problems.  And then I look at the system and how we produce our crops right now.  
**[0:08:49-0:08:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:08:49):**  If diversity is what we're after, then man, our production prices are just absolutely  perfect for creating pest outbreaks.  Yeah, I can completely relate with your desire to not work with corn because it's a dominant  crop.  It's well studied to some degree.  
**[0:09:10-0:09:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:09:10):**  And it's a relatively simplistic crop compared to growing, say, tomatoes or peaches or nectarines.  But to your last comment, it's such a dominant crop in such a broad region throughout the  Midwest.  I mean, in the state of Iowa, any crop that is not corn or soybean is considered a specialty  crop.  
**[0:09:30-0:09:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:09:30):**  Alfalfa hay is a specialty crop, as are oats and everything else.  Isn't that amazing?  Yeah, that's pretty amazing.  I can justify working on it in my own mind by just saying, well, if we can make changes  to corn, think of the footprint geographically that we would have in terms of changing landscapes  
**[0:09:49-0:09:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:09:49):**  and stuff like that.  On our own farm, I don't grow corn.  And I don't advise people to grow corn either.  The reality is that for many growers today, it makes very good economic sense to grow  crops other than corn.  
**[0:10:05-0:10:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:10:05):**  That's another conversation.  You mentioned that when you had increased insect diversity and a diverse population  of insects, you had no pest pressure.  What do you believe the mechanisms are for producing that shift?  We've known that putting up more plant species into a habitat tends to result in fewer pests.  
**[0:10:27-0:10:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:10:27):**  And there's two general hypotheses for what drives this.  And they are the natural enemies hypothesis, which says that as you increase plants, you  increase the number of predators of pest species.  And so that predation ends up being a downward pressure on the pest populations.  And then the other idea, resource concentration theory, which is by including more plant diversity  
**[0:10:49-0:10:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:10:49):**  into a system, that you are diluting your focal crop within the vegetation community.  And so maybe it's more difficult for the pests to find or it changes the plant in some way.  I think both of those are probably at play within that study that showed that insect  diversity was really important.  But I think that it's so much more complicated than that.  
**[0:11:14-0:11:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:11:14):**  Scientists are just like everybody else in that we like to categorize things and we like  to control them and we like to manipulate them and feel like we have, at the end of  it, some intimate knowledge of what's going on.  But the reality is within an ecological system, and I've been working in it for a long time,  the complexity becomes so staggering that I don't think that we can understand all of  
**[0:11:44-0:11:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:11:44):**  the mechanisms that are driving this.  And that's a humbling experience for a scientist to have to admit that at some level we just  have to get the hell out of the way and observe these systems rather than going out to our  research farm and picking out every mechanism that we can think of as the quote unquote  experts.  
**[0:12:06-0:12:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:12:06):**  What I ended up doing that was really important in my career and in us coming to these conclusions  is I just started to go out to the farmers that were leading this regenerative agriculture  movement and looked at what they were doing.  I wasn't interested in controlling their farm.  I just wanted to observe.  
**[0:12:26-0:12:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:12:26):**  And that's the way science used to happen, isn't it?  Scientists would go out and they would observe the natural world and they would use that  as the basis of developing hypotheses that then they could test.  And nowadays science has totally shifted, right?  Nowadays the scientific expert who's got their PhD and all of the pieces of paper that says  
**[0:12:49-0:12:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:12:49):**  that they're really bright, they sit down behind their computer and they write the sexiest  grant proposal that they possibly can.  And there's a total disconnect more often than not between the science that ends up  happening and the real world that ultimately farmers are living in.  And so it's been a real challenge for us to innovate our food production system using  
**[0:13:13-0:13:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:13:13):**  science.  It's a challenge for some growers as well.  There are certainly some growers who are exceptional at being observant and seeing what is happening.  Many farmers are very connected to their farm and what's happening around them in the natural  environment.  
**[0:13:27-0:13:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:13:27):**  There is an incredible complexity.  It's beyond the capacity of most of us or perhaps any of us to comprehend all the interactions  that are happening inside of a plant and with all of these various organism communications  back and forth by whatever mechanism and by whatever means.  But the beauty, the beauty within all of that complexity and we can take comfort in the  
**[0:13:51-0:13:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:13:51):**  fact that it was designed to work.  It's been developed to work.  It works extremely harmoniously to the point that you made earlier is that in many cases  perhaps we just simply need to get out of the way and allow it to function as it was  intended to.  
**[0:14:05-0:14:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:14:05):**  To me, it's humbling and it's also so exciting because when we kind of release that and we  just start appreciating the beauty and that sense of wonder at the natural world, my God,  what an invigorating thing, you know.  It is indeed.  Earlier in our conversation, you mentioned the ecological implications of pest management  
**[0:14:34-0:14:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:14:34):**  and some of the tools that we use today.  I'd love to hear a bit more about that.  What are the impacts on our agriculture ecosystems of the pest management tools that we're so  widely using today and how can we, what are possible alternatives?  What can we do better?  
**[0:14:51-0:14:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:14:51):**  Right.  My research focuses on two general areas.  One is risk assessment of pesticides and genetically modified crops and basically farm management  practices in general.  And then the other half is working on developing sustainable systems.  
**[0:15:07-0:15:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:15:07):**  So I've got quite a bit of experience in understanding the ecological risk assessment and the framework  that we use for trying to determine whether a particular agrochemical or something is  safe or not safe.  I've advised the U.S. EPA, I've been on advisory panels for the European version of the EPA,  Brazilian government, the United Nations and their conference on biodiversity.  
**[0:15:39-0:15:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:15:39):**  After 20 years of studying this, I can honestly say that when you look at the side of a jug  and it says that it's safe, that is meaningless.  You can go out and you can buy something off of a shelf and it's labeled and it's regulated.  Nobody is watching.  Nobody is watching.  
**[0:16:06-0:16:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:16:06):**  Risk assessment is incredibly hard.  It's incredibly hard.  We can get closer to the mark with scientific approaches to risk assessment.  But again, when you understand the complexity of the natural world, I mean, my God, right  now just for pesticides, there are a couple hundred different pesticides where the active  
**[0:16:30-0:16:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:16:30):**  ingredient is registered with the EPA.  And that's where most of the assessments are, or the safety assessments are focused, is  on those active ingredients.  But whenever you add an adjuvant, maybe it's a sticker or a spreader or a de-foaming agent  or whatever, it changes the toxicology of that active ingredient such that the risk  
**[0:16:57-0:17:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:16:57):**  assessment that you're actually performing on that active ingredient really does not  hold much weight anymore.  And when you think about all of the formulated products, there's 20,000 formulated pesticides  in the US and each of those pesticides would require an ecological risk assessment independent.  Each of them.  
**[0:17:20-0:17:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:17:20):**  Where's the budget for that?  Yeah.  And in addition to that, farmers will in many cases add additional adjuvants or spreader,  stickers or whatever the case might be in the spray tank in addition to whatever's in  the jug.  
**[0:17:33-0:17:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:17:33):**  That's right.  And it changes everything.  I'm not saying that we shouldn't have, you know, agrochemical, be they herbicides, be  they fungicides, be they insecticides.  I understand the utility of these things, but I think that we need to have a hell of  
**[0:17:49-0:17:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:17:49):**  a lot more respect than we do right now.  The counties, my county in particular, should not be using a fire hose to be spraying the  weeds on the road margins to kill fissiles that may or may not be there.  You know, just to burn up product.  Come on.  
**[0:18:05-0:18:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:18:05):**  I think that farmers, when they buy a bag of seed and the seed is in the natural color,  it's either purple or blue or pink, those are neurotoxins that they're putting onto  their field and very little of that is actually getting into the plant.  Most of it is getting into your soil.  And so when we start to think about what causes a pest, and if it's a reduction in biodiversity,  
**[0:18:32-0:18:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:18:32):**  almost instantly when you buy a jug, you are counteracting nature's ability to fight that  pest.  You are causing pest problems.  That then you have to buy another jug in order to control.  And it's this wicked treadmill that just keeps spiraling.  
**[0:18:54-0:18:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:18:54):**  So a couple of thoughts that emerge from what you've just shared.  The first one is when you say that nobody is watching, what are the ecological implications  of that?  What I'm hearing you to some degree, Day, is that we don't even understand the implications  that these materials might have on soil health and ecosystem health.  
**[0:19:16-0:19:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:19:16):**  We don't have the first inkling of what the implications of these things, be it glyphosate,  be it neonicotinoids, be it propiconazole, or be it the adjuvants, which sometimes are  more toxic than the active ingredient in terms of its ecological effects.  And we're not just talking about the soil, right?  We're talking about human health problems.  
**[0:19:37-0:19:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:19:37):**  Farmers have the highest suicide rate of any career at this point in the US.  And we know that pesticide use is linked with depression.  The science has been done on that.  I mean, are we killing ourselves?  Many of these agrochemicals, in my understanding, are also very exceptionally potent endocrine  
**[0:19:59-0:20:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:19:59):**  disruptors.  And estrogen stimulants.  And they affect us and the natural world in many ways.  The moment you begin talking about endocrine disruption, I mean, that shapes who we are  and our personality and our thought patterns in ways I think we don't fully aware of.  
**[0:20:20-0:20:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:20:20):**  But when you think about the cancer profile and cancers of various organs in the endocrine  system or the reproductive system and the way that that has shifted, not just among  farmers, but in general population, it leads me to ask the question 40, 50 years ago, perhaps  60 years ago, ovarian cancer, uterine cancer, breast cancer, testicular cancer, prostate  cancer, et cetera, all these that are connected to the endocrine system and the reproductive  
**[0:20:53-0:20:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:20:53):**  system were relatively small proportion of cancers.  They were single digit percentage points.  Today they're a majority when taken in aggregate.  So will we ever determine whether pesticides are the cause of that?  I don't know.  
**[0:21:10-0:21:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:21:10):**  I mean, definitively the cause of it.  I don't know.  I think there's evidence that would support that, the carcinogenicity of various agrochemicals.  Do we know that that's, is that all?  I don't know that would cause these patterns that we're starting to see within our society.  
**[0:21:29-0:21:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:21:29):**  I'm not sure, but boy, my eyes and ears are wide open and if I can get away on my own  farm without that stuff, then I'm going to do my darndest to do that.  And I think that perhaps more importantly, and this is the way that I kind of say it,  I don't try to make it an ideological decision.  You know what, if I can eliminate an input cost from my farming operation, that's just  
**[0:21:54-0:21:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:21:54):**  a good business decision.  And so if I get up there and I tell farmers, you know, there's another way and it's probably  going to save you money and these other farmers are the ones who figured it out.  That just makes a hell of a lot of sense, right?  It does.  
**[0:22:11-0:22:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:22:11):**  So what, what is that other way?  How do we develop agro ecosystems that reduce the need for insect management products and  other agrochemicals?  The regenerative farm movement is doing a heck of a good job of it.  There's some principles that link these systems that are occurring all over the world.  
**[0:22:33-0:22:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:22:33):**  I've heard categories of these principles here, there and everywhere.  I think fundamentally reducing or eliminating tillage from your operation is the first step.  Never leaving bare soil is the next.  Increasing plant diversity whenever possible on your field, be that crop rotation, be that  crop, be that field margins, be that intercropping, interseeding cover crops in your crop rows.  
**[0:23:05-0:23:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:23:05):**  Those are all great practices that work.  And then finally integrating animals and crops together in the same place at the same time.  When a system has these elements, they don't have pests.  And that's a pretty, that's a really big statement.  I think that is a resilient system.  
**[0:23:27-0:23:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:23:27):**  I can give you an example.  So we have a field that's 12 years no till.  I didn't inherit a farm that had degraded resource.  I think it had been sprayed with 2,4-D and dicamba to eliminate weeds.  But otherwise it's had perennial grass cover for a long time.  
**[0:23:47-0:23:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:23:47):**  We had some weeds out there, right?  I did use like maybe a half to a quarter rate of Roundup or glyphosate in order to manage  it, just push down some of that vegetation.  And then I plant our cash crop directly into that.  It's an annual cash crop that's put into perennial grass cover.  
**[0:24:06-0:24:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:24:06):**  We use our, until I had livestock, I didn't understand how I was going to control those  weeds in any other way.  And this spring I ended up high intensity grazing down that weed cover and then we planted  directly in.  I think when my flock is big enough of these hair sheep, I don't think I'm going to need  
**[0:24:25-0:24:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:24:25):**  herbicides anymore.  So in that case, I'm actually seeing a problem, a pest problem, right, that we're supposed  to react to.  I look at that pest problem as an opportunity.  So when we had some farm tours, we had a tour of South Africans last year and they were  
**[0:24:45-0:24:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:24:45):**  like, gosh, you've got some weeds out here.  And I'm like, where?  I don't see any weeds.  I see forage, right?  I love it.  
**[0:24:56-0:25:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:24:56):**  And when you change your perspective on things, then you've got real opportunities.  When you don't negate the tools that you have in your tool belt, oh, I'm a cropper.  I don't raise livestock.  That's, you know, that's, well, you know what?  Then you're eliminating a really valuable tool from your operation.  
**[0:25:17-0:25:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:25:17):**  Speaking of changing perspectives, I've observed that many growers and researchers shift their  perspectives over time as they're on this journey.  What is something that you believe to be true about modern agriculture that is different  from the mainstream view as your perspective has shifted?  When I got into entomology, I was an adherent to, you know, the pest management principles,  
**[0:25:47-0:25:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:25:47):**  right?  Like you, you go out, sample your fields, you wait until the past reaches a certain  density and then you react.  What I discovered or was taught by farmers, regenerative farmers, is that if you design  your system right, pest management should not be a reactive process.  
**[0:26:10-0:26:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:26:10):**  Pest management is a proactive process.  You design a system correctly, then you don't have pests anymore.  And if you have a pest outbreak in your field, that means that you're doing something wrong.  That's a very, very different philosophy than you get from just about every extension agent  or office, but also much of the infrastructure.  
**[0:26:34-0:26:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:26:34):**  So much of our current scientific infrastructure is bent on making a broken system work.  Make it work.  Figure out how to take this system, change it ever so slightly so that farmers will adopt  it on a huge scale and it'll get them by for a little while longer.  Genetically modify the plants, you know, do that.  
**[0:26:57-0:26:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:26:57):**  Here's some seed coding.  This will be easy to use and it'll make the system work.  And then ultimately the system always re-breaks.  And what I was taught very recently is that we need to stop supporting a broken system  and we need to reinvent how we're thinking about agriculture.  
**[0:27:21-0:27:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:27:21):**  It is intriguing how entrenched the current model has become to the point where it's become  dogmatic and no longer is considering new ideas and new inputs as might have been the  case a number of decades ago.  On a couple of occasions, you've mentioned that in addition to pesticide evaluations,  you've also done evaluations of GMOs and you've mentioned seed coatings a couple of times.  
**[0:27:48-0:27:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:27:48):**  I'd love to hear your perspective.  What are the things that you've observed and learned about GMOs and how they impact ecosystems?  Is there a role for, like, modified organisms in regenerative agriculture ecosystems?  You know, I'm not fundamentally against genetically modified organisms any more than I am any  other of the tools that are put out there to support the current system.  
**[0:28:15-0:28:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:28:15):**  I think that GMOs, seed coatings, pesticides in general, they're a symptom of a greater  problem.  And that problem is a simplification of our food system.  So in my view, I guess I'm against GMOs because I just don't think they're needed.  I think if we were to solve the underlying issue, which is a simplified system where  
**[0:28:38-0:28:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:28:38):**  it's all monoculture, thousands of acres of a single plant species that's genetically  limited and selected to produce only large seeds, or maybe there's a few other small  characteristics that we decided we wanted in that particular organism.  Since we went down that road, we just predisposed ourselves for pest outbreak after pest outbreak.  And really within that context, if that's your system, dead soil and a monoculture,  
**[0:29:06-0:29:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:29:06):**  then you know what?  You are absolutely reliant on agrochemicals and genetically modified organisms.  That's the only way to produce, I think, efficiently within that system.  But if you suddenly look at one of your neighbors who's farming regeneratively and you see a  different approach, a different philosophy towards producing food, suddenly it's really  
**[0:29:33-0:29:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:29:33):**  empowering, right?  Suddenly you're keeping more money on your own operation, rural communities keep more  money in their own communities.  We suddenly have opportunities for stacking enterprises and industries that keep our kids  back out on the farm.  
**[0:29:50-0:29:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:29:50):**  We're growing healthier food.  Everybody wins in this situation.  To me, that was something that's worth fighting for and changing my entire life and career  trajectory for.  One of the pieces that is really inspiring to me is understanding that we have such tremendous  
**[0:30:14-0:30:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:30:14):**  untapped genetic potential in the crop genetics that we have available today and have had  available for the last 40 years that we have not yet tapped into.  And speaking with experts and scientists in the field, Don Huber and Jerry Hatfield and  many others, the implication and in some cases the explicit statement is that the reason  we have this untapped genetic potential that we have failed to realize is because of our  
**[0:30:46-0:30:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:30:46):**  agriculture ecosystems and our soil health.  You can only push yields to a certain threshold by applying more nutrients and pesticides.  You can't get past that point until you change the system.  So there's all this discussion around needing to feed a rapidly growing world population  and there's a lot wrapped up in that considering food waste and unequal distribution, etc.,  
**[0:31:11-0:31:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:31:11):**  etc.  But even leaving those issues on the side, it is very inspiring to me to think that,  just as an example, in fruit and vegetable production, there are some crops where yields  have increased by 250 to 300 percent over the last 20 years.  Strawberries in California 20 years ago, the average yield was 4,000 flats per acre.  
**[0:31:34-0:31:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:31:34):**  Today it's 10,000 flats per acre.  And the same is true of processing tomato production.  There have been a number of crops that we have continued to develop and get rapidly  higher yields, but that hasn't happened yet on our commodity crops, corn, soybeans, etc.  And while the evidence is there to suggest that the genetic potential is there to tap  
**[0:31:56-0:32:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:31:56):**  into that once we shift our ecosystems and begin growing those plants differently.  Yeah, kind of associated with that is that we've got this list of recommendations that  work within degraded soils and or at least they can keep you alive during degraded soils  and in a monoculture situation.  But when you start farming down a regenerative road, a lot of the recommendations that are  
**[0:32:23-0:32:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:32:23):**  associated with that current system, and including for idle selection and things like this, you  just throw those rules kind of out the window.  I mean, they just don't apply anymore.  It's going to necessitate that we end up having to reinvent what we think we know.  Yeah, going back to first principles thinking, foundational thinking.  
**[0:32:43-0:32:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:32:43):**  Jonathan, what is a book or resource that you recommend the most often to growers and  to agronomists?  I love some of the classic stuff like Plowman's Folly and One Straw Revolution are always  good.  A lot of the stuff that I tend to read, it tends to be a little bit more technical.  
**[0:33:06-0:33:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:33:06):**  Mark Winston's got some great stuff that I would definitely look into some of his stuff  he wrote and then, you know, big picture thinking.  I just love anything by Carl Sagan.  That guy is, I think you may have been an alien that fell down to earth just to educate  us and kind of think philosophically.  
**[0:33:26-0:33:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:33:26):**  Good stuff there too.  At least get you thinking.  I like being challenged.  I like being challenged to think outside my comfort zone.  Jonathan, what is the question that you wish I would have asked?  
**[0:33:36-0:33:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:33:36):**  What's the topic that you would love to talk more about that we haven't approached?  You know, you hit on some of the big issues.  Gets my attention going.  I wish that we could talk more about or hear more discussion about what tends to pertain  to integrating livestock and crops and how to do that effectively and why we would do  
**[0:33:57-0:33:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:33:57):**  stuff like that.  And bees are another issue.  Why are the bees dying is a good question.  Everybody always needs to come up.  Can you tell us a little bit more about what you are doing on your farm with livestock  
**[0:34:11-0:34:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:34:11):**  and how you're integrating livestock into your farming system?  Sure.  So we have 43 acres.  Some people would laugh at that size, but you know, honestly, I don't know that you  can farm regeneratively, truly regeneratively on anything more than 100 acres unless you're  
**[0:34:30-0:34:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:34:30):**  like hiring on a lot of staff.  So our farm is 43 acres.  Twenty five of that is native unbroken prairie and wetlands.  So we're going to leave that.  We produce annual crops for seed, honey.  
**[0:34:47-0:34:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:34:47):**  We have sheep.  We're starting to integrate pastured pork.  We have egg production and then we produce some broilers and stuff like that.  So it's a pretty integrated system.  Bringing small pieces and stacking enterprises onto those things.  
**[0:35:04-0:35:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:35:04):**  So last year we grew three different crops, borage, phacelia and hubam annual sweet clover,  which most farmers have never heard of.  But what they all have in common is that they're great cover crop species.  They're great in pollinator conservation and things like this.  They're all flowering species that just kick out nectar and pollen like you wouldn't believe.  
**[0:35:32-0:35:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:35:32):**  And they're all worth money.  Why would I plant corn, soybeans, wheat if the market just isn't there for those things?  Why would I?  So to me, I'd rather sell my crops by the pound than by the bushel.  And so these are, these are a little bit of higher risk crops, right?  
**[0:35:53-0:35:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:35:53):**  The borage, I've had a hell of a time trying to harvest.  We can grow it up through seed production, but it's really fussy on us.  It likes to shatter if you stare at it in a funny way.  And so I didn't get any crop revenue off of that field, but I still made more money than  my neighbor because I produced so much honey off of that field per acre.  
**[0:36:17-0:36:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:36:17):**  So the question that I always ask farmers that come up to visit is how often can you  lose a crop and make more money than the neighbors do?  And the answer is every single time when you're farming regeneratively, you know, every time  because you're stacking enterprises, your farm is a resilient business model.  You're not tying your entire livelihood to a single commodity.  
**[0:36:47-0:36:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:36:47):**  So ours is a complicated unit.  It's a complicated unit, but it seems to be working.  I'm really surprised to hear you say that you don't think we can farm regeneratively  on a scale greater than a hundred acres.  I'd love to, could you expand on that a little bit?  
**[0:37:03-0:37:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:37:03):**  Because I know that there are some growers who are both in the fruit and vegetable space  and in the broadacre crop space, such as Gabe Brown, for example, who are on a scale of  thousands of acres.  We're making some very substantial progress.  I think you can make some substantial progress.  
**[0:37:20-0:37:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:37:20):**  And I think that we can farm larger acreage is a lot better than what we are right now.  And we can apply some of these principles.  But when you're starting to talk about integrating, you know, livestock as a weed control measure  or just maintaining perennial fruit and nut production, annual crops, you know, a number  of different livestock, the amount of maintenance, at least in my experience, has to go into  
**[0:37:48-0:37:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:37:48):**  that system in order to keep it productive and keep it moving in such a way that the  ecological processes are hitting on many different aspects of the farm all the time.  Man, that's really difficult.  But what's also really important to realize is that the goal of farming at a conventional  scale, regeneratively, is probably misguided.  
**[0:38:16-0:38:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:38:16):**  I think that if you are farming in a regenerative nature and stacking those enterprises and  having those different tools at your disposal, then you don't need to farm at such a great  scale anymore.  The average farm size doesn't have to be 400 to 1,000 acres.  It can be closer to 100 to 150 acres.  
**[0:38:40-0:38:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:38:40):**  And you're still generating the revenue that's needed there.  I don't know, that's my thoughts, at least all of those things are debatable.  I do agree with you that there is a, the regenerative agriculture ecosystems, in my experience,  what I've observed, they're always more profitable.  We've got data to show.  
**[0:39:02-0:39:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:39:02):**  Yeah, they're always more profitable.  They are extremely climate resilient.  And there is something that I would refer to it as the heart to acres ratio.  That in order to, as we were discussing earlier, to be really observant and to really have  a connection to what is happening on your farm, you need to spend time with your feet  
**[0:39:25-0:39:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:39:25):**  on the ground and your hands in the soil and on the plants, not just riding a four wheeler  or pickup truck.  Definitely, there is a limitation to how many acres you can do that well with.  I also agree that, I've used the words before of scale appropriate.  There is, depending on the environment and the ecosystem that you're in, what is natively  
**[0:39:47-0:39:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:39:47):**  adapted to grow well there.  I think scale appropriate can mean different things in different places.  But generally when you have a smaller scale, you have a more intense production because  you have more layers on a single operation.  And that can add a tremendous amount of value.  
**[0:40:04-0:40:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:40:04):**  And I do also think it can be possible to do it on a larger scale, but you lose some  of those benefits that you've just been talking about.  Yeah, maybe putting a magic number on it isn't the most appropriate thing, but adopting the  philosophy that you can farm smaller better is really a goal that's kind of associated  with a regenerative production system, maybe a better way of explaining it.  
**[0:40:33-0:40:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:40:33):**  I was looking at the neighbor who was selling some land across the road from me and I was  looking at that 75 acres and then I was thinking to myself, I'm like, God, I got 43 acres right  now and I'm riding this all the time it feels like, or at least I could be.  Why would I expand out with another 75 acres?  Maybe I'll hit a certain threshold with this farm.  
**[0:40:59-0:41:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:40:59):**  I've only been here for three years or this'll be my third summer on it.  I'll see where it goes.  I'm really intrigued when you describe your farming operation, your primary crops, everything  is revolving around honeybees and honeybees and you've mentioned the importance of beekeeping.  What is your background with honeybees and talk a little bit more about that.  
**[0:41:20-0:41:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:41:20):**  So I'm an anthropologist and so bees are, it's sort of siloed, right?  It's not crops.  And a lot of, most people don't think of it as livestock either, and I would really beg  to differ.  Bees are just another form of livestock, aren't they?  
**[0:41:35-0:41:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:41:35):**  And so personally, you know, I've never been a farmer.  I've never been a beekeeper when we started this research farm.  I mean, I advise beekeepers and I advise farmers and scientists and we've done work on all  of these things.  But I just thought when I left the USDA to start Blue Dasher Farm, you know, and Anakdisus  
**[0:41:58-0:42:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:41:58):**  Foundation is our nonprofit.  It was kind of like, in order to really serve, I had to experience what the beekeepers and  the farmers were experiencing firsthand and tying our own livelihood to the operation  of a regenerative farming operation.  So I had never kept bees, you know, professionally.  
**[0:42:18-0:42:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:42:18):**  I'd never been a farmer professionally and I've learned a hell of a lot in the last three  years and I've made a hell of a lot of mistakes in the last three years.  But at the same time, it's given me such new perspective on just the diversity of skills  that farmers need and the experience.  And it also raised in my own consciousness the fact that, you know, some of the best  
**[0:42:41-0:42:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:42:41):**  naturalists that I've ever met are farmers and beekeepers.  You know, just observers of the natural world.  Awesome.  I like that because actually that means a lot to me personally because before I started  doing my current consulting work, starting advancing eco agriculture and working in the  
**[0:43:02-0:43:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:43:02):**  regenerative agriculture field, my dream was to be a full time beekeeper.  I had some over 30 colonies of honeybees from the age of 12 and I still have that as a hobby  today and I love it.  I love it.  There's nothing more invigorating, more invigorating than opening up a box of 10,000 stinging insects  
**[0:43:21-0:43:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:43:21):**  and just like, you know what, they don't care.  If you've got the right queen.  I had some Africanized hives that were mean as cuffs.  But this year they're really friendly and it's like, yeah, they kind of just let you  into this world that is almost unimaginable.  
**[0:43:40-0:43:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:43:40):**  You know, who could come up with honeybees?  I mean, who could imagine something like that and you know, science fiction or in Hollywood,  right?  There's something really special about that.  Unless you really screw things up.  
**[0:43:55-0:44:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:43:55):**  It's always a very calming experience for me to be out and working with honeybees because  you have to be in that calm space to really work with them well and not get things riled  up.  So it's a very calming experience as well.  Doc in general has taught that to me about myself.  
**[0:44:13-0:44:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:44:13):**  And how to respond to social interactions in my own life.  It's like when the sheep get out of the paddock, they want to be back in that paddock, but  you can't rush them, right?  You can't run after them.  You have to, you nudge them, right?  
**[0:44:30-0:44:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:44:30):**  And then you, and then if they don't, then they almost get back into their fence where  they want to be originally, but then they take off in another direction and you just  have to take a deep breath and just be like, all right, I'm going to go and do this again.  You know, very slowly, very methodically and teaches you patience.  It teaches you self-awareness and it's something that our society has lost.  
**[0:44:58-0:45:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:44:58):**  I think this is an important topic for us to speak a bit about because it's perhaps  something that farmers might not hear very often.  Can you tell us a little bit about, in the scope of your 43 acre farming operation, how  many colonies of honeybees do you have and what is the economic contribution of those  as a proportion of your overall farming operation?  
**[0:45:21-0:45:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:45:21):**  We have a hundred hives on our land when the bees are, so we had to build comb over the  first couple of years.  And that's something that I think a lot of farmers, a lot of new guys may not understand  that I didn't, is that a lot of the honey initially goes into comb production.  Right now, I mean, we're expecting to be able to pull down the 3000 pounds of honey off  
**[0:45:45-0:45:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:45:45):**  of our farm and then we sell it at $8 a pound and I can't keep it in stock.  I can't keep it in stock.  So our farm is really designed to produce honey.  That's revenue of $500 an acre without even considering all the other production and everything  else that is happening.  
**[0:46:06-0:46:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:46:06):**  That's right.  Plus I'm taking meat production off in terms of the sheep and pasture pork and then we're  also taking the annual crop seed off when we can get it.  But if I don't, you know what, that's not such a big deal.  I've got a pretty good system designed there.  
**[0:46:24-0:46:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:46:24):**  The honey production is the majority of our revenue at this point.  That's why we've kind of designed it the way we have.  I think that a lot of farmers and maybe even consumers don't even know what real honey  tastes like.  I mean, honey that you buy at the grocery store, that's not honey.  
**[0:46:41-0:46:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:46:41):**  No, it resembles corn syrup more than it does real honey.  Yes, absolutely it is.  Because a lot of the big box stores, they buy their honey from international markets  and China and India are dumping honey in North America right now and it's not honey.  It's like rice sugar that they've adulterated to get through customs.  
**[0:47:03-0:47:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:47:03):**  And so they're just dumping it that drives the price way, way down.  Beekeepers are just like, what are these guys doing?  And then when you do get clover honey, sometimes they produce that honey not off a nectar because  there isn't enough nectar in the environment anymore to support a lot of bee colonies.  And so a lot of beekeepers end up feeding their hives with sugar water or corn syrup  
**[0:47:23-0:47:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:47:23):**  water.  And that honey that's then created, it doesn't have the floral bouquet, the flavor and the  smell of what real honey is.  We don't feed our bees except we'll feed them honey during June when there's a dearth.  But there is almost nothing better than just like reaching into a beehive when it's still  
**[0:47:46-0:47:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:47:46):**  warm and that honey coming out, oh my gosh.  I'm totally with you on that.  I can really relate.  You know, honey has, people who are aware and educated about this are aware that honey  has different flavors, but feedback that I've received from buyers of honey that I've produced  
**[0:48:04-0:48:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:48:04):**  and that I've worked with is that this honey is different.  It makes my lips tingle.  It makes my mouth tingle.  I feel energized from it.  That's what real honey is supposed to be like.  
**[0:48:15-0:48:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:48:15):**  Well, that's right.  And it's good for you.  You know how good it is for you?  I mean, it jazzes up your immune system.  It's like, yeah, it's not at all.  
**[0:48:26-0:48:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:48:26):**  Honey bees and the decline in honey bees and the difficulty that we have.  I mean, I've never kept hives alive all winter yet.  I'm going to try something different this winter, but we can't keep them going.  And it's so discouraging for me to look at the learning disabilities that the bees have  adopted from the agrochemical exposure that they're getting out in the environment.  
**[0:48:47-0:48:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:48:47):**  I mean, my God, they're just the canaries in the coal mine here.  I think you have the capacity to offer a unique perspective on this with your background as  an entomologist and looking at agroecology.  Why are the honey bees dying?  You want to save the bees, you heal the soil.  
**[0:49:05-0:49:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:49:05):**  A number of pollinator groups have adopted that since I first started saying it, but  it's absolutely true.  I mean, the bee die off is totally a symptom of the simplification of our food system.  Lack of floral resources, lack of flowers, nectar, pollen for the bees to eat.  So they're nutritionally, they're starving.  
**[0:49:29-0:49:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:49:29):**  Then you've got all of the pesticide exposure.  When scientists have looked, we found 90 different pesticides in beehives.  Bees aggregate these things into the wax and their comb.  And so their larvae are constantly exposed to this whole suite of different agrochemicals  that we are being exposed to as well.  
**[0:49:52-0:49:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:49:52):**  And lo and behold, starving, poisoned bees get sick.  And so enter in the varroa mite, enter in the viruses, enter in the bacterial and fungal  diseases.  And it's just like a perfect storm.  But you can silo all of those issues, right?  
**[0:50:10-0:50:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:50:10):**  Oh, I'm going to, oh, the varroa mite, the varroa mite must be killing.  I'm going to work on the varroa mite, or I'm going to get rid of all these pesticides.  And I mean, we're just at the state where component research and component solutions  aren't going to get us where we've got to be.  It's got to be a systems level change.  
**[0:50:28-0:50:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:50:28):**  And that's been the direction that we push forward.  And the beekeepers get it.  A couple of thoughts for you on overwintering.  I'm sure you probably know more than I do.  No, I'm listening.  
**[0:50:40-0:50:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:50:40):**  What do you got?  I started doing something pretty interesting three years ago.  And I started berating myself as soon as I opened my mouth because I had 100% losses  last year.  So who am I qualified to have an opinion?  
**[0:50:55-0:50:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:50:55):**  But for the two years prior, I was actually successful overwintering.  And I learned a technique from an aeronautical engineer where he was dealing a lot with attempting  to remove the self-generated humidity from within the hive.  And he developed this idea of where he would remove the north sidewall frame and replace  it with a piece of marine board.  
**[0:51:18-0:51:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:51:18):**  And he'd do this all the way down throughout the entire colony to have basically a barrier  layer of the marine board between the marine board sidewall all the way down.  The principle was that if there was any condensation or humidity within the colony, it would accumulate  only between 100% of it would be in that crevice between the marine board and the sidewall  of the colony.  
**[0:51:41-0:51:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:51:41):**  It doesn't actually work that way.  It removes all of the humidity and the condensation from other parts of the colony.  That's been a big problem for us, for sure.  You're taking out a frame?  Yes, he was taking out one frame and then he basically cut it long enough so that it  
**[0:51:56-0:51:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:51:56):**  would fit all the way from the top of the colony.  He was using two deeps that would go all the way from the top here to the bottom board.  So he didn't want any splits and not see some marine board.  I'm going to try it.  I'll give it a shot.  
**[0:52:07-0:52:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:52:07):**  The other thing that I've been hearing, I'm going to try overwintering them as nucs in  one of our sheds this winter and see whether or not they have to replace the resources,  the resource frames every so often that way.  But I guess that they're able to regulate temperature a little bit better.  The problem is, and I think this is again, this probably is an artifact of a neonic exposure,  
**[0:52:32-0:52:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:52:32):**  is that that first frost, man, they just, they don't know how to form a ball in order  to conserve heat.  And so you see a major die off.  We lost half of the hides after the first frost.  They were going strong, going home and then boom, they just crashed.  
**[0:52:53-0:52:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:52:53):**  What happened?  And a couple of the beekeepers have said, well, I think they don't still know how to  form a ball anymore.  They can't remember.  That's really interesting because I have extensive family, cousins, aunts and uncles and all  
**[0:53:06-0:53:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:53:06):**  in the thumb of Michigan.  They have started putting their honeybee colonies in caches over winter and with incredible  success.  I mean, if they have a last three or four years, they've had 90 plus percent overwintering  success.  
**[0:53:23-0:53:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:53:23):**  That's kind of blew my mind.  What did they put them in?  Plastic calf hutches that you can think of them almost as a miniature greenhouse.  Protect them from the wind.  They're warmer during the winter months.  
**[0:53:34-0:53:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:53:34):**  I was in this blue, get cold, but they warm up pretty quickly whenever the sun hits them.  So five or six in a hutch or something like that.  You think?  Yes.  Actually I want to say three or four.  
**[0:53:46-0:53:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:53:46):**  Okay.  And that way the hive heat itself isn't going to get overwhelming either.  Is it?  Exactly.  What bothers me is that overwintering did not used to be this much of a challenge.  
**[0:53:58-0:54:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:53:58):**  I think, yeah, you've always lost a few hives if you will, were wintered up north, but this  just seems like nobody is successful.  I talked to all of the beekeepers in the region.  Nobody had their hives survived this last year.  Wow.  
**[0:54:12-0:54:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:54:12):**  That's bad.  I think there's something bigger going on, but well, I think we talked about a lot of  that today.  Not a lot of people want to hear it maybe, but it needs to be said.  Jonathan, thank you so much for sharing all of your insights.  
**[0:54:28-0:54:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:54:28):**  I've enjoyed this discussion tremendously and I'm sure many others will as well.  No, my pleasure.  My pleasure.  We've covered a lot of ground.  Awesome.  
**[0:54:37-0:54:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:54:37):**  All right.  All right.  Okay.  Thanks, Jaffe.  This podcast was brought to you by a great company that I work for, AEA, Advancing Eco-Agriculture,  
**[0:54:48-0:54:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:54:48):**  the leader in regenerative agriculture since 2006.  At AEA, we believe in challenging the status quo to find more profitable and regenerative  ways to grow crops.  We also believe that healthy plants are resistant to pests and disease and that to grow healthy  crops, we must first think different about agriculture, about empowering life instead  
**[0:55:06-0:55:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/ecosystem-diversity-prevents-insect-pressure-with-jonathan-lundgren/#t=0:55:06):**  of suppressing life, about regeneration versus degeneration.  To achieve this, we formulate and sell products that help growers produce higher quality yield  with less risk of crop failure.  In short, we help growers make more money with less risk.  Thanks for listening.  