
    ---
    title: Eliminating the Need For Synthetic Fertilizers with Kris Nichols
    ---

    ### Regenerative Agriculture Podcast  (2018-06-15)  
### Author(s): John Kempf  

**[0:00:00-0:00:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:00:00):**  Hi friends, I'm Jon Kampf, hosting this podcast. I am passionate about developing regenerative  agriculture systems that improve soil health, produce crops that are completely resistant  to diseases and insects, and produce fruit of such an exceptional quality that we can have  
**[0:00:16-0:00:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:00:16):**  a legitimate conversation about growing food as medicine. I've discovered that there are many  people with incredible knowledge and information about soil and plant systems and how to develop  regenerative agriculture systems. However, much of this knowledge and this information is scattered,  
**[0:00:33-0:00:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:00:33):**  it's found all over the place. Some of it has been published in peer-reviewed publications,  but there are many incredible stories and a lot of knowledge that has not been published  and that hasn't been shared with many people. I started Advancing Eco-Agriculture in 2006 to  
**[0:00:49-0:00:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:00:49):**  bring this knowledge together in a more coherent fashion and incorporate it into products and  growing systems that growers can easily put into practice. It's my personal mission to have these  regenerative agricultural systems become adopted globally and become the mainstream, the status  
**[0:01:05-0:01:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:01:05):**  quo against which all other growing systems are compared. To help achieve this goal, I want to  share the knowledge that we have learned in the last decade and make it available to everyone.  While we have developed products at AEA that embody the principles of regenerative agriculture  
**[0:01:22-0:01:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:01:22):**  systems and make them easier for growers to apply, this knowledge and these principles can be applied  anywhere. And when they are applied properly, they will always increase farm profitability  and resilience to climate stress. If you have any questions, suggestions, comments, or ideas,  
**[0:01:40-0:01:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:01:40):**  topics that you would like for me to discuss, please connect on LinkedIn or on Twitter,  where my username is at visionbuilder7, or you can also email me at john at johnkempf.com. I would  very much like to hear from you and to hear your feedback. Be sure to subscribe to this podcast,  
**[0:01:59-0:02:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:01:59):**  and thank you very much for listening. Enjoy the show.  Greetings, friends, and welcome to the Regenerative Agriculture podcast.  On this podcast, we explore the science and practical application of regenerative  
**[0:02:11-0:02:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:02:11):**  agriculture ecosystems, and talk about how to regenerate soil and crop health and quality  and how to increase farm profitability. In this episode, I had a very enjoyable discussion with  Dr. Chris Nichols, where we spoke about the value of developing soil fungal populations,  
**[0:02:31-0:02:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:02:31):**  developing climate resilient crops. And one piece that I found particularly intriguing was the  negative impact of synthetic fertilizer applications, particularly phosphorus and  nitrogen applications on soil biology, particularly on soil fungi, and the implications that has for  
**[0:02:50-0:02:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:02:50):**  developing truly regenerative agriculture ecosystems. Chris, you've done a lot of work  looking at soil biology and the impact of soil biology on plant performance and growing really  climate resilient crops. What are some of the highlights of the pieces that you have worked on  
**[0:03:10-0:03:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:03:10):**  over the years that are very memorable for you? Well, some of the most memorable highlights kind  of starting a little bit maybe chronologically was when I started at the University of Minnesota  as an undergrad and was able to do some research working in a laboratory where I  
**[0:03:33-0:03:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:03:33):**  discovered arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi. These are organisms that have relationships with  over 90% of the plants and most of crop plants are associated with mycorrhizal fungi and these  fungi help the plants to get nutrients and water from the soil in exchange for photosynthetically  
**[0:03:58-0:04:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:03:58):**  derived carbon. This is a very old, very important relationship that plants and fungi have had  and it was fascinating to me to see how interconnected these two organisms could be  and how much life depended on having these organisms work together. So that led me to  
**[0:04:26-0:04:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:04:26):**  want to continue to study these fungi and plant relationships into my graduate work. I grew up on  a farm and was involved in agriculture in various ways and farming. This was in the 80s, not totally  to date myself, but in the 80s and during that time farming and agriculture was very difficult  
**[0:04:52-0:04:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:04:52):**  and I think like many young people I didn't want to do what my parents were doing and  wanted to run away from the farm and although I was fascinated by these fungi I didn't want to get  into farming but life becomes very funny and I ended up falling back into agriculture and when  
**[0:05:11-0:05:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:05:11):**  I was able to get a position working for USDA, Agriculture Research Service in North Dakota,  and being able to work with the farmers like Gabe Brown in North Dakota who were doing  really fascinating innovative things that were taking some of the science that I had been  
**[0:05:37-0:05:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:05:37):**  learning about and researching in the laboratory and actually applying this in the real world.  I was seeing that the things that I had been discovering and thinking about in the laboratory  actually had connections in the real world and the things that I was questioning and couldn't  
**[0:05:59-0:06:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:05:59):**  fully understand how things were working, those questions I could start to see play out  in what these farmers were taking a look at. When I interviewed Gabe he made a comment and I'm  quoting from memory so it might not be perfect but in essence he said that today he is not  
**[0:06:21-0:06:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:06:21):**  losing any synthetic fertilizers on his farm and that is due to a comment that you made when you  visited his farm at one moment where you said that as long as he continues to use synthetic  fertilizers he can never expect to regenerate soil and plants to their full potential.  
**[0:06:40-0:06:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:06:40):**  I'm really fascinated by that comment. Could you describe for us a little bit of why you  believe that to be true? Well that really goes back with the research that I was doing in the  laboratory where we would see this very strong connection with the mycorrhizal fungi and the  
**[0:06:58-0:07:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:06:58):**  organisms that were in the soil and the potential that these organisms have for being able to  resolve the nutrient issues that plants have. What we could find was that in the laboratory we could  see that they could resolve those issues but when we were trying to see if farmers were willing to  
**[0:07:26-0:07:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:07:26):**  apply those in the field the system was still very much dependent upon utilizing a lot of synthetic  fertilizers and I couldn't fully understand why we thought that we needed to still be dependent  upon these synthetic fertilizers when what I was seeing in the laboratory was that we didn't really  
**[0:07:50-0:07:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:07:50):**  need to do that. When I looked at Gabe's system and the way that he was applying things and the  way that he was stimulating the biological activity I started to think that really he was  putting in the tools in place that were important for biological activity, reducing the amount of  
**[0:08:13-0:08:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:08:13):**  tillage that he was doing. In fact he had gone to a no-till system so a little bit of a  no-till system so eliminating soil disturbance, improving the crop rotation, utilizing cover crops,  making sure that he had plants growing as much as possible. So he was putting the tools into place  
**[0:08:34-0:08:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:08:34):**  that was stimulating the biological activity but he still wasn't optimizing fully the efficiencies  of the organisms that are in the soil especially the mycorrhizal fungi and that was really because  he was outsourcing the job of the mycorrhizal fungi the fact that they will provide the  
**[0:08:55-0:09:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:08:55):**  nutrients to the plants if the plants are required to give that photosynthetically derived carbon  to the mycorrhizal fungi and the consortium organisms that work with the mycorrhizal fungi  to get those nutrients and if you don't start that early enough in the process  
**[0:09:18-0:09:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:09:18):**  you're not going to be able to optimize that functionality and so that was the missing link  for Gabe that he needed to really optimize that functionality in order to be able to maximize  those efficiencies. One of the pieces that we have observed working with many vegetable farmers is  
**[0:09:40-0:09:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:09:40):**  they it's been standard practice and as I'm sure it is as well on many broadacre crops to apply  a soluble phosphorus fertilizer at planting and with the vegetable crops we know that when we  apply soluble phosphorus fertilizers we don't see the mycorrhizal colonization happening.  
**[0:10:00-0:10:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:10:00):**  So I think what you're describing if I'm understanding it correctly is that when you  apply the soluble phosphorus fertilizers then you essentially remove the need for the plant to have  a symbiotic relationship with mycorrhizae because they can already obtain a generous supply of  
**[0:10:16-0:10:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:10:16):**  phosphorus. Exactly again it becomes very critically important to work a lot with the timing.  If we are going to be adding amendments that the amendments that we add we time them appropriately  with the physiological needs of the plant so that we make sure that the plant is getting its needs  
**[0:10:41-0:10:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:10:41):**  realized when the plant has those needs. So initially for the plant the plant will essentially  when it's very young it sets what its maximum can be but then it has a period of time in which  it doesn't need to it can't you fully utilize the amount of fertilizer that in many of our systems  
**[0:11:08-0:11:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:11:08):**  we have applied because the seedling is very small. Later on when it goes into the reproductive  phase it has a very large nutrient demand in order to fulfill that maximum potential of what  the the grain fill potential might be or what its maximum yield potential might be. So what we want  
**[0:11:32-0:11:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:11:32):**  to do is we want to figure out how to work with that timing of the physiological needs of the  plant and making sure that we've timed it in such a way so that we are not outsourcing the job of  things like the mycorrhizal fungi too early in the growing season so that we keep the mycorrhizal  
**[0:11:57-0:12:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:11:57):**  fungi and the consortia of the organisms available to colonize the roots. We want to make sure the  plant has enough nutrients starting off so that the seed can germinate and grow in our fields and  that that young seedling can realize that optimum potential and then it won't be so over fertilized  
**[0:12:24-0:12:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:12:24):**  that it says I don't need if you don't need to have mycorrhizal fungi or other microbes feed you  because you have all your nutrients already supplied to you why would you give them why  would you pay for something you don't need everything is a supply and demand nothing is free  
**[0:12:48-0:12:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:12:48):**  we're taking a systems approach and nothing is free in this system what ends up happening  is we want to create a system in which the plant relies on having those organisms so that it allows  those organisms the mycorrhizal fungi to colonize the roots early on and pay them a little bit of  
**[0:13:13-0:13:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:13:13):**  photosynthetic carbon so that they'll colonize those roots and start supplying the nutrients  and also in addition to supplying nutrients in water supplying phosphorus as well as a number of  other nutrients including many micronutrients the mycorrhizal fungi can help with disease prevention  
**[0:13:36-0:13:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:13:36):**  especially root-borne pathogen prevention if they colonize the roots early enough in the growing  season so that can be really important in our crop production systems but then you have them growing  and they're able to optimize their efficiencies because they've been growing with the plant and  
**[0:13:56-0:14:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:13:56):**  building the consortium activity throughout the growing season so that they can grow and  source your activity throughout the growing season and so they'll be working with the plant  throughout the growing season helping to cycle nutrients in the rhizosphere environment providing  
**[0:14:18-0:14:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:14:18):**  the right nutrients at the right times when the plant has those demands and then when the plant  has the greatest demand later on during the reproductive phase oftentimes that's the most  stressful time for the plant it's also some of the hardest times for nutrient flow in the soil  
**[0:14:46-0:14:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:14:46):**  environment because frequently where we are growing our plants it's also the time in which  our soils are the driest and much of our nutrient movement as well as a lot of biological activity  is dependent on soil moisture and water and so you need to make sure that you've got a moist  
**[0:15:08-0:15:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:15:08):**  soil environment but we don't have a lot of precipitation events at this point in time so  this is you know mid-summer and so what we want is we want to have this activity where you have  these organisms in the rhizosphere and you don't have to have a lot of distance that you have to  
**[0:15:29-0:15:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:15:29):**  have nutrients or organisms moving around in large aqueous environments because it's happening  right around the roots you don't have to have a lot of water in that environment and so now you've  got a great level of efficiency. I'd like to come back to speak a bit more about the water piece but  
**[0:15:52-0:16:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:15:52):**  before we go there you spoke a bit of the negative impact that phosphorus can have on a micro as a  colonization and possibly I would expect also other microbes a question that I know many growers have  asked me is what are what other fertilizers might have a potentially damaging effect is it all  
**[0:16:16-0:16:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:16:16):**  soluble fertilizers which are those that we should be particularly certain to avoid? Well for the  mycorrhizal fungi phosphorus has been a very big key soluble fertilizer. Soluble fertilizer is going  to do the most damage to outsourcing those jobs that the microbial community has so as much as  
**[0:16:42-0:16:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:16:42):**  possible if you can avoid those soluble inorganic types of fertilizers. The organic fertilizers  are not going to have that same level of issue because for the organic fertilizers to work  they're being broken down by the microbial communities and those nutrients are being  
**[0:17:05-0:17:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:17:05):**  released by the microbial communities and then processed and cycled through and becoming available  and in addition to that we are finding that some of the proteins and the amino acids  are possibly be being taken up so in a nitrogen that is in a protein or an amino acid form  
**[0:17:32-0:17:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:17:32):**  can be taken up in some smaller quantities either directly by the roots we're not quite sure if that  happens but we have seen very good evidence that the fungi can act as a mediator to help to take up  those proteins and amino acids translocate those inside to the to the plant roots themselves.  
**[0:17:58-0:18:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:17:58):**  The piece that you just mentioned plant absorption root absorption of amino acids and the proteins  are really that's a really big deal in many cases where we have farms that have a generous supply of  of organic matter we have farms that we've worked with that have grown greater than 300  
**[0:18:15-0:18:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:18:15):**  bushels per acre of corn without a single pound of added nitrogen. Now that is not to say obviously  we have the nitrification cycle we're getting in the soil profile and I'm certain that even on  those soils there was ammonium and nitrate present even though none have been applied but in the  
**[0:18:33-0:18:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:18:33):**  testing that we have done it also appears that plants are absorbing amino acids and peptides  and those seem to contribute a great deal of energy to plant growth much more so proportionally  than nitrate or ammonium and so I think that's an opportunity to really grow higher yielding crops  
**[0:18:54-0:19:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:18:54):**  that we have not understood very well. And I would agree with that I mean I think that again  there were many things that we were discussing as scientists that we don't always think about  taking out into the field or thinking about making that connection to what's happening in the field  
**[0:19:14-0:19:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:19:14):**  and how some of these more complex activities may be occurring we just sort of accept  what we think as principles or as dogma or as this is just the way that it is this is how things  function and we don't go out there and ask new questions and challenge ourselves often enough  
**[0:19:39-0:19:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:19:39):**  in order to be able to see these other things that are happening and you know whether it's again  whether it's the plant roots themselves which may very well have ways of being able to absorb some  of these more complex molecules because we always thought that they absorbed very simple inorganic  
**[0:20:03-0:20:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:20:03):**  ions if they're able to absorb some of these more complex molecules or if that's mediated by  microbes especially by mycorrhizal fungi we have to recognize that this is something that we're  starting to see is actually happening and start discussing this as something because it starts  
**[0:20:28-0:20:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:20:28):**  to get us I think what for me what becomes critically important about this is it also gets  us away from the continuous argument for the use of synthetic fertilizers has always been  you have to use synthetic fertilizers you have to add in if you take something off you have to put  
**[0:20:49-0:20:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:20:49):**  new things in and they have to be in this inorganic form because that's the only way  plants can take them up and you have to do this otherwise you're going to mine your soils  and you know you look at farmers like you're talking about or when I was having these  
**[0:21:07-0:21:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:21:07):**  discussions with Gabe you know I said this to Gabe as far as not adding synthetic fertilizers  and there was never really a question in in my mind or in Gabe's mind as to if he was going to  mine his soils. There is so much evidence when you when you look at the geological profile of  
**[0:21:30-0:21:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:21:30):**  many of our agricultural soils most of our agricultural soils we have a virtually  inexhaustible supply of most of the macronutrients particularly phosphorus and potassium and I think  for all of the farmers and Gabe is a great example as he has worked as he has built a biology in his  
**[0:21:49-0:21:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:21:49):**  soil profile the level of available nutrients in his soil has continued to increase to the point  where it's today four times higher than it is on surrounding farms and multiple times higher  than it was when he started. Exactly and so those are the things that you know we have to be saying  
**[0:22:10-0:22:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:22:10):**  to ourselves that we're not going to be doing that but because we've always focused on that  inorganic component of things when you do something like what Gabe's doing if you're not  adding inorganic fertilizers people say you're going to mine your you're you're going to mine  
**[0:22:29-0:22:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:22:29):**  your soil your yields are going to decline and you're going to lose something and that's where  you know I guess for many for many of these things I don't want to I don't like arguing with people  I like to just sort of change the direction and the thought pattern into this is what's going on  
**[0:22:53-0:23:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:22:53):**  and if I can show you this other evidence of what's going on there isn't even really an argument  to be had we're not going to we're not going to argue about this you know I'll talk to people  about organic matter and you know there's been a long discussion of we can't change organic matter  
**[0:23:12-0:23:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:23:12):**  percentages in our lifetime and you talk to many soil scientists and many soil scientists that I  have a tremendous amount of respect for still believe that that's the case and you know I'll  have discussions with them and I'll be like I understand why you have that point of view  
**[0:23:35-0:23:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:23:35):**  you know this paradigm that you have your point of view based on is this idea that the old  humic material that we've always focused on that is the majority of organic matter can take  hundreds of years to form that's a highly decomposed product and that's the majority of  
**[0:23:59-0:24:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:23:59):**  the organic matter if that's what most of the organic matter is most of that if it's a highly  decomposed product that can't have the binding capacity the chemistry and the functionality  that you're attributing to organic matter well I think to a point that you made earlier  
**[0:24:20-0:24:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:24:20):**  agriculture and other as well as some other areas of science as well seems to maintain  an abundance of dogma and today we have a very substantial amount of evidence solid large scale  field scale evidence that we can in fact build organic matter quite rapidly in that in light of  
**[0:24:45-0:24:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:24:45):**  that very practical evidence we need to reconsider some of the theories that have existed before and  see where we need to re-evaluate completely agree with you I'd like to go back to the comments that  you made earlier regarding water and water use efficiency it's my understanding that  
**[0:25:08-0:25:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:25:08):**  micro-  access water in the soil profile and make it available that plants might not be able to access and they also  contribute perhaps drop resilience in other ways can you describe that for us a little bit  
**[0:25:29-0:25:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:25:29):**  yeah you're exactly right there are two different processes that are going on  one is the diameter of the fungal hyphae because they are much smaller in diameter than  the roots are they can actually colonize into new zones in the soil environment and access water  
**[0:25:56-0:26:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:25:56):**  that normally plant roots can't access so researchers in more arid environments have  been able to see this and you know we can see this in the natural world fungi are part of allowing  plants to grow on rocks they break down rock material they penetrate through that very dense  
**[0:26:22-0:26:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:26:22):**  environment and access water in very solid rocky types of environments this is a way you know you  see lichens growing on rocks and allowing trees to be able to grow basically on the sides of  mountains and and those types of things that happens because fungi are allowing for the roots  
**[0:26:47-0:26:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:26:47):**  to be able to grow through there and access and break through that material and it's that diameter  of the fungal hyphae penetrating through that dense material so that's one way in which that  happens the other way is the overall water use efficiency this is a way you know you see life  
**[0:27:08-0:27:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:27:08):**  growing on rocks and allowing we don't fully understand about soil and soil biology and about  plants and how plants grow and one of the most basic things with how plants grow is the fact  that we have no idea how much water a plant actually needs we water plants all the time we  
**[0:27:33-0:27:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:27:33):**  think plants need water we think we know how much we need to be watering plants we've done irrigation  studies but so much of that is more dependent upon the soil in which we're growing the plants  than how much water the plant actually needs because there is water needs on a cellular level  
**[0:28:00-0:28:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:28:00):**  how much water is in the cytoplasm of the plants in the xylem and the flow of the plants utilized  to move the minerals through the plants but how much water is then actually needed in the media  in the rhizosphere surrounding the plants in order for nutrients to get from that media  
**[0:28:28-0:28:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:28:28):**  from that media into the plant roots themselves and this is where it's critically important  to understand and recognize if you can get the relationship of the mycorrhizal fungi occurring  early enough in the plant growth that is going to allow you to create this network of fungal hyphae  
**[0:29:00-0:29:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:29:00):**  that can be essentially hundreds of miles long but it may only be a few feet around the plant  roots themselves what that does is that fills that environment so that wherever there may be  an atom of nitrogen or a molecule of nitrate or an amino acid or a potassium ion or a copper ion  
**[0:29:35-0:29:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:29:35):**  or whatever it is that the plant needs there is going to be a piece of hyphae that will be nearby  and what that does is it makes sure that there is a very short distance that that ion has to move  in water to reach the hyphae so that it can be then absorbed and once it gets into the hyphae  
**[0:30:05-0:30:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:30:05):**  it's all moving through water that is part of the water that's in within the cells of the fungi  and then once it reaches the plant roots it's all then within the cells of the plant  so you're efficiently now using water you only used a small amount of water  
**[0:30:28-0:30:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:30:28):**  in the soil environment and so the more that you can have this type of architecture designed  the more efficiently you're utilizing water in that environment if you were to imagine  that you fulfilled the nutrient requirements for the plant early on in the growing season  
**[0:30:53-0:31:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:30:53):**  and the plant basically didn't require the presence of the mycorrhizal fungi  so you didn't get the growth of this hyphal network and then later in the growing season  it started to get this hyphal network but the hyphal network now isn't very extensive because  
**[0:31:15-0:31:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:31:15):**  it hasn't been growing for very long and now the plant has a nutrient demand  the soil is very dry now you need to utilize more water in order to be able to try  and get those nutrients flowing now you're dependent on water that is in the bulk soil  
**[0:31:37-0:31:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:31:37):**  environment that the plant roots can access not on that which the mycorrhizal can access and i think  you mentioned another very key piece which is that when the mycorrhizal network establishes at the  beginning early in the plant's life you end up with a mycorrhizal network that substantially  
**[0:31:55-0:32:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:31:55):**  exceeds the root system size so you're extending out past the root system in some cases quite a  distance and they can access water that the plant roots themselves wouldn't be able to reach as well  exactly so you're gaining layers of efficiency and this is what has been you know so critical  
**[0:32:15-0:32:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:32:15):**  about this relationship and why these relationships have lasted for as long as they have  is because they have fulfilled these roles and continued to make themselves more and more  efficient so some of the things they've done to improve the efficiency is one of the unique  
**[0:32:38-0:32:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:32:38):**  relationships that has been established between mycorrhizal fungi and another organism  phosphate-solubilizing bacteria and these bacteria they will colonize the hyphae of mycorrhizal  fungi they essentially grow on the hyphae of the mycorrhizal fungi which is good for them  
**[0:33:03-0:33:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:33:03):**  bacteria are smaller even than the the fungal hyphae themselves which means that it's very  hard for you to move to a new environment if you can hitch a ride on a fungus it's nice  so they hitch a ride on fungi so that they can get to different environments and what they do  
**[0:33:24-0:33:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:33:24):**  is they will basically produce enzymes that release phosphate and they will get into the  environment and they release phosphate from minerals phosphate likes to be bound in soil  to either iron or aluminum or to calcium they produce an enzyme that releases that phosphate  
**[0:33:46-0:33:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:33:46):**  now the phosphate will be solubilized it will stay soluble for a brief period of time it again  can become bound up again but because it's solubilized near the fungal hyphae the fungi  absorb it and then transport that through the fungal hyphae inside the root inside the hyphae  
**[0:34:08-0:34:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:34:08):**  to the roots of the plant and so it's become a very efficient process that phosphate-solubilizing  bacteria gets carbon from the plant so the fungus shares some of its carbon that it got from the  plant that's how it sort of pays the bacteria for the job the bacteria did and again because this  
**[0:34:33-0:34:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:34:33):**  happens right outside of the hyphal wall it takes very little water instead of the bacteria being  from a microbial scale maybe just a couple of micrometers but for us this is like you know  being several miles away but for you know a bacteria this is just maybe a couple of micrometers  
**[0:34:53-0:35:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:34:53):**  and it was a process on our scale let's say a fungus and the phosphate is getting solubilized  in the neighboring town and so now you need to figure out a way to get a column of water to flow  from the neighboring town to your farm to bring the phosphate instead you now have the bacteria  
**[0:35:17-0:35:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:35:17):**  at the end of your driveway fixing the phosphate for you so all you have to do is get the column  of water to go to the end of your driveway and bring it to your house this is this is fascinating  because what you're describing if i'm understanding you correctly is that mycorrhizae not only have a  
**[0:35:39-0:35:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:35:39):**  symbiotic relationship with plants they also have a symbiotic relationship with in the other direction  with phosphorylizing bacteria and they are they're not only providing carbon and sugars but they're  also providing water to the bacteria is that correct well they're not necessarily providing  
**[0:35:59-0:36:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:35:59):**  water i mean they could provide water if water is needed the water comes with the carbon because for  the carbon to move out to the to the bacteria so the water is is there in that environment but the  difference between saving water for phosphate mobilization from having to utilize the amount  
**[0:36:23-0:36:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:36:23):**  of water that would take to mobilize phosphate from the end of your driveway as opposed to  mobilizing phosphate from the neighboring town much less required exactly when we're starting  to rely more on the microbial community and so what i was trying to tell gabe is he started to  
**[0:36:45-0:36:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:36:45):**  tap into these systems and this is one that we know about from research with mycorrhizal fungi  and phosphate-solubilizing bacteria we know that there's a similar connection that mycorrhizal  fungi make when they co-colonize you'll have roots of a legume and a non-legume plant  
**[0:37:13-0:37:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:37:13):**  that will be colonized by the same fungus so a strand of hyphae can colonize a legume plant and  non-legume plant and can transfer nitrogen from the legume plant to the non-legume plant and again  there's no water loss because all of that that nitrogen fixation is happening in the roots of  
**[0:37:39-0:37:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:37:39):**  the legume plant it's all flowing through the water that's in the cells of the fungus  and the plant roots and then you don't have to waste water so for you know gabe who was  growing things in a semi-arid environment if he truly wanted to make his system the most  
**[0:38:03-0:38:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:38:03):**  efficient as possible he needed to quit providing synthetic nutrients and optimize what the  organisms in the soil and the consortia and relationships that they could provide as well as  mixed cultures of plants could provide we know that plants like flax and buckwheat are also  
**[0:38:34-0:38:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:38:34):**  important in being able to help to move nutrients between other plants in the whole entire system  so flax is another one that's really important it's not a legume but we've seen with labeling  studies some micronutrients move between flax plants and other plants through mycorrhizal fungi  
**[0:39:02-0:39:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:39:02):**  as there have been demands it's intriguing that we have plant to plant transfer of nutrients  and energy sources all the various projects and research that you've done what has been something  that really surprised you the thing that really surprised me was sort of a little bit indirectly  
**[0:39:24-0:39:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:39:24):**  i knew it but it didn't hit me as strongly until a few years back and it was actually something  that that happened on a personal level i ended up and i apologize i'm going to go off on a little  bit of a tangent i i ended up having a thyroid cancer and your thyroid controls your metabolism  
**[0:39:50-0:39:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:39:50):**  your body's ability to process carbon and i had to get my thyroid removed and then they needed to  wait for a while and not allow my body to have the synthetic hormone that normally they'll give you  so that your body knows how to metabolize carbon they wanted to essentially try and get if there  
**[0:40:15-0:40:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:40:15):**  were any remaining cancer cells in my body after they removed my thyroid they wanted those cancer  cells to replicate so when they did the radiation treatment they could kill them all and they  could kill them and what happened was my body started not being able to function very well i  
**[0:40:36-0:40:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:40:36):**  couldn't think very well and it made me think about how the whole entire agro ecosystem functions  again going back to this whole thing with carbon and carbon flow through all of these organisms  and so this whole pay-as-you-go type of a system this carbon exchange was so essential because  
**[0:41:05-0:41:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:41:05):**  without carbon nothing works and if you can't get carbon flowing from one organism to another  organism it doesn't function and so again kind of going back to the work that i had been doing with  my body i would say what was missing he was doing the no-till he was doing the crop rotation  
**[0:41:32-0:41:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:41:32):**  he was doing the cover crops and those types of things but he was missing the fact that he was  cutting off the payment of carbon to the soil organism and so everything from then on for me  was just a matter of time. So what discussions i would have with farmers on what is it that you're  
**[0:41:57-0:42:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:41:57):**  missing that's stopping the payment flowing to the right organisms in the system are you not growing  cover crops is your rotation not complex enough are you doing tillage so that the the system has  a building process as opposed to an enhancement process how is the carbon flowing and being  
**[0:42:23-0:42:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:42:23):**  metabolized what do you believe to be true about modern agriculture that many other people don't  believe to be true or that is perhaps not mainstream i believe that we have the capacity  to feed at least 14 billion people which is way beyond where our current population nutrient-dense  
**[0:42:51-0:43:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:42:51):**  food and at the same time to have a high quality of life and to maintain and enhance our ecosystem  services yeah i absolutely agree and i would say in fact we already produce enough food to  probably feed 12 to 14 billion people but that we have a distribution problem not a production  
**[0:43:21-0:43:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:43:21):**  problem but there is in continuing with with the the essence of what you described there is  so much untapped potential every crop that we are growing has untapped genetic potential that  there is there still exists with the genetics that we already have today on many crops for  
**[0:43:44-0:43:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:43:44):**  us to increase yields anywhere from 30 to upwards of 100 i believe on those crops so  i completely agree that we have we have the capacity to do so much more we already have  the knowledge we have the information there is still there's still a lot that we don't know  
**[0:44:02-0:44:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:44:02):**  there's still a lot that we need to learn but we already know enough to make a really substantial  difference i i totally agree with you you know as far as how much we produce i think the biggest  thing that we're missing now is the nutritive quality of what we're producing because we're  
**[0:44:21-0:44:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:44:21):**  losing that connection of the nutritional value many of our important amino acids  antioxidants what we've always referred to as sort of polyphenolics and phytonutrients  are actually more tied to the soil biology and soil microbiology and that's what we need to be  
**[0:44:48-0:44:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:44:48):**  tapping back into i'd love to unwrap that just a little bit more because this is something that  we've observed and that i realized as well and i haven't seen it being explored very well in the  literature we have observed that when we have really aggressive biology in the in the rhizosphere  
**[0:45:07-0:45:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:45:07):**  profile that there is a much greater production of all these what are generally referred to as  plant secondary metabolites all the terpenoids the phytoalexins and all these biophylatoids  etc all the aromatic compounds that plants produce and so forth so based on the work that you have  
**[0:45:26-0:45:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:45:26):**  done what is the impact of biology on producing higher levels of these compounds and plants  well there are two things that are going on one is there are many compounds that are actually coming  directly from soil microbes especially many fungi that produce many of these compounds  
**[0:45:49-0:45:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:45:49):**  and then those compounds are finding their way into the food chain through plants so the plants  are taking in many of these compounds that are actually originally produced by microorganisms  that would be fascinating because that's another example of plants absorbing complete compounds  
**[0:46:10-0:46:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:46:10):**  rather than ions right and you know we're not again quite sure how this happens some of this  we do know is mediated by fungi especially root colonizing fungi either the arbuscular  mycorrhizal fungi or the ectomycorrhizal fungi so there's a compound that we started working with  
**[0:46:31-0:46:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:46:31):**  when i was still at the Rodale Institute called ergothein that has been found not just in plants  but also in animal tissue and so in chicken livers in parts of animals that find its way into again  what we're eating and it's because of the fact that those animals are eating plants that have  
**[0:46:59-0:47:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:46:59):**  high concentrations of these fungi growing in the soil and so you know being able to take a look at  how we could enhance those relationships or what management techniques impact those relationships  and one of the things that we're starting to find when we look at those management impact  
**[0:47:21-0:47:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:47:21):**  you know you're talking about these secondary compounds that are formed and again going back  to this whole idea of carbon and where carbon flows and how carbon moves in the system  what ends up happening especially on a microbial level and especially for fungi when your job  
**[0:47:47-0:47:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:47:47):**  is to your first primary job the first way in which you get paid from the plant is to satisfy  the nutrient needs of the plant the first thing you're going to do is make sure that you're  going to do is make sure that you can provide the maximum amount of nutrients that the plant needs  
**[0:48:14-0:48:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:48:14):**  and I think that's always why things like the mycorrhizal fungi were tied to something like  phosphorus because phosphorus was so unavailable in the soil and it was it's a it's a nutrient  unavailable and a nutrient that was something that the plant needed in abundance so it was  
**[0:48:36-0:48:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:48:36):**  something that we could see a pretty direct relationship to when it came to some of the  micronutrients and to water and some of the other things that mycorrhizal fungi also provide to the  plant that took a little bit more time and a little bit more research to take a look at that  
**[0:48:56-0:49:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:48:56):**  didn't mean that that's not as important as phosphorus it just meant that what we first  started looking at was phosphorus because again overall our focus when it came to plant nutrition  so much focus has always been on you know sort of the big three NPK nitrogen potassium and phosphorus  
**[0:49:18-0:49:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:49:18):**  yeah phosphorus was was always a tough one in the soil because it's immobile so you know that  became a big key so again you know kind of going back to that we just always did these studies  where it was you know you manipulate the concentration of phosphorus and you see how that  
**[0:49:40-0:49:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:49:40):**  affects colonization and you see how that affects plant growth and those types of things that are  that are going on but we're starting to see now that other things are actually happening as well  and again when the fungus is reliant upon satisfying nutrient needs the first thing  
**[0:50:04-0:50:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:50:04):**  the fungus is going to put energy into is creating a better hyphal network  extending that network as far as it needs to to make sure that it gets the nutrient demands  satisfied so that it can then get as much carbon as it can and then if it has the network established  
**[0:50:29-0:50:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:50:29):**  well then it starts to do some of the secondary activity you can do things like enhancing that  network a little bit more making sure that part of that network has some rigidity to it so some  of the hyphae you'll invest a little bit more into making sure that some of the hyphae has  
**[0:50:51-0:50:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:50:51):**  some secondary compounds as part of the hyphal wall structure so it doesn't fall apart as easy  most of the hyphae when you first create it is very ephemeral it doesn't last very long  you don't put a lot of energy into it and then you know you if it's going to stick around a little  
**[0:51:10-0:51:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:51:10):**  bit longer you don't get as much disturbance with tillage or things like that then you build up a  more resilient network you start making soil aggregates with that more resilient network  you start investing and releasing more carbohydrates more sugars to attract  
**[0:51:30-0:51:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:51:30):**  phosphate-solubilizing bacteria and consortia of other organisms creating what is referred to  as sort of a mycorrhizosphere organisms around the fungal hyphae that starts to develop more  of the soil aggregate structure all of those things start happening part of creating that  
**[0:51:51-0:52:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:51:51):**  more rigid hyphal network is creating some of these secondary compounds so the formation on  the part of the arboreticular mycorrhizal fungi some of the initial work that I had done my PhD  and masters on was looking at glomalin and glomalin is a glycoprotein produced by arboreticular  
**[0:52:15-0:52:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:52:15):**  mycorrhizal fungi and what we found was that glomalin wasn't always immediately produced  that the more that you had a system that was a no-till system or an undisturbed system that had  perennial crops in it or that had cover crops in it the more glomalin you saw produced so it was  
**[0:52:42-0:52:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:52:42):**  one of those secondary compounds it was kind of like you needed more carbon in order to be able  to get it to be produced so again that makes sense it's a large complex biomolecule if the first  thing you need to do is make sure that you do your primary job which is getting nutrients  
**[0:53:01-0:53:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:53:01):**  you make a good network to get the nutrient if you make a good network then you now have  the energy reserves you make secondary compounds and glomalin from the perspective of the fungus  helped with some of the hyphal wall rigidity it allows potentially allows the hyphae to penetrate  
**[0:53:24-0:53:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:53:24):**  air water interface zones those types of things so that was important to the hyphal structure  and that is also something that we find those secondary compounds what they do for hyphal wall  structure is also what helps to classify them as antioxidants and polyphenolics and some of the  
**[0:53:51-0:53:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:53:51):**  phytochemicals that are important for human cell wall integrity and some of our our own  health benefits so this is what we're seeing yeah chris we you've we've spoken of a number  of different topics uh mycorrhizal fungi the soil microbiome many different pieces that have tied  
**[0:54:12-0:54:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:54:12):**  together and i'm certain that growers will want to explore some of these topics more deeply are  there any resources that you recommend frequently to growers so i have uh you know i have some  you know i have some different things and i i guess i encourage growers to go out there and  
**[0:54:36-0:54:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:54:36):**  really kind of explore a number of different types of resources that are out there you know if you're  interested in in some of these things i mean i do a lot of reading through scientific literature so  you can plug your way through scientific literature but there have been a few authors  
**[0:54:55-0:55:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:54:55):**  that have done i think a good job of summarizing some things and they have some good references  that will point you to some scientific literature and david montgomery is a very good author who does  a good job of like i said having some good reference lists and judith schwartz who uh wrote  
**[0:55:18-0:55:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:55:18):**  a book called cows save the planet who also has done a book called water in plain sight which is a  really interesting book about some of these water relationships and some of these other issues that  we touched on there again you know providing some reference materials and christen olson who did the  
**[0:55:40-0:55:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:55:40):**  soil will save us has also done some work with that again providing some reference lists one of  the books that and this is a can be a little bit of a difficult book to to slug your way through  but it opens up some interesting topics to things one of the books that sort of was one of the topic  
**[0:55:59-0:56:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:55:59):**  areas or books that changed my life was a biogeochemistry book by um williams lessinger  and what i like is these topics that interface not just biology but biology and chemistry  and geology and physics i was just stating to a colleague of mine the other day that i consider  
**[0:56:24-0:56:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:56:24):**  myself to be a physical biogeochemist because just being a soil scientist that's kind of what  you have to do is look at all of these interfaces and so that's what i would encourage growers to do  i've always thought of farmers ranchers and growers to be renaissance people that function  
**[0:56:48-0:56:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:56:48):**  at the interfaces of so many different occupations and so it's hard to point to one particular topic  but explore a number of different things and a number of different resources and how they all  interface and work together wonderful chris thank you so much for sharing your wisdom and knowledge  
**[0:57:11-0:57:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:57:11):**  of the things that you've learned i really enjoyed this discussion and uh wish you success in the  work that you're doing we look forward to having you back on the podcast soon thank you so much  this podcast was brought to you by a great company that i work for aea advancing eco  
**[0:57:28-0:57:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:57:28):**  agriculture the leader in regenerative agriculture since 2006 at aea we believe in challenging the  status quo to find more profitable and regenerative ways to grow crops we also believe that healthy  plants are resistant to pests and disease and to grow healthy plants we must first think in a  
**[0:57:49-0:57:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:57:49):**  different way about agriculture about empowering life instead of suppressing life about regeneration  and also about regeneration and also about the growth of the generation versus degeneration to  achieve this we formulate and sell products that help growers produce higher quality yield with  
**[0:58:08-0:58:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:58:08):**  less risk of crop failure in short we help growers make more money with less risk if you would like  to learn more about our programs and systems call jason stole a highly regarded aea consultant at  6603 extension 300 again the number is 800-495-6603 extension 300 mention the code podcast 10  
**[0:58:36-0:58:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/eliminating-the-need-for-synthetic-fertilizers-with-kris-nichols/#t=0:58:36):**  and get a special incentive with your first order thank you for listening  