---
title: Episode 76 Tim Parton
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### Regenerative Agriculture Podcast  (2021-09-30)  
### Author(s): John Kempf  

**[0:00:00-0:00:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:00:00):**  Hi friends, this is John and this is the Regent of Agriculture podcast where we talk about the  agronomic sciences and the cultural management practices that regenerate plant health, soil  health, and farms financial health as well as ultimately public health where we can have  
**[0:00:15-0:00:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:00:15):**  conversations about growing really healthy food. My guest for this episode is Tim Parton who is a  farmer in the UK. Tim has been on a really interesting journey for some time adopting  regenerative agriculture practices and principles. Tim thank you for being here with us today. I'm  
**[0:00:32-0:00:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:00:32):**  really excited to learn more about your story and the journey that you've been on. Can you tell us  a little bit about your farming context? What's the climate like? What crops are you growing?  And what has your journey been like on your operation over the last decade or so?  
**[0:00:45-0:00:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:00:45):**  Thanks John, well it's a pleasure. It's always nice to spread the word. My journey probably  started in 2009 but I'd always had an interest in soil really prior to that and I could never  understand how farmers could abuse the one attribute that they relied on the most and  
**[0:01:03-0:01:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:01:03):**  yet it was always left to last in quite often the cases. So from 2009 I started to go down the strip  till route and my soils jumped, worm numbers came forward and things started to work. By 2015 I  realised I was still moving too much soil in my mind. I'd got very interested in biology by this  
**[0:01:22-0:01:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:01:22):**  time. I'd started playing around with using biology in 2012 and I'd had some fantastic results.  So in 2015 I made the jump just to direct drilling and the big thing for me there was being able to  get biology down next to the seed so I adapted the drill straight away to be able to do that.  
**[0:01:41-0:01:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:01:41):**  These days I farm pretty much without fungicides. I'm a total believer if we get the nutrition  right the plant won't get ill. If that plant's balanced the disease pests just won't look at it.  If they do I will still use biology to take control of disease coming into that plant  
**[0:01:59-0:02:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:01:59):**  but the biology really is a result and I've got it wrong all the climate's been against me.  I grow quite a variation of crops here so I'm about 50-50 winter autumn sort of drilling  and spring cropping. So on the spring cropping I'm always getting cover crops in there  
**[0:02:16-0:02:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:02:16):**  with as much variation as I can because I'm a real big believer the more variation I've got  above ground the more variation I've got below ground we're going to be feeding different  microbes and really getting that soil moving again. The rotation here I'll be as varied as I  
**[0:02:31-0:02:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:02:31):**  possibly can so I'll have winter wheat which is 4 million for bread making. I'll have winter oil  seed rape or canola as you would probably know it more as. I'll grow spring barley for for malting  to make beer. I'll grow spring beans which are on a seed contract. I grow spring lupins again which  
**[0:02:49-0:02:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:02:49):**  are on a seed contract but I'm a big fan of the lupin it just does so much for soil I haven't  found a crop quite like lupins other than grass that improves soil so much more and I think a lot  of farmers in the UK should be growing protein because it seems madness in pork protein halfway  
**[0:03:05-0:03:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:03:05):**  around the world when we could be growing a good lot of air and reducing that carbon footprint.  I'll grow spring goats and as I say I've also got grass in the rotation which I'm making for  haylage for horses because we're quite close to Wolverhampton Birmingham so there's a big  
**[0:03:21-0:03:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:03:21):**  horse population around here and that grass gets rotated around the farm so it's a real good carbon  sequencer and a real good way of improving that soil. What does your climate look like and what  parts of the US might that compare with in terms of temperature and rainfall? I don't know what  
**[0:03:38-0:03:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:03:38):**  we'd compare with rainfall I normally average 27 to 30 inches the last couple of winters we've  been a bit higher and summer temperatures would typically be around that 23 this year we hit 30  but it was a very some very hot days here we sort of broke some of the records for those temperatures  
**[0:03:54-0:03:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:03:54):**  but that would be sort of around the norm we're quite wet because we're in the west of the country  so we've wetted them what the east of the UK would be. This year I've missed out on a lot of the rain  I was like a desert there was rain all around me and it just didn't want to come anywhere near me  
**[0:04:07-0:04:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:04:07):**  but that's a different story. You mentioned that you are not using any herbicides anymore  and you also hinted at not using any fungicides and insecticides I'm really intrigued by what  that transition looked like. I'm still using some herbicides John I've reduced it I don't use any  
**[0:04:25-0:04:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:04:25):**  pre-emergence herbicides since moving to this system and I've improved my soils I don't really  get the grass weeds I had a little bit of brome coming this spring because we were so dry and cold  crops didn't get going the soil was left open so mother nature decided to put something there for  
**[0:04:40-0:04:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:04:40):**  me but other than that you know instead of sort of like doing pre-emergence and probably another  autumn herbicide I'm now down just to spring herbicide on wheat which is a massive saving from  where I used to be. I haven't used insecticides for six years now and that to me was a real  
**[0:04:59-0:05:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:04:59):**  breakthrough I mean once you get your natural predators working you get that plant balanced  there just isn't the need to use insecticides I mean my canola to put it in your term of what you  call it I drilled it this year probably two weeks ago three weeks ago the field was absolutely  
**[0:05:16-0:05:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:05:16):**  crawling with flea beetle they were everywhere they were in the barley as we've combined the  crop the grain store was full of flea beetle they were just everywhere and the student helping me  said you can't possibly put oil seed rape into that condition and I said well as long as the  
**[0:05:30-0:05:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:05:30):**  plant's balanced they're not going to be able to feed on it because the sugars are just going to  be too thick they're just going to collapse and they're just they're just going to have indigestion  they're going to leave and sure enough yes you can see where one or two have tasted it but it's  
**[0:05:42-0:05:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:05:42):**  just not for them and they've left and I've got a good crop of canola coming forward it's keeping  that plant balanced and understanding why that pest is there and in my experience nine times out  of ten that pest is there because we've caused it to be there we've created a problem that mother  
**[0:05:58-0:06:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:05:58):**  nature knows is a problem and so she's reacting to it for you know to save that problem getting any  worse that's how I always look at things. So this is fascinating you're offering a really fascinating  example of flea beetle presence in a field I mean it's this common perception that getting canola  
**[0:06:14-0:06:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:06:14):**  seedlings off to a healthy start without strong flea beetle pressure is unheard of there's no way  of managing that or controlling that without using neonicotinoids as seed treatments. What are the  tools or the management practices that you have used to accomplish that outcome what do you  
**[0:06:30-0:06:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:06:30):**  attribute your success to in producing flea beetle resistant seedlings? Because I've got the liquid  applicator on the drill which I've put on and the guy called Trevor Tappin Tappin engineering  helped me build it or he designed the bulk of it we work together a lot I'll give him problems  
**[0:06:45-0:06:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:06:45):**  and he gives me the solution and it works really well. So one cycle bit was able to do that John  then when I'm drilling I'll put diatomaceous earth down there which obviously gets converted  into monosolic acid so that's already making that cell wall stronger so it's making it more  
**[0:07:01-0:07:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:07:01):**  difficult. I'll then put a balance of nutrition down which we normally solve for molybdenum and  boron magnesium down there just to help that plant and give it the ingredients it wants to start and  process the sugars and then I'll also use a lot of humic acid because that plant sucks that humic  
**[0:07:18-0:07:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:07:18):**  acid in it will just be able to convert those sugars into more complex sugars so that it's just  not going to be a problem those flea beetle just aren't going to be able to cope with that plant  growing and this year has really proved it even though I thought oh I might be pushing it this  
**[0:07:31-0:07:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:07:31):**  year with the amount we got but they just left wasn't suitable it wasn't the right food and  they've moved on. Wow that is incredible so how close is your liquid application to the seed and  when you think about a seed being planted and germinating it's often thought that the majority  
**[0:07:46-0:07:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:07:46):**  of the nutrition comes from the seed itself for the first week or two so how quickly are these  young seedlings tapping into the nutrients that you're applying? I've always had the same philosophy  that you know that seed's got everything it needs to start off and I don't disagree with that but  
**[0:08:01-0:08:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:08:01):**  as it's going to be moving forward I want to make sure it's balanced from day one. With having the  applicator I drop it right on top of the seed in the seed trench so it's coated around it. If I've  brewed up biology and put down there as well the biology has already made contact with that seed  
**[0:08:17-0:08:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:08:17):**  and so it's all starting to work from day one in my mind and so this year it's just proved my  theory right and the results are fantastic in my mind. With that I've always had great successes  I've never stopped growing canola a lot of farmers over here have stopped growing canola because flea  
**[0:08:32-0:08:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:08:32):**  beetle was so bad I've never stopped and I've had various comments that oh it's because you're  further west you haven't got as big a flea beetle or they haven't found or you've been lucky but  this year there was no doubt I was swamped out with flea beetle they were everywhere  
**[0:08:47-0:08:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:08:47):**  and I haven't lost a plant to flea beetle at all. That's pretty incredible what about insect control  and other crops if you haven't used in insecticides in six years what have been your major pests that  you have overcome on some of your other crops? The other big one really is BYDV and again I don't  
**[0:09:05-0:09:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:09:05):**  put the same nutrition down there I do put humic acid down I put a little bit of nutrition down  with spring cropping because it's moving so forward and I think it's important to have  that nutrition there. Winter cropping I don't tend to bother I put humic acid down and I will brew up  
**[0:09:21-0:09:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:09:21):**  a little biology so I normally brew up some phosphorous releasing bacteria sometimes some  nitrogen fixing bacteria and some trichoderma just so as I'm putting a balance down there I'm  probably at the stage now where I don't need to do that because the soils have moved on that far  
**[0:09:35-0:09:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:09:35):**  and they're functioning they're very healthy. I do extract compost as well I'm playing around with  that one because the more variation I think we can get in to that back into that soil because  we've been killing everything for the last 70 years and I think it's important just to be able  
**[0:09:49-0:09:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:09:49):**  to introduce the microbes back because we don't know what we've killed and we still don't know  what there is there so compost to me a good healthy compost has probably got more answers  than just brewing up the relatively rude microbes if that makes sense. For those of our listeners  
**[0:10:04-0:10:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:10:04):**  who are not familiar with the acronym of BYDV can you tell us what that is? Yeah it's barley yellow  dwarf virus and aphids carry it around with them so not all aphids but some aphids do so as they  start to feed on the plant they infect the plant with the virus and then the plant becomes very  
**[0:10:21-0:10:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:10:21):**  stunted and especially in the spring it'll look like a big elephant has just walked across the  field and there's just big holes everywhere of crop if you've got it. There's always a worry when  you first leave the insecticide out because I've been brought up that oh while you're going through  
**[0:10:36-0:10:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:10:36):**  to shut the insecticide in you don't want to get BYDV they're always working on that fear factor  so when you step out from that sort of set of being safe in the flock and doing the same as  everybody else it's always a little bit nerve-wracking so I do walk my crops probably  
**[0:10:51-0:10:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:10:51):**  more than ever because I'm always looking I'm more relaxed these days because I know I haven't got a  problem. I just recently combined my lupins and I was just cleaning the combine off as I came out  the field and I looked back and the field was just a mass of cobwebs but those spiders are there  
**[0:11:07-0:11:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:11:07):**  they're working for me 24 7 and because I haven't been killing everything off they're just getting  stronger and stronger so in the autumn you walk out in the morning when you walk through a crop  you'll come out the field and your shoes are just white with cobwebs because they're there my  
**[0:11:23-0:11:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:11:23):**  defense system my guards are on duty and they're far better than any insecticide in my mind.  Yeah when you see those fields covered with cobwebs in the fall it really raises the question of  what is the biomass what is the volume of insects required to sustain that population because it's  
**[0:11:42-0:11:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:11:42):**  a pretty extraordinary population I've seen it so those are pretty awesome photos. Exactly and  that's why you know I like to see one or two aphids about because everything's got to eat  it's just being in balance with nature we haven't got to create this imbalance it's everything was  
**[0:11:54-0:11:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:11:54):**  functioning perfect until we started to balls it all up for want of a better word as human beings  it's four million years you know 30 300 million years this has all been evolving and then along  comes human being and saying it's all right we'll take it from now we know what we're doing and  
**[0:12:10-0:12:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:12:10):**  we didn't have a clue and it's only now where we're starting to repair some of us are starting  to repair that damage that has been done for so long and we've done so much damage in such a small  time in my mind. Your comment reminds me of an experience that we had on a high tunnel tomato  
**[0:12:27-0:12:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:12:27):**  operation in eastern Pennsylvania where when we first got there this farmer had been doing a lot  of work with biological management and introducing beneficials his tomato leaves were covered with  beneficials as in we counted on some leaves as much as 50 to 70 beneficial insects per leaf  
**[0:12:45-0:12:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:12:45):**  it was quite remarkable and after working with him for a year or two on nutrition management I  think it was the second year that we were working with him on managing his nutrition all of a sudden  the beneficial population dropped dramatically it didn't disappear entirely but it dropped  
**[0:13:01-0:13:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:13:01):**  dramatically because there were no longer aphids and spider mites present there was no longer  enough of a food source there to sustain the really large population that had been there  historically so it was really intriguing to observe how those population dynamics shifted  
**[0:13:16-0:13:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:13:16):**  and changed with quantity of the beneficial and the predators present based on the presence or  absence of their food source. Totally agree I think that's what's happened here you know I  still get slugs for instance but because the plant is more balanced now there isn't the polyamides  
**[0:13:31-0:13:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:13:31):**  there so the slugs aren't coming in it's yes I see the odd one but I like the odd one about  because those caribbean beetles have got to have something to feed on it you've just got to sustain  everything but it's keeping everything balanced balance is key to my operation as I do here  
**[0:13:44-0:13:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:13:44):**  but I totally agree once you've got that plant balanced there isn't the need for all those  insects to be coming in to take advantage of that weak plant as I call it because that plant isn't  healthy so nature's trying to get rid of that plant because it knows it's not healthy and we're  
**[0:14:00-0:14:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:14:00):**  trying to keep it alive so we're killing everything so we're all the while trying to stop that process  happening when really it's just that's caused the whole problem in the first place. You mentioned  you're doing cover crops I guess my question is what in addition to the overall management  
**[0:14:14-0:14:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:14:14):**  practices what do you credit your success to managing the aphids in the barley? In the barley  again it's putting a little bit nutrition down so as it's balanced the other big thing that I've  done is I'm constantly bringing nitrogen down and I think once you start to bring that nitrogen down  
**[0:14:31-0:14:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:14:31):**  you haven't got those weak cells so you're not attracting everything anyway so this year I've  grown spring barley and I was down to 36 kilos of N and that was near enough apart from 20 kilos all  foliar applied because I love foliar applied N because it's far more efficient the plant it's 90  
**[0:14:50-0:14:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:14:50):**  available to the plant and the plant is using that up it's different to soil applied where I'm  probably only using 40 or 50 percent which is all getting leached out going down the drains getting  into our oceans and creating all these dead zones and the argument people always give me well we've  
**[0:15:07-0:15:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:15:07):**  got to feed a growing population well we can feed a growing population and still regenerate our soils  I've proved that and other farmers have proved that but we can't keep killing the planet 70 to  90 percent of our oxygen is coming from marine photosynthesis what are we going to do wait for  
**[0:15:23-0:15:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:15:23):**  everybody just to starve of air and then do something we've got to act now it's it's we've  had enough of killing the planet there is no planet B and every inhabitant of this planet has  got to stand up and be counted and demand food produced in a regenerative system because it's  
**[0:15:41-0:15:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:15:41):**  those buyers those consumers that have got the most power and if they start to demand it  supermarkets will react governments will react and that's how we're going to make the real massive  changes needed in my mind to the agricultural system of the world because that's what we're  
**[0:15:55-0:16:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:15:55):**  working on and it's farmers that can do the greatest good to repair this world and to repair  the damage that's being done you know and we all should be standing up and cheering and shouting  about what we can achieve yeah there is so much opportunity for improving the outcomes and  
**[0:16:14-0:16:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:16:14):**  reducing the negatives of our mainstream farming practices and the point that you make is one that  i very much agree with is that we don't need a lot of new knowledge or new information or new  technology there's always room for improvement of course but we already know enough we already  
**[0:16:31-0:16:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:16:31):**  have enough farmers amongst us who have implemented these systems on scale successfully  that we can learn from we already have enough knowledge that we can go out and implement it  on scale and of course accomplishing that requires a mind shift and stepping out and being willing to  
**[0:16:47-0:16:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:16:47):**  be a bit different at this stage of the game although hopefully that changes in the future  you mentioned your nitrogen and applications and your foliar applications that brings a couple of  questions to mind can you tell us a little bit about your foliar application system how frequently  
**[0:17:03-0:17:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:17:03):**  are you putting on foliar applications on your various crops what types of nutrients and how are  you managing all of that what does that look like um i'm sort of starting off with a little bit of a  soil application so i use a little bit of ammonium nitrate just to all the while really john trying  
**[0:17:18-0:17:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:17:18):**  to to get the soil to produce its own and that's my end goal is the area 78 percent end there's  enough up there for what we need to use it's just getting that nitrogen fixing bacteria to actually  work and that's what i'm always striving to get but i have to stay profitable as a business to get  
**[0:17:34-0:17:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:17:34):**  there so it's slowly slowly in little steps so i'll start off with the soil applied and then as  the temperatures start to warm and that crop is actively growing i will start and come in with  a foliar and it will all depend really on temperature of how much n i apply in the first  
**[0:17:50-0:17:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:17:50):**  application it might only be a little bit because it's cold the plant isn't really the stomates  aren't really open so they're not really sucking all that foliar nitrogen in there so it could  only be a little bit just for those couple of hours warm where i've got some growth and it'll  
**[0:18:03-0:18:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:18:03):**  take it in you know we're moving forward after that once we do get on a good cycle it'll be every  two weeks i'll do a foliar feed and i'll balance that out with some potassium and magnesium along  the way and all the other nutrients that i'm short of some sulfur so the plant is always  
**[0:18:20-0:18:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:18:20):**  balanced so i'm never creating an imbalance to bring disease in so i've got a problem it's always  balanced and then i'll be doing sat tests along the way every 10 to 14 days probably more 10  to make sure that plant is balanced so if i need to correct an imbalance i can as you always say  
**[0:18:38-0:18:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:18:38):**  it's test test test we've got to be testing to see what's going on in that plant because  the one thing i've found with biology it's a fickle thing if it's too dry too cold it will  start to stop working and the main thing as farmers we have got to stop in business we can't  
**[0:18:52-0:18:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:18:52):**  do any environmental work if we're not making money you know we've got to be able to generate  that income to be able to do the real good work that we need to do to keep moving forward so i'll  always be testing and i'd say if it is a dry time we've had two dry springs here where i've had to  
**[0:19:07-0:19:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:19:07):**  step in and do a bit more foliar feed than what i normally would because biology hasn't been working  and the plants have started to suffer so it's just monitoring and reacting to what's going on  and that's where it needs to be tested on a regular basis because everything's changing all  
**[0:19:21-0:19:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:19:21):**  the while you know you could do a test today and then all of a sudden it warms up in two days it's  a different test result that's where we need to be there on the ball testing and just seeing what's  going on it's just i always class it as you know it's like the world-class athlete and we're just  
**[0:19:37-0:19:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:19:37):**  trying to make it the nutrition perfect to get the best out of that athlete and that's that's how i  see my plants you mentioned the critical importance of needing to be profitable needing to be  economically viable in order to be able to do environmental work and i find that interesting  
**[0:19:52-0:19:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:19:52):**  in the context of our conversation of foliar applications it's very common to look at foliar  applications from the perspective of what is this going to cost rather than what are the potential  rewards so what are the economic impacts of foliar applications for you and what is your  
**[0:20:07-0:20:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:20:07):**  frequency of application are you putting on applications once or twice a season half a dozen  times a season what does that look like well there's a few questions there john but on the  financial one compared to where i used to be where i'd probably be 240 kilos to 270 kilos of n i'm now  
**[0:20:22-0:20:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:20:22):**  sort of standard practice would be 120 to 150 and obviously i'm bringing it low and i'm doing trials  every year so at the 240 it works out a lot cheaper to do it foliar applications at the 120  work last year it worked out a little bit cheaper it might have been 10 pound a hectare cheaper  
**[0:20:41-0:20:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:20:41):**  to do foliar it was certainly still cheaper than and not you know it wasn't more expensive  but the results are far better in my mind because obviously we're not polluting we're not throwing  on all this nitrogen needlessly which is burning the carbon out of our soil so it's definitely the  
**[0:20:56-0:21:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:20:56):**  right way to be going in my mind i use a company flex fertilizer which is it's a ever fertilized  over here but it's actually from denmark where it was produced and in denmark there nitrogen  restrictions are very high so that's why they develop flex so it's an aim i then it's a little  
**[0:21:13-0:21:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:21:13):**  bit further down the line than the urea so that's what makes it so readily available this year i've  had very good results the yields were pretty much on par with the rest of the farm i hadn't thrown  all that nitrogen on there you talked about the reduced cost of being about 10 pounds  
**[0:21:29-0:21:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:21:29):**  an acre less is that just for material costs because when you consider foliar applications  and more frequent trips across the field you obviously have higher application costs as well  the application costs i suppose it isn't really it would be compared to my old conventional system  
**[0:21:44-0:21:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:21:44):**  but because i'm quite often going through the cop to keep it balanced now because i'm not spending  the money on fungicides so i'm not doing that application of fungicides i'm probably not doing  any more applications with the sprayer it might be one if it was a real hard time or two but i  
**[0:21:59-0:22:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:21:59):**  see that as cheap the sprayer sat there it's my own sprayer the tractor sat there so it's only  really my time and a little bit of diesel to knit through and if that's going to give me a healthy  crop then it's time well spent in my mind so that one i suppose if you was on a real big system and  
**[0:22:14-0:22:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:22:14):**  you know it took you a week to get through the crop might be something you have to look at but  i still think the financial savings you're having from not using fungicides and not using all that  nitrogen you can almost buy two outfits and have two people going through the crop to speed the  
**[0:22:27-0:22:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:22:27):**  job up the end game has still got to be to have that healthy plant and get the full potential from  that plant so it doesn't really concern me if i did an extra application to what i normally do  but it's not i'm not going through that many more times i normally three or four times a season i go  
**[0:22:42-0:22:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:22:42):**  through if it was a real rough season it'd probably be six but you know there's this  perception that adopting regenerative agriculture practices and managing nutrition more intensively  is more expensive and that has occasionally in some situations been true in the past although  
**[0:22:59-0:23:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:22:59):**  it's certainly not universally true but that has changed for us in our experience in the last  particular last year or so as commodity fertilizer prices have increased it is now less expensive in  many cases significantly less expensive to manage attrition in this regenerative approach and only  
**[0:23:18-0:23:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:23:18):**  apply what the crop needs rather than all the extra npk that many growers are familiar with  applying i think i'd agree with that you know i haven't applied p and k fertilizers for 10 years  now so that's that's a massive saving on this farm you know that'd be 25 30 000 straight away  
**[0:23:34-0:23:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:23:34):**  i'm not buying as much nitrogen i'm not spending 100 pounds a hectare on on fungicides you know  i'm not spending the money on herbicides so the little bit i spend on nutrition is still far far  less than what i was spending on all these synthetic horrible products that are just  
**[0:23:55-0:24:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:23:55):**  killing everything you know we've got herbicides we've got fungicides we've got insecticides  and to me all the breathing they've got in common is suicide to us as a success  i like that so i want to come back and talk about the the fungicide applications and how you're  
**[0:24:15-0:24:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:24:15):**  managing diseases but before we go there let's talk a little bit more about your fertilizer  applications you mentioned that you haven't applied any p and k for a decade how are you  able to get away with that are you tapping into historical soil reserves of applied materials  
**[0:24:30-0:24:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:24:30):**  do you believe that's going to be sustainable for the future what does that look like for you  i totally believe it's going to be sustainable for the future i mean potassium for example as  you well know john is just continually cycling it's just continually cycling and if anything i've got  
**[0:24:45-0:24:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:24:45):**  going back to the the old sort of soil tests that we have to do here for government purposes you  know my indices are far higher now than what they ever were if anything potassium is more readily  available which it is because it's just totally cycling the whole process is cycling the whole  
**[0:25:00-0:25:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:25:00):**  ecosystem has come alive and the same with phosphorus as a phosphorus is again my indices  are just high which i don't take much regard to soil tests if i'm totally honest but the plant is  just putting out those exudates and calling for phosphorus and it's only taking what it needs in  
**[0:25:14-0:25:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:25:14):**  my mind yes i might put some potassium on as a folio when we're in a real growing period because  the plant isn't taking a nothing and it's just growing so fast and i'll address that imbalance  if i have to but phosphorus and potassium they say phosphorus it's just cycling the bacteria  
**[0:25:30-0:25:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:25:30):**  releasing it just on on enough we've got so many rocks and everything's still in the soil here that  i can't see generations to come ever having a problem it's just totally working in harmony  just as it was meant to and if i went out there and threw some phosphorus you're only too aware  
**[0:25:45-0:25:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:25:45):**  of the damage i do to all the fungi that i've got i just wipe everything out it's the nature  never intended for us to have to keep throwing all these elements on it was always supposed to be a  naturally recycling system and it's us that have stepped in and caused the problem and once we  
**[0:26:02-0:26:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:26:02):**  step in and stop that cycling process then you've just created a drug addict and you've got to keep  feeding it all the while because you've stopped nature doing her job because we know better  yeah we've got it figured out and generations they come they'll look back at what we did last  
**[0:26:16-0:26:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:26:16):**  century and they'll just put their hands over their head because it's just they'll never  understand what why we were so stupid i don't think to have to have done a system that was  working perfectly well and here we come along and we just interrupt it all and it costs us a whole  
**[0:26:30-0:26:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:26:30):**  load of money for a problem that never existed oh but we were able to increase yields  yeah hasn't that one been used a lot in the past throw more on  you know it's interesting that we you and i say that as a joke and we laugh about it but for many  
**[0:26:50-0:26:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:26:50):**  people and even many farmers today still don't recognize and don't realize that the idea that the  marketing slogan of being able to increase yields is just a fallacy that you can actually produce  equivalent or higher yields using these regenerative practices than what the mainstream  
**[0:27:09-0:27:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:27:09):**  is today and we know it because we've seen it observed it and experienced it but most people  have not no and i think that's why i try and shout and use social media such a lot just to show  people what i am achieving because i always say it john but if i can leave this planet and i've made  
**[0:27:26-0:27:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:27:26):**  the slightest bit of difference to that planet health and helping it recover that it's my time  was it's the best reward i could have financial gains is exactly the same as that knowing that  you've made a difference to the planet and that's where i always help farmers and that's where i  
**[0:27:41-0:27:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:27:41):**  will always shout about what i'm achieving because it's so important that people here and as i said  earlier it's the consumer we really need to educate because once the consumer knows what we  can achieve as regeneration farmers they're going to demand that food and that's that's our got to  
**[0:27:57-0:28:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:27:57):**  be all of our goal really is to educate the consumer because once they know the food can  be produced and we can be healing the planet at the same time and moving everything forward i  mean the wildlife that's come back here i have a bird ringing group come on the farm and we've got  
**[0:28:12-0:28:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:28:12):**  kestrels back on the farm and we've reared 14 chicks in the last three years four years  we've got skylarks which are red data species and they're just abundant here but the only reason  they're abundant is because i've stopped using insecticides i've got this food here for them  
**[0:28:28-0:28:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:28:28):**  when we have the the blue tits and the great tits in the spring and we go around the nesting boxes  there'll be eight to ten chicks in those boxes and the only reason the clutches are so big is  because there's so much food here wow and it just attracts everything everything comes back it's  
**[0:28:41-0:28:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:28:41):**  just the same as the soil once you start to get the food source there the worms come back everything  starts working nature is so forgiving of the mistakes and the damage we've done if we just  let her heal she'll heal we just got to work in harmony with her if we work together with nature  
**[0:28:57-0:29:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:28:57):**  it's just like trying to paddle a canoe or river you can paddle and you can be as fit as a fiddle  but eventually that river is going to beat you and that's the track i think we've been on for  the last 50 60 years is we're paddling up river and nature is always going to beat us it's far  
**[0:29:10-0:29:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:29:10):**  easy just to go with the flow and to paddle down river instead of up river yeah wow thank you tim  it is a really enjoyable and really incredible to see how ecology can recover and not just not just  the ecology that we study and pay a lot of attention to for crop production purposes like  
**[0:29:28-0:29:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:29:28):**  mycorrhizal fungi and earthworms and so forth but also the macro ecology of the bird populations and  the honeybee populations and so forth in the local areas so that is really powerful they all exist  and feed off each other but the whole system is working here now it's it's just a pleasure to walk  
**[0:29:46-0:29:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:29:46):**  around the farm and to see everything in abundant i grow a lot of flower margins and the like around  the farm so there's always late pollinators i've still got flowers going now so the pollinators  are always got some food source and those pollinators are so important to us as farmers  
**[0:30:02-0:30:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:30:02):**  we need to look after them we've to say again we've abused them for so long thinking we didn't  need to rely on them without pollinators we're all doomed insects are so important to us  so we mentioned the yield improvements that are possible with a region of agriculture practices  
**[0:30:18-0:30:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:30:18):**  what has your personal experience been in your history on your farm over your transition period  how have yields shifted i've never had a yield dip when i first started out it was always said that  oh in year three you'll have a massive yield dip i never had that yields have always been  
**[0:30:33-0:30:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:30:33):**  sustainable as long as i get the water i can get some very good yields this year my x days week  which is just a variety of a group two a biscuit wheat i'd put 120 kilos of nitrogen on there it  didn't have any fungicides no insecticides no seed treatments and that was yielding 11 to 11  
**[0:30:52-0:30:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:30:52):**  and a half tons to the to the hectare and that's a conservative figure it's probably a little bit  higher but i never like to do pub figures as we talk over here you know i'm not one for boasting  i'm just saying what can be achieved and that to me just proves the point that if you keep  
**[0:31:06-0:31:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:31:06):**  everything in balance the yields that can be achieved and it's not all about nitrogen nitrogen  is just a part of it and it's just utilizing it properly to get the best out of it rather than  just throw more on throw more on and just destroy everything that we're trying to achieve really  
**[0:31:22-0:31:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:31:22):**  circling the conversation back to nitrogen on wheat reminds me that i never got an answer to  the question on foliar frequency how many trips through the field did you use to make with a  sprayer with insecticide fungicide applications and how does that compare with what you're doing  
**[0:31:38-0:31:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:31:38):**  today with nutrition management on a fungicide i'd have done a t naught as we call it here t1 t2  t3 and a t4 i now call them fs1 and fs naught it's foliar spray because i'd like to get away  from that chemical sort of mentality so i'd still be going on a similar basis on with a nutrition  
**[0:31:57-0:32:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:31:57):**  based on a biology based it wouldn't be much different it will just be john if i've done a  sat test and i can see an imbalance then i'll slip one in between those two but that's just money  well spent in my mind because i want the best out of that plant if i keep that plant healthy it's  
**[0:32:13-0:32:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:32:13):**  not going to get diseased it's not going to lose yield potential so to me that little bit of  expense of going through again is just well worth it it's why would you not want to do that what  is not to like about gaining the full potential of that plant it's i can't see why anybody could  
**[0:32:29-0:32:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:32:29):**  argue with having to make another pass it's just not worth you know the time to spray so quick you  can cover many many hundreds thousands of acres quickly it's um the benefit to say it's i wouldn't  even enter my mentality of having to do an extra spray because it's so worthwhile to see the  
**[0:32:47-0:32:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:32:47):**  difference in two or three days when you address that imbalance and how the plant  just picks up again and then i'll be getting fantastic bricks readings and  i know everything's right why would you not want to do that that's just  
**[0:32:58-0:33:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:32:58):**  just being bothered to put the effort in in my mind tell us about your bricks readings and your  evaluations i know in previous conversations that you and i have had you talked about  the very high bricks readings that you're achieving which is a struggle for many people  
**[0:33:12-0:33:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:33:12):**  to achieve even some people who are using sap analysis that when they start out using sap  analysis and their soil biology hasn't fully recovered yet achieving higher bricks readings is  is a struggle so where are you there's a general rule if i've got the moisture i mean if if it's  
**[0:33:27-0:33:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:33:27):**  low moisture i can be up in the 20s i could be 22 23 but when i've had the moisture because it  always changes when i get rain so i always expect to be somewhere around the 17 18 that's that's my  norm and if it's we're in a drier period and it's warm i will go up to 20 to 20 degrees but  
**[0:33:44-0:33:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:33:44):**  i'll do a ph reading at the same time so i'm always monitoring crops it's um i think my  management time is a lot higher than ever it was in the conventional system because  my crops my babies all the world because that's how i treat crops they've got to have the attention  
**[0:33:59-0:34:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:33:59):**  they're like my children running around and i've got to be out there and look after them and do the  best as a parent to get that to full potential it's just just the way i look at it so they're  my stock for want of a better word in farmer terms it's uh it's a good thing that they're  
**[0:34:12-0:34:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:34:12):**  in the farmer's terms it's uh i don't see looking after crops as any different to looking after stock  if you want the best out of them you've got to be out there and paying them the attention it's  uh i'm a big believer you know of life is the more you can put into life the more you get out and it's  
**[0:34:25-0:34:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:34:25):**  the same philosophy to me i'm certain that those elevator bricks readings are of course they are  an expression of the nutritional balance that is contributing to your disease resistance and  insect resistance so how have things changed you used to put on multiple fungicide applications and  
**[0:34:44-0:34:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:34:44):**  you're not doing those anymore no what management what management practices um are you using to  replace the fungicide applications i do rely on silica an awful lot so we use potassium silicate  and we use diatomaceous herbs so silica is a big one for me just to keep that cell wall strong  
**[0:35:02-0:35:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:35:02):**  i work closely with a guy called nick woodjack nick is very much a biological agronomist so he  comes in and helps me and we have some good discussions but we're always trying to do it  with nutrition and biology chemicals would be a really really last resort for us we would both  
**[0:35:17-0:35:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:35:17):**  feel we failed if we had to i mean obviously if you know if we thought there was no other way i  would but i can't really see me ever being in that situation now because the nutrition we've got it  wrong if we if we had to get to that sort of stage the one thing i noticed when i first stopped using  
**[0:35:33-0:35:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:35:33):**  fungicides if i chopped a field of straw that straw would just break down so quickly within  a couple of weeks it's gone whereas when you've used the fungicide it's still stiff it's brittle  because you've put a barrier there for fungi not to be able to do their job so why would it go  
**[0:35:48-0:35:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:35:48):**  quickly because i put a barrier there to stop it that was the real eye opener to me was the fact  how straw breaks down and how quickly the biology utilized that decay matter than if it had a  fungicide there and it's the same when we've done trials with with seed treatments because it's not  
**[0:36:06-0:36:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:36:06):**  too bad now but a couple of years ago it was very difficult here to buy new seed didn't have a seed  treatment i'd ask for it not to be treated sure enough it would roll up on farm and it had been  seed treated so i'd grow it in a separate part of the field and it would be drilled at the same  
**[0:36:21-0:36:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:36:21):**  seeds per square meter on the same day at the same depth with the same machine the untreated  seed would be up 10 days earlier than the treated seed because i've got that wow connection and  things were growing and it would be up here and the treaty would be just poking out the ground and  
**[0:36:36-0:36:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:36:36):**  you've got to keep doing trials everybody should be doing trials on their own farm because every  farm is different and if we all shared the data we can just move this thing so much quicker  being the old cloak and dagger of oh i'm not telling you what i've done because it's worked  
**[0:36:49-0:36:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:36:49):**  and you just come on let's share it's bigger than all of us as farmers to take this forward  you know we've got a planet at stake here we've we've got to push it forward it's what it's all  about there's enough money out there for all of us to make a good profit out of it we don't have  
**[0:37:03-0:37:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:37:03):**  to be cloak and dagger and not share information information is king you know i've observed that  it is those growers who share the information the most freely who also get shared the most  information from other growers it creates this reciprocity effect where the more you share with  
**[0:37:21-0:37:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:37:21):**  others the more you learn that benefits you and your operation and it just it accelerates the  overall system and those growers who attempt to hold things close to their vests because they  believe they're the best they're doing a really great job they end up getting left behind in many  
**[0:37:35-0:37:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:37:35):**  cases i've always got a saying john that like attracts like so i think like-minded people  always attract each other because it's just the way they are and you know everybody can move  forward then and it's it just makes the whole process so much fun if you can talk to a like-minded  
**[0:37:50-0:37:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:37:50):**  person and just chat about your experiences and what you achieved and what went wrong and  share and we all move forward because that conversation might save you a year's worth of  trials because you know the outcome already and that's what it's all about because then we can  
**[0:38:02-0:38:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:38:02):**  just progress because there's so much more to learn and do yet but i think you know the journey  it's just fascinating to me it's i always get whatever i do i'm always one that i've got to  know everything about it and i don't think i'll ever get to that situation with regen farming i  
**[0:38:16-0:38:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:38:16):**  think every year i'm doing something different it's no it's moving so fast at the minute it's  just hard to keep up your experience with planting naked seed without any you know it's interesting  that we call that naked seed we should actually be considering it just healthy seed without all  
**[0:38:31-0:38:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:38:31):**  the toxins applied to it definitely my observation has been that when growers try that i would  with different crops in different environments about 70 or 80 percent of the time the untreated  seed significantly outperforms the treated seed just as you described it emerges earlier it's  
**[0:38:50-0:38:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:38:50):**  faster it's stronger it takes off and goes so much quicker that isn't a hundred percent of the time  there are some soils which are so conducive to pathogen growth they're so disease enhancing  that those seed treatments are needed because those soils are incredibly sick in those cases  
**[0:39:08-0:39:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:39:08):**  and this is why people need to test it on their own soils in those cases that's when we need to  take some time to grow cover crops or put on some compost tea or inoculants to shift that microbial  population so we can get that same type of reaction and response and i believe this is  
**[0:39:23-0:39:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:39:23):**  something you've been doing as well for fusarium control and for different diseases you're also  producing perhaps some compost compost teas and brews can you tell us a little bit about that and  what that looks like for fusarium control i brew up a consortium tea because i'm a little bit  
**[0:39:38-0:39:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:39:38):**  nervous about using compost teas at that stage of growth just in case i've had some legionnaires  disease in that compost and then i'm putting it all over a million weeks i'm not brave enough to  do that so i'll use what's what we call a consortium tea so it'll be bacillus subtilis and bacillus  
**[0:39:55-0:40:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:39:55):**  and bacillus amyloquefacin i can brew that up then for 12 24 hours and by brewing it i can do it for  as little as two pound a hectare or two pound fifty a hectare pound an acre just to make things simple  i started doing that three or four years ago the first year i did it i wasn't totally convinced  
**[0:40:15-0:40:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:40:15):**  as i never am i always want proof it's just the scientist in me i want to make sure it's actually  doing something and so i left an area untreated i treated an area with chemical and i treated  the area with bacillus where we hadn't treated we'd got 36 percent fusarium where we treated with the  
**[0:40:35-0:40:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:40:35):**  bacillus we've got two percent one and a half to two percent of fusarium and where we treated  we chemical i think we were about 20 to 25 and from that down i just stopped using chemicals  bacillus is just far far better at fusarium and then the beauty of it is john obviously i'm not  
**[0:40:51-0:40:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:40:51):**  carrying that over to use that seed to continually grow fusarium i've stopped the cycle which is a  massive breakthrough to me it's just pushing it forward and say it's just a far better control  than any chemical most chemicals are about 50 or 60 percent control whereas fusarium i would say  
**[0:41:09-0:41:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:41:09):**  it's near enough 90 it's just fantastic uh bacillus sorry not museum yeah you know this this brings  up an interesting point as farmers we need to think differently about whether we are using  products for plant health or for disease control and this is an important paradigm shift from a  
**[0:41:28-0:41:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:41:28):**  regulatory perspective because in many cases okay take bacillus subtilis for example or these  various bacillus species we can apply these products to enhance plant health and enhance  crop performance with relatively limited regulatory oversight you put on the product  
**[0:41:48-0:41:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:41:48):**  plant health improves it's a win-win but the moment you begin making claims to say that oh  you can put on this product for fusarium control all of a sudden that product needs to go through  an extensive registration process that is very expensive and becomes a lot more expensive for  
**[0:42:05-0:42:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:42:05):**  growers to purchase the product and to apply it i'm using an organism as an example but the same  is true of nutrients of manganese or copper for example you can get uh manganese bactericides or  copper bactericides like mannep and mancozeb and all these different compounds or you can use  
**[0:42:24-0:42:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:42:24):**  manganese as a nutrient and actually get better results in many cases than you can with the  fungicide application because you get it inside the plant preventatively proactively and so there  is this difference in perspective of how we approach and manage and apply these products  
**[0:42:42-0:42:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:42:42):**  and also how we talk about them that has regulatory consequences in in many of the  developed countries around the world and that's something that's very important for us to keep in  mind is if we demand that products carry a label for disease control that we have an inoculant that  
**[0:42:58-0:43:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:42:58):**  carries a label for disease control then that's what we're going to get at some point in time as  the industry develops and it'll probably come at a significant cost that wasn't really necessary  and that'll be the sad thing won't it because once it gets regulated big farmer will take over  
**[0:43:16-0:43:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:43:16):**  and that's where the cost will go up and when once again farmers are being farmed aren't they  to use your term job it's and it's that's the sad bit because it doesn't have to be expensive  you know farming is getting tighter and tighter we have got a growing population to feed and  
**[0:43:32-0:43:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:43:32):**  we've got to get the job right so as we are regenerating and it's it's a tough one but it's  it'll be very sad if it all gets abused by a big farmer again and we're back to square one.  Tim what do you see as the untapped potential many cases many times when i speak with growers  
**[0:43:50-0:43:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:43:50):**  they often have these experiences or these observations where they see that there is a  certain opportunity in agriculture tremendous untapped opportunity and untapped potential  exists that many people are not aware of or not paying attention to what does that look like for  
**[0:44:03-0:44:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:44:03):**  you i think at the moment john over here it would be carbon sequestration i see that as has been a  big market for us moving forward there's a group of us come together and we're calling ourselves  the green farm collective and we're going to trying to sell carbon on behalf of farmers and  
**[0:44:20-0:44:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:44:20):**  the reason one main reason we've come together is we don't want farmers to be exploited again  in this market and unless we get together and do that it will be exploited we can sequent carbon  in the way we're farming i'm already net zero so i have got carbon to sell and i see that really  
**[0:44:37-0:44:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:44:37):**  has been a big potential for farming moving forward because the planet is being polluted  and if somebody wants to invest in my farm to stop some of that pollution and bring some of  that carbon back into the soil where it belongs i'm happy to to have an income from that and work  
**[0:44:55-0:45:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:44:55):**  with those people to make that happen and by having that income then i've got more money to  spend on creating more biodiversity more capital green capital on the farm to be able to take that  forward and i see that really as a big there's only farmers really that can make that difference  
**[0:45:12-0:45:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:45:12):**  on the planet and if we can have we should have an income for being paid for it it's not wrong to do  that i don't see really going forward when you consider the experiences that you've had on your  operation that you've shared very widely with many people particularly in the uk and you consider the  
**[0:45:29-0:45:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:45:29):**  opportunity that exists what do you perceive being the limiting factors that limit farmers from  moving forward what is limiting farmers themselves from achieving the potential that they're really  capable of it's always what's between their two ears john it's you can't rush people down this path  
**[0:45:49-0:45:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:45:49):**  it's when i first started you know you shout you jump up and down and you want to tell everybody  and nobody listens and then you get really angry and frustrated because people aren't listening  and then you go through the stage where i'm not going to talk to anybody because nobody listens  
**[0:46:01-0:46:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:46:01):**  anyway and then you come out the other side and you start to realize that when people need help  they pop up and i'm always more than happy to help you know quite often i'll be going up and  down the field and i'll be talking a farmer through a process just to help them and that's  
**[0:46:16-0:46:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:46:16):**  the thing it's the more we can talk about it and the more we can get out there the more people will  start to take an interest and take a look at it but it's always what's between farmers two ears  that creates the biggest barriers because until it makes sense in their own head they won't do it and  
**[0:46:32-0:46:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:46:32):**  they won't put it out there and it's just slowly slowly you can't rush people on their journey it's  their journey and it's not us to step in and say right you've got to be there by now it's all we  can do is coach and encourage and help them along that journey and it's it's a wonderful journey to  
**[0:46:48-0:46:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:46:48):**  start and i love it when a farmer phones me up and they've heard me speak and they've gone home and  they've implemented something and they say tim it's fantastic it's worked really well that's the best  reward ever that is you know you can just you feel how pleased they are that it's made a jump on their  
**[0:47:05-0:47:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:47:05):**  farm and they're taking it forward and yeah i just love phone calls like that on my own personal  journey the stuff that was between my ears that most hindered my own research development was  it was not the stuff that i didn't know it was the stuff the information i was certain i knew  
**[0:47:25-0:47:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:47:25):**  that was incorrect and the stuff that i learned historically from kind of the mainstream agronomy  approach i've uh one piece at a time it got chucked into the dustbin and until eventually  there's almost nothing left i could so relate to that it is just starting from scratch but  
**[0:47:43-0:47:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:47:43):**  it's just it's almost like being a newborn child and it's just that bewilderment of taking it all  in and questioning everything i question everything and once you start to question  everything you can pull it all apart and just take the bits that you want and that's that's  
**[0:47:57-0:48:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:47:57):**  what i really love about the journey because we're unfolding so much new stuff that you know we were  told couldn't happen or wouldn't happen or you can't do that and that's the the fascinating bit  of the journey it's just seeing everything unfold and repair and move forward and it doesn't always  
**[0:48:12-0:48:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:48:12):**  go right but then you learn to show up when it hasn't gone right it's it's taking the positives  out of every situation there's no point dwelling on the negative that's not going to make you feel  good or take you forward you've got to dwell on the positives and take that little bit there's  
**[0:48:25-0:48:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:48:25):**  always a positive there you've just got to find it and learn from it and take it forward with this  pathway that you've been on of presenting and talking to farmers and sharing your own journey  what is something that you would like to speak more about but you're often hesitant because  
**[0:48:41-0:48:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:48:41):**  you sense people may not be ready to hear it yet oh that's a big one i'll be totally honest now  i'll probably get shot down for this later but i think it's it's the fact that everything is  connected we're connected to everything on the on this planet i think we're all one really the trees  
**[0:48:57-0:49:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:48:57):**  the plants everything is we are so connected because everything is energy we're energy and  energy can neither be created or destroyed and i think that's the one i probably have never been  ballsy enough to talk about but i think we're all connected you know every plant every tree i think  
**[0:49:13-0:49:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:49:13):**  we've all got that connection there and i think that's why it's so important to start and heal  the planet because it's the only way we're going to repair the damage and move forward and respect  everything that's on the planet if that makes sense yeah i think respecting it acknowledging it  
**[0:49:29-0:49:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:49:29):**  i personally believe that the majority of the living organisms we work with  in fact i think i can safely say i believe that this is true for all of them they are all capable  of making intelligent informed decisions whether that gives them sentience or not they certainly  
**[0:49:45-0:49:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:49:45):**  seem to be self-aware they certainly seem to be aware of their environment this should give us  a newfound respect and appreciation for what's going on and when we also begin realizing the  incredible degree to which they communicate with each other and with all the other organisms in the  
**[0:50:00-0:50:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:50:00):**  environment it is it's pretty remarkable i saw a cartoon a couple days ago or a couple weeks ago  that really cracked me up there were two trees with two people walking by and the one tree says  to the other do you suppose that those people can communicate with each other and the second tree  
**[0:50:18-0:50:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:50:18):**  says no how can they possibly they don't have roots oh yeah that's so true and it is it's it's  uh it is we're all connected and there's been so many experiments done where you can train sort of  rats or something to do something and there'll be another island miles away and they learn it without  
**[0:50:42-0:50:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:50:42):**  being learned it's just all out there in the big internet it's um it's just downloading it i know  you've heard of different composers and when they're coming up with a song and then somebody  the other side of the world will come up with a very similar song and if you've got your antenna  
**[0:50:55-0:51:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:50:55):**  there you'll just download it and it's it's just been open yeah it's quite extraordinary well tim  thank you very much for joining me here and for sharing your knowledge and wisdom and experiences  i've really enjoyed this conversation and i look forward to having more with you in the future  
**[0:51:12-0:51:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:51:12):**  it totally my pleasure john really enjoyed it myself it's uh it's nice to talk to a like-minded  person and spread the word a bit more because that's what it's all about the team at aea and  i are dedicated to bringing this show to you because we believe that knowledge and information  
**[0:51:28-0:51:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:51:28):**  is the foundation of successful regenerative systems at aea we believe that growing better  quality food and making more money from your crops is possible and since 2006 we've worked  with leading professional growers to help them do just that at aea we don't guess we test we analyze  
**[0:51:48-0:51:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:51:48):**  and we provide recommendations based on scientific data knowledge and experience we've developed  products that are uniquely positioned to help growers make more money with regenerative  agriculture if you are a professional grower who believes in testing instead of guessing someone  
**[0:52:03-0:52:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Episode_76_Tim_Parton_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:52:03):**  who believes in a better more regenerative way to grow visit advancingecoag.com and contact us  to see if aea is right for you thank you for listening and we look forward to working with you  