### Regenerative Agriculture Podcast  (2021-35-04)
**[0:00:00-0:00:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:00:00):**  Hi friends, this is Jon and this is the Regenerative Agriculture Podcast. Thanks for coming back.  This is the place where we talk about the agronomic science and the cultural management  practices that regenerate plant health, soil health, and public health. In this episode,  I have a guest who I've had the very good fortune of spending a lot of time with and  learning about regenerative agriculture science together over the last decade. It's Jason  
**[0:00:26-0:00:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:00:26):**  Hobson, the CEO of Advancing Eco-Agriculture. Jason and I worked together in consulting  and agronomy work for the last 11 years and we've had lots of adventures together. So  Jason, thanks for joining me here. Thanks, Jon. Thanks for having me. It's great to have  a chance to come on the show. Jason, can you provide a little bit of context for our listeners,  background that brought you to agriculture and then to your work with AEA and the scope  
**[0:00:57-0:01:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:00:57):**  of your work with AEA? Sure. Well, I guess my journey in agriculture started when I was  in college. I grew up in the suburbs of Indianapolis, not anything to do with agriculture. My parents  were teachers and my grandparents on both sides had all grown up on farms in Indiana  here, but they moved to towns at various points, right in the last 50 years or so and got jobs  and things like that in town. And my parents were teachers in Indianapolis area. I was  
**[0:01:25-0:01:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:01:25):**  at Indiana University studying religion. I was studying ethics. I was planning to go  to Harvard. I was going to go to Harvard and get a PhD in ethics and had everything set  to go to there. And in the fall of my senior year of college, somebody handed me a Wendell  Berry book. I read that book and read everything else he wrote and decided I needed to find  a way to get into agriculture. And working in ag for the last 25 years, it seems like  
**[0:01:56-0:02:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:01:56):**  that that calling to the land and to farming is in so many people at a almost, I'd say,  genetic level. It reaches out and grabs people from in various places and various points  in their lives and pulls them into it almost unwittingly. And that happened to me at that  point. So instead of going to Harvard, I got a job at a CSA in Terre Haute, Indiana, growing  vegetables then proceeded to figure out how to be more involved in agriculture for the  
**[0:02:26-0:02:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:02:26):**  next 10 years or so. I had various CSAs that I ran with my family, did things like horse  run agriculture, horse logging, various other things. I ran a construction company for several  years that specialize in timber frame building. And then I decided to take a job in a grazing  dairy operation in Pennsylvania, which then led to a job managing a dairy here in Indianapolis.  And did that for about three years and was fired from that position in 2010. One of the  
**[0:03:02-0:03:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:03:02):**  reasons I got fired was trying to implement some ideas that I had learned from Gary Zimmer  at Midwestern Bio Ag. So after I was let go, I went to Gary and said, hey, you guys got  me fired. Would you mind if I could train as a consultant? And Gary was gracious enough  to bring me into the consultant training program from Midwestern Bio Ag and spent three or  four days at Gary's farm in Wisconsin, drinking from the fire hose, trying to take as many  
**[0:03:28-0:03:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:03:28):**  notes as possible and catch up to as many of the concepts he was laying out. I think  it was the last day of that I was talking to Gary. He was like, you need to go check  out this kid in Ohio named John. He was doing some crazy stuff with liquid fertilizer. You  might get along with him. And that was October of 2010. So November, I drove over to meet  you in about an eight by eight office with a fax machine and a notepad and are still  
**[0:03:59-0:04:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:03:59):**  our AR manager, Diane, and as your assistant. We were shipping stuff out of your dad's driveway  and things seemed a little bit brand new with all of that. But something in the dream that  you talked about as far as changing agriculture and what you believe that the products that  you were building could do and what they had done already in some of the trial situations  that you had conducted in the last year or so before that caught my attention. And so  
**[0:04:27-0:04:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:04:27):**  I decided to start working with you and 11 years later and going from a company with  just a few employees to over 40 and business at all 50 states plus a couple other countries.  It's been a heck of a ride.  It's certainly been a lot of fun. So when you think back to that shift of reading Wendell  Berry's books, what was it when you think about studying ethics versus agriculture?  
**[0:04:54-0:04:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:04:54):**  Where's the bridge between those two? And I guess really my question is, what was it  in Wendell's writings that really caught your attention? What was it that was really appealing  to you?  Well, a couple of things. I think it was a very short step from ethics to that because  I was looking at social movements, Catholic social movements, various stages over the  
**[0:05:14-0:05:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:05:14):**  last couple of hundred years and being able to understand why people are making decisions  and what's motivating them. And a lot of Wendell Berry's writings are about decisions, decisions  that are made for good reasons that turn out well and for maybe not so good reasons. This  is made for good reasons that don't turn out well. I think the amazing thing about Wendell  Berry is being able to read his essays and his fiction and his poetry and seeing the  
**[0:05:44-0:05:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:05:44):**  same themes woven through all three of those genres and be able to tie those together.  And so hearing him describe the degradation of farming communities in factual detail in  the nonfiction looks like the unsettling of America and detailing the impact of the big  ag movements of the late sixties and seventies and what that did to family farms in the Midwest,  especially in Kentucky and Indiana and Ohio. And then seeing that chronicled through the  
**[0:06:14-0:06:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:06:14):**  characters that he writes about in his fiction and seeing those facts kind of turned into  stories that move through generations that are inhabiting the fictional kind of landscape  that he created. So seeing that, seeing the version of that that happened around here  to my family when they moved off farms and moved into town and got jobs because farming  wasn't profitable on the marginal land around here. Seeing things like the still five foot  
**[0:06:43-0:06:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:06:43):**  deep gullies that are in our farm now that were created in the twenties and thirties  and people plowing hillsides for corn and seeing those scars that are left all over  the landscape here in Southern Indiana. It was kind of being able to see how the stories  that he was talking about and the changes in agriculture had in a sense led me in my  life to be where I was, to be what was a rural driven community here in Indiana that has  
**[0:07:11-0:07:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:07:11):**  become more of a suburban community because farming was difficult here and we didn't have  the tools and the understanding to be able to make it profitable. Like I said, trying  to plant corn on steep hillsides within top soil. It was not a recipe for sustainable  agriculture and agriculture that thrives over time. And so I think once I was able to see  that and it helped me to want to, I think, become more rooted in my own place here. I'm  
**[0:07:44-0:07:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:07:44):**  the eighth generation on both sides of my mom's family from Bloomington area. That the  Duke County is the East and West of Monroe County where Bloomington is. We had family  in this area as far back as the 1840s and probably even before that. So, reading him  helped me to understand how important it is for me to be here and be from here. And that  led to several decisions in my life as far as to not move away to somewhere else and  
**[0:08:14-0:08:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:08:14):**  go to grad school and also to want to honor that history that I have here and raise my  family in the same place.  Jason, when you think about your pathway, the transition that you made with the brief  connection with Midwestern BioAg and then our work together for the last decade, I really  want to get your perspective on how is our approach at advancing eco agriculture? How  
**[0:08:41-0:08:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:08:41):**  is our approach to nutrition management and crop management perhaps different from other  perspectives? And of course, there's a lot of overlap with other agronomists and other  approaches in the regenerative agriculture space. So there are differences between regenerative  agriculture and kind of the mainstream agriculture approach, if you will. But then there's also  nuance even within the regenerative agriculture community. What are the things that you have  
**[0:09:08-0:09:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:09:08):**  observed in our last decade of working together where we have learned new insights that have  led to a very different approach to agriculture than what others might be familiar with?  Sure. I think looking back at that time, the concepts that you and I both learned from  Gary at Midwestern BioAg and others that were the kind of groundbreakers of this movement,  I think it was a great foundation. Looking at Gary taking essentially Neil Kinsey's,  
**[0:09:39-0:09:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:09:39):**  which was an offshoot of Albrecht, taking that look at soil and then adding the biology  component to it and adding some of the focus on trace minerals and calcium and things like  that were so much not a part of conventional agriculture and conventional agronomy in the  last 50 years. And then looking at a biological component and looking at different cultural  practices that impact the biology and how to change that and tillage and adapting different  
**[0:10:03-0:10:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:10:03):**  machinery to be able to plant in heavy trash and things that he's done and things that  he emphasizes. That was a great foundation. I think that what we do builds on that foundation,  but also goes in several new and important directions. Two biggest areas that I feel  like that we've been able to make innovations are number one, being able to manipulate biology,  being able to understand it, being able to manipulate it and create applications that  
**[0:10:31-0:10:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:10:31):**  do different jobs. So we can reduce sodium, we can increase phosphorus solubility, we  can create additional nitrogen, and we can also reduce the impact of residual toxins  and chemicals that are in the soil. And we could do those almost at will when the situation  calls for it. We're not just out there, quote unquote, building biology as a general goal.  And we're also, I think, not just looking at a simple single species type solution where  
**[0:10:58-0:11:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:10:58):**  we're using a biological product to take the place of a chemical product. It still has  that kind of point and shoot mindset of a single action product to do a single goal.  What we do is much bigger than that. And understanding how to foster and guide biological communities  to accomplish certain goals for a grower, I think is something that we do very well  in a lot of ways that are more sophisticated and effective than other approaches that are  
**[0:11:24-0:11:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:11:24):**  out there. The second key piece I feel like is understanding how to read and build programs  according to what crops need during the season. And this is the use of SAP analysis becomes  key here. And obviously we were the first people to really popularize and really bring  that technology to fruition here in the US. And over the last, I guess, almost eight years  now we've been doing SAP analysis. That history and experience has given us the ability to  
**[0:11:55-0:12:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:11:55):**  very quickly understand what's going on with the crop, almost no matter what crop it is  in any area, any growing region, and be able to create a nutritional program that is tailored  exactly to what that crop needs in that situation.  What have been some of the highlights for you in the last decade or so working with  lots of different crops in different regions? What have been some of the experiences that  
**[0:12:19-0:12:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:12:19):**  really stood out for you?  Wow. I think we get used to hearing all the quote unquote miracle stories at AEA, things  happen that are unusual so frequently. I think going back to what I was just saying before  about understanding what's happening in plants. This wasn't a success in the field because  we didn't have a chance to pursue it as much as it was just an aha moment to see what the  
**[0:12:44-0:12:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:12:44):**  value of the technology was. But I think looking at citrus in SAP analysis and being able to  see those first tests and see calcium deficiencies and issues with calcium uptake that were not  showing up on traditional tissue tests, they were showing up very clearly in SAP analysis  that were able to pinpoint what was happening with the very devastating disease of citrus  greening and being able to look at what trees were healthier versus what trees were more  
**[0:13:12-0:13:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:13:12):**  affected based off of the nutritional profile with a great deal of accuracy.  So that was a huge eye opener. That was very early in our SAP analysis experience in 2013  and 2014. As far as in the field successes, this has been on our site in years in the  past but the changes that we saw in our first block we worked at at MyComixFarm back in  Oregon starting in 2011 and 12 and being able to take that from the worst performing block  
**[0:13:41-0:13:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:13:41):**  to the second best performing block he had in just over a two year period and seeing  firsthand the changes in those trees was pretty amazing.  More recently, I feel like the success we've been able to have on apples in Washington  over the last three years, Steven Berlink on his farm, obviously he's done a lot by  taking our ideas and our programs and adding his own twist to that and he's made a lot  
**[0:14:07-0:14:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:14:07):**  of advances on his own but I think it's a very fun thing to see where he's been able  to take our example and our way of doing things and create a huge amount of growth and success  on his farm as far as being able to have the quality and the production he has there. I  think some of the other interesting developments, last year our work in cotton in New Mexico  with James Johnson being able to cut out the PTRs, cut out the insecticides and other pesticides,  
**[0:14:39-0:14:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:14:39):**  reduce nitrogen dramatically and still increase yields by a substantial amount. There's a  huge potential that we have for being able to work with growers in those regions on those  kind of crops and so James was able to show us that.  What about agronomic highlights? One of the key pieces that I believe is at the foundation  of our success is our continued learning and willingness to challenge what we think to  
**[0:15:03-0:15:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:15:03):**  be true. So what were some of the experiences that you've had over the last decade where  we thought something was a certain way and then we discovered that it wasn't?  I mean I recall learning that our trace manure products weren't nearly as effective as we  thought they were when we started using sap analysis and having to reformulate those lines  that eventually turned into the rebound line and just really seeing what a tool that was  
**[0:15:29-0:15:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:15:29):**  for gauging the effectiveness of nutritional materials. That was definitely a big learning  curve for us when we started to see those trends and started to not see the movement,  the plants that we thought we were able to create.  I think another key thing was talking about apples again was realizing the key calcium  potassium relationship. We knew that bitter pit was calcium driven. We weren't as fully  
**[0:15:52-0:15:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:15:52):**  aware that it was also potassium driven as far as potassium blocking calcium from getting  into the trees. And I know you wrote some papers and articles on that even before a  lot of universities were talking about that now and it's pretty commonplace now to talk  about potassium and calcium in under-gressed apples with bitter pit but I think we saw  that first because of the sap analysis and we were pushing calcium but you know when  
**[0:16:16-0:16:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:16:16):**  the trees are so full of potassium pushing all the calcium in the world it's not going  to be able to move the levels to where they need to be. And it was the half of the sap  analysis that showed us that particular relationship and allowed us to focus on managing potassium  both by reducing it and not applying it when it's not needed and also by providing the  trace minerals like manganese that are necessary for proper potassium regulation in the trees.  
**[0:16:43-0:16:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:16:43):**  When you were speaking about apples just now there's this phrase, this conversation that  keeps reoccurring within our team here at AEA that is something along the lines of if  someone sat down and deliberately put together an agronomy management system to create and  to design some of the problems that these crops experience they couldn't possibly design  something better than the current agronomic management systems that are in widespread  
**[0:17:11-0:17:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:17:11):**  use. I know that we say that with an element of facetiousness and yet there's entirely  too much truth in that to be comfortable. Can you share some of your observations and  experiences of where you've observed crops or management practices that were the direct  antithesis of what was needed to produce a really healthy crop?  Sure yeah I think apples are a big example and this is something that I want to make  
**[0:17:40-0:17:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:17:40):**  these criticisms or observations from the perspective of understanding that farmers  are trying to make the best decisions they can on a daily basis. A lot of times the information  that they're coming across, that they're reading, that things are being told by agronomists,  by consultants, by university personnel, by salesmen from retailers, things like that  they're following the best advice they can get it's just they're not hearing the right  
**[0:18:09-0:18:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:18:09):**  information or hearing the right perspective. And so I don't want to fault growers as much  as being able to just call out the practices that I think and I've seen be detrimental  and I think on apples going back to those key nutrient management pieces of potassium  and calcium of understanding when and how to use potassium is hugely important. From  our perspective potassium isn't needed and generally until well into fruit fill on most  
**[0:18:38-0:18:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:18:38):**  varieties of most soils but a lot of programs front load large amounts of potassium in the  fall, in the spring to the detriment of the ability of those trees to pull up calcium  to create large high quality fruit and also to meet the nutritional needs of the trees  that allow for continual production year on year without falling into a biannual bearing  cycles especially when you get into hard to manage varieties like Honeycrisp where there's  
**[0:19:07-0:19:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:19:07):**  also heavy pruning so you're restricting the photosynthetic capacity of the tree as well  as feeding out of balance mineral programs. It really results in trees that struggle to  produce a lot of high quality fruit that struggle to maintain productivity and a long healthy  lifespan. So I think that even going into techniques of deficit irrigation and using  a lot of calcium chloride because it's cheap as a calcium source which only further impacts  
**[0:19:37-0:19:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:19:37):**  the canopy of the tree and retards its ability to undergo photosynthesis and produce a lot  of energy. So it's just this negative cycle that keeps building upon itself with these  trees. I think citrus is another one. Obviously greening has made a huge impact on the citrus  industry in Florida but those trees before the bacteria showed up were in rough shape  as well from again too much focus on nitrogen and potassium, not enough on trace minerals  
**[0:20:05-0:20:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:20:05):**  and calcium over use of herbicides and pesticides that reduce soil biology and created in a  sense an opening for a disease organism to gain a foothold in those trees and the trees  don't have the energy or strength to be able to fight it off. I think that extends to I  mentioned cotton before too and cotton as well. It's a plant that is managed I've heard  you describe as having both pedals jammed to the floor at the same time both with the  
**[0:20:35-0:20:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:20:35):**  accelerator and the brake and that's pretty accurate because they're feeding tons of nitrogen  which causes the plant to grow and then they don't want it to grow so they use the PTRs  to put the brakes on the growth which then sends the plant into kind of a shock cycle  that does in some ways create some force reproduction but then there's not the nutritional support  underneath that to be able to allow the plant to feel like it can successfully undergrow  
**[0:21:04-0:21:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:21:04):**  that reproduction cycle so then it really stretches out more in response to that and  creates taller internodes and weak cells that are susceptible to insects and disease so  more chemicals have to be applied to control the insects and disease and at the end of  the season bowl openers and desiccants have to be applied to be able to get the bowls  to open and the crop to be harvestable and it really is working against the natural tendencies  
**[0:21:29-0:21:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:21:29):**  of that plant and I think that that's an extreme example but those things happen a lot in most  cropping systems where the management decisions that the growers are making are working against  nature right and we talked for a long time about working with nature versus working against  nature and to be able to understand what a plant needs and when it needs it as far as  nutrition and be able to support that and provide those things in the right timing are  
**[0:21:55-0:21:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:21:55):**  some of the key things that we talk about and some of the advances and successes we've  had are just because of changing up of timing like I mentioned with potassium we don't need  potassium in March and April on the majority of crops we really need it in July, August  and September and so being able to you know to change management programs to account for  that could make some big differences pretty quickly.  
**[0:22:18-0:22:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:22:18):**  I think many of the challenges with nutrient mismanagement or in the case of cotton of  driving with both the accelerator and the brake jammed all the way to the ground which  is as great analogy for what is happening with those systems.  The challenge is not that farmers aren't attempting to make good decisions or that they're getting  wrong information it is that many times the decision-making framework is rather than looking  
**[0:22:45-0:22:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:22:45):**  at the entire system and all the pieces that are integrated into the entire system we're  looking for specific point solutions.  So back in the beginning I'm sure that there was a problem that resulted in the point solution  for a specific problem on cotton was increased applications of nitrogen.  Well that then creates another set of problems for which the solution is a PGR application.  
**[0:23:12-0:23:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:23:12):**  It's very similar to someone who gets a drug prescription and they're on a drug for a while  and then they develop another symptom another problem now they need to have another drug  to treat the symptoms or the effects of the first drug and that's in many ways where we've  arrived in agriculture and I recall one conversation when you had first started working with some  apples in Washington there were concerns about fruit drop late season fruit drop just before  
**[0:23:37-0:23:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:23:37):**  harvest as a result of high levels of abscisic acid yet the challenges with fruit drop were  actually being created by the very practices and products that farmers were using.  Can you tell us a little bit about that?  Yeah that was going back to the Honeycrisp management but you're exactly right on the  kind of layering of silver bullet solutions you know which is a lot of what agronomy and  
**[0:23:59-0:24:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:23:59):**  what is pushed in ag retail.  You're right focusing on a single problem with a single point solution that does not  account for any of the effects that are caused by that and does not account for how those  particular applications affect the entire system you know or really how they would optimally  incorporate it into that system.  
**[0:24:24-0:24:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:24:24):**  That's not to say that some of these things can't be tools that you know are effective  and used well but just it's not they're not thought of that way it's much more focused  on short term versus systemic or holistic or long term thinking and part of what we  do I think is being able to unwind you know some of those and under help for us to understand  which management practices are helpful and which can stay and which need to be let go  
**[0:24:49-0:24:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:24:49):**  of because they're not really making a difference or they're making a negative difference.  I'll get back to your question on the apples in a second but just thinking about a grower  that we were working with you know just starting work with a couple of years ago and they were  spending several hundred thousand dollars a year on a potassium product you know a high  quality quote unquote you know dry potassium product.  
**[0:25:12-0:25:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:25:12):**  Looking at their SAP analysis you know when they were applying that they didn't need it  their potassium was good in the trees adequate levels or more than adequate levels and they're  making very expensive applications and actually weren't seeing a big bump in their potassium  levels in the trees so they were really you know throwing a lot of money in a sense onto  the ground and not seeing a lot of benefit from it and we were able to help them take  
**[0:25:36-0:25:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:25:36):**  that money and put it towards the calcium and trace minerals of biology that made a  big difference in the next season on how those trees performed.  And a similar situation in the grower you were talking about earlier is you know looking  to retard growth in Honeycrisp right because they don't want a lot of growth a lot of vigor  because you know that pulls in a sense calcium away from you know the fruit and so the idea  
**[0:26:00-0:26:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:26:00):**  is to retard the growth past the fruiting spur and be able to you know concentrate the  nutrient flow into the fruit which is logical right it makes sense you know it's just that  that's accomplished through pretty drastic measures of holding back water in very arid  environments for long periods of time and applications of things like epicyc acid which  is the very compound in trees that causes fruit drop.  
**[0:26:27-0:26:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:26:27):**  Both those things together on this particular farm was resulting in pretty high percentage  of late season fruit drop on the Honeycrisp and when you're in that situation and you're  you've been making these decisions and listening to what people have been telling you you know  it can make sense from from that particular perspective of walking into the farm you know  from the outside just being able to listen you know with in a sense fresh ears to what's  
**[0:26:49-0:26:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:26:49):**  going on you know it was like okay you're holding back water from the trees which is  going to want to make them drop fruit especially you know in the climate you know in this area  where it's hot and very dry and you're applying a hormone compound that will also encourage  trees to drop fruit and you're a little you know surprised that there's fruit drop happening  that this problem you know is occurring within a certain number of weeks after the application  
**[0:27:18-0:27:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:27:18):**  of the epicyc acid.  It's really kind of like I felt like that was they were just down in a dead end street  you know and they had been making all these turns following directions you know that were  being given to them and they ended up just smack in the middle of a dead end street and  we're wondering why you know how they got there when from stepping back and looking  
**[0:27:36-0:27:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:27:36):**  at it from a bit of a different vantage point it was very easy you know very easy to see  why they were in that spot and having to undo that entire system you know where you know  the problems not the irrigation practices or the hormone applications it's really backing  up to what are the nutrient applications that are leading those trees to be in the situation  where they have to be deficit irrigated and have hormone supplies to stop them from growing.  
**[0:28:03-0:28:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:28:03):**  It's really looking for the root cause of it right and that's also something that we  do really really well is to not get caught up in chasing symptoms but really look for  the root causes and situations that when we change those the series of problems whatever  they are start to unravel the crops move into a situation where they're creating their own  resiliency and robustness that can resist whatever the issue of the day is right if  
**[0:28:30-0:28:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:28:30):**  it's too wet of a year or too dry of a year or if there's you know an insect problem that  happens show up in part of the crop you know it's just it when the biology is right when  the nutrition is right and when the system is working you know like it should don't become  large economically damaging issues that they used to.  It's a really interesting conversation for us to have advising a different approach to  
**[0:28:53-0:28:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:28:53):**  nutrition management because what happens is we end up with this series of self-inflicted  wounds as a result of incorrect information or simply maybe the right information misapplied  or as a result of these as you described it layered silver bullet solutions and then when  you identify the root cause and you start making recommendations for how to change the  system they appear to be completely radical to say okay let's go back to the cotton example  
**[0:29:20-0:29:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:29:20):**  okay we need to rather than driving with both the accelerator and the brake to the floor  using both high rates of nitrogen and PGRs let's cut out the PBRs let's reduce nitrogen  applications by 60 or 70 percent so that's just two facets that's not even talking about  how additional recommendations for addressing biology and so forth.  So those types of recommendations appear to be really radical they require some comfort  
**[0:29:49-0:29:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:29:49):**  with taking a completely different perspective and completely different approach.  Even then what happens we've gained a reputation in this regenerative agriculture space for  producing some pretty extraordinary yield outcomes like the cotton example that you  talked about with James Johnson of producing what happened the numbers for this last year  40 percent to 70 percent on the different varieties I think increase yields over regional  
**[0:30:16-0:30:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:30:16):**  averages and so when you look at taking this very different approach to very different  types of outcomes I've made the comment in the past that many of us don't even know what  really healthy plants actually look like anymore we don't have a good perspective anymore of  what is really possible because we have developed such a warped approach and so I'd love to  get your perspective on what really is possible where are the opportunities that we're really  
**[0:30:43-0:30:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:30:43):**  missing?  I think the opportunities abound in every region in every crop type in the US and beyond  you know I've seen I think starting from what's possible to not do it's possible to dramatically  reduce the nitrogen potassium and phosphorus applications that are routinely made all across  the country that are in a sense the root of plant centered issues that surround insect  
**[0:31:09-0:31:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:31:09):**  and disease problems that end up polluting waterways in Chesapeake Bay and the Great  Lakes and the Gulf of Mexico and you know the West Coast waterways you know so being  able to reduce those applications to only what's really necessary using plant sap analysis  and their technology I think it's possible to dramatically reduce the amount of crop  control pesticides insecticides that are applied on a yearly basis the cotton is a great example  
**[0:31:37-0:31:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:31:37):**  I think there's not a crop that we've worked in that I can think of right now where we  haven't been able to significantly reduce those kind of applications when the grower  feels ready right we don't do that right from the start we don't come out and try to pull  it pull the tablecloth out from under the the place settings in the first year and we  have to work with the grower I think we do a good job of that working with the grower  
**[0:31:55-0:31:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:31:55):**  to have them feel confident that they can make those kind of changes sometimes we get  we get thrown for loop and the grower does it without telling us but that's always a  fun surprise later in the year like yeah I haven't put on any insecticide all year I  didn't tell you guys I wanted to see how it worked but I think that's great to see that  they have confidence you know in what in what they're seeing it's always a nice surprise  
**[0:32:13-0:32:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:32:13):**  to hear that so I think there we can make major major changes in the kind of negative  applications that are causing a lot of both the issues with the crops and plants themselves  and then also that create issues downstream from that you know in ecosystems and communities  all around the country so making those two changes I think are huge and you know as the  as the acreage that AEA works on expands you know on a yearly basis I like to be able to  
**[0:32:41-0:32:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:32:41):**  think we're having a very positive impact on those two areas for as far as what's possible  with the plants themselves I still think we're only seeing the beginning of that being able  to to increase yield and we've seen that in in crops ranging from apples to brussels sprouts  to cotton to corn and soybeans to you know wheat kind of whatever we've been able to  work but also really understanding what the the key quality metrics are that make a big  
**[0:33:08-0:33:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:33:08):**  difference economically for growers I think that's something else that we do very very  well is we're not just saying here buy this product because you need it or buy this product  because everybody else is putting it on and having conversations with with the grower  we're able to understand what are the key drivers of their economic situation you know  what makes them the most money in a sense and we are able to put together a program  
**[0:33:35-0:33:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:33:35):**  that orients all of what they're doing for fertility around that particular goal whether  that's looking at you know size and firmness in blueberries whether that's you know looking  at protein and falling number in wheat whether that's looking at color and you know size  uniformity in apples we understand how to make those manipulations and how to encourage  the crop to you know to move towards those particular goals and we can we can show the  
**[0:34:07-0:34:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:34:07):**  grower exactly why you know we're making particular applications and they're in line with those  goals and so once we're doing that I think that we really haven't been able to to see  the new levels new plateaus of growth and productivity that we can reach you know I  think we've been doing this you know you and I for you know over a decade and there are  some farms that have been with us for you know four five six seven years that are really  
**[0:34:32-0:34:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:34:32):**  only starting to come into their own that understanding the systems of having soil biology  in place for a number of seasons of having you know high quality crops growing in in  those soils putting a lot of that energy and solar energy back into the in the ground and  feeding biology and and creating that that positive momentum you know because it takes  two to three years at least to to stop the negative momentum from decades of potentially  
**[0:34:59-0:35:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:34:59):**  you know not as beneficial practices and get it going the right direction so once we do  that it takes two to three years to to start seeing some of the real benefits and we're  just in that phase of having growers that have been doing this long enough to to really  open up I think what some of the new possibilities are.  When you observe some of these exceptional successes or as in the cotton example that  
**[0:35:23-0:35:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:35:23):**  we spoke about a moment ago or you mentioned Stephen Beerlink on apples we have any number  of growers that we work with that have observed some pretty remarkable crop responses what  are the common themes that you observe that growers are doing what are growers getting  right that contributes to those exceptional successes?  Starting with biology being able to focus on the life in the soil and either accentuate  
**[0:35:49-0:35:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:35:49):**  what they've got or if they're starting from a more hardcore conventional system being  able to start that process of reinvigorating of repopulating you know the various communities  in the soil which then changes water penetration it changes oxygen levels in the soil it changes  soil structure it changes nutrient cycling you know all these things which are fundamental  to the success of a crop right so being able to start with that being able to build off  
**[0:36:15-0:36:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:36:15):**  that foundational block of soil biology and then look to really start to take a much more  direct hold on the nutrient management during the crop season and that has a couple of forms  you know one like we talked about is reducing the applications of what's not needed or what's  causing problems and whether that's things like anhydrous ammonia or early season potassium  applications in tree fruit or being able to understand the full impacts of herbicides  
**[0:36:43-0:36:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:36:43):**  and fungicides insecticides on soil and soil biology and nutrient density and crops being  able to cut some of those out that are necessary or change product types to ones that are less  harmful the second part of that is being able to add in being able to understand where the  holes are where the needs are in the nutritional levels of the crop and be able to supply those  with high quality materials at the right time that combination of having a good foundation  
**[0:37:11-0:37:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:37:11):**  in the soil you know with minerals and biology plus moving what's causing problems or what's  not necessary what's getting in the way and then adding in the key pieces that are missing  you know it's really the pathway that I see over and over again that leads to success.  With the different experiences that you have had which have been almost without question  quite different from many mainstream agronomists and producers with all of your various observations  
**[0:37:41-0:37:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:37:41):**  what do you believe to be true about agriculture that is perhaps different from the mainstream  view?  Nitrogen isn't as important as people think it is.  Nitrogen a drug that covers up for a lot of other things being missing or not functioning.  I think that's one of the great myths of agriculture around the world you know right now.  
**[0:38:02-0:38:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:38:02):**  Nitrogen is important absolutely it is necessary but it is not as it's not more important than  calcium or phosphorus or manganese or sulfur or any other of the key minerals that are  needed for proper plant growth.  Not only is it not as important but it's also much easier to come by in a functioning regenerative  or biological system than a lot of growers believe.  
**[0:38:26-0:38:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:38:26):**  You know I've seen farms that in places in California that haven't applied nitrogen in  a couple years in tree fruit and seen very adequate nitrogen on sap analysis because  of soil biology because a little bit of nitrate in the water just wasn't needed and the crops  are very healthy and perform very well.  Are they using cover crops in those contexts?  
**[0:38:46-0:38:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:38:46):**  No it wasn't even any particularly well managed from that perspective it was just being able  to use the data and sap analysis to take advantage of what was coming into the water and being  able to provide the rest of the trees needs through soil biology and those applications  that were increasing that so it was just being able to use some very basic tools in our toolboxes  and even getting to some of the more advanced ones with cover crops and in multi species  
**[0:39:10-0:39:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:39:10):**  and things like that that could even enhance that.  When you think about the perspective that you've just described with nitrogen challenges  and so forth which I think is has been echoed quite commonly with other people who've been  here on the podcast as well.  Just kind of a two part question here one is where do you see significant areas of opportunity  
**[0:39:33-0:39:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:39:33):**  for farmers today and kind of the other side of the coin of that question is what do you  observe most limiting farmers from achieving the potential that they are capable of or  that their crops are capable of?  I think agronomically for farmers I believe that they have the ability to change what's  happening on their farms in very significant degrees.  
**[0:39:56-0:40:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:39:56):**  I think it's very easy I even see it on my own farm you see things every day you have  the same problems you know you tend to think that they're always going to be there.  A benefit of having somebody come in that's not there every day that doesn't deal with  that from the outside is being able to make suggestions or give a perspective that those  things are malleable and changeable but that has to start with the belief that they can  
**[0:40:17-0:40:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:40:17):**  be changed right and having that belief will then lead to the actions that make the changes.  If growers stay stuck in the mindset that you know this is the way the soil is or this  is the way this variety is or this is the way this block is or that kind of thing then  it's going to stay that way.  But if we look at it from the perspective of what's one thing we can change here you  
**[0:40:39-0:40:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:40:39):**  know what's the what's the most important thing we can change you know on this block  and this variety this year and figure out what that is and implement that change then  probably you're going to see something different and then that leads to additional energy and  excitement and enthusiasm that then wants you to make other changes you know in different  places and that then you know snowballs over a few seasons and then things on the whole  
**[0:41:02-0:41:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:41:02):**  farm are very different right so it's having that understanding that what we're seeing  in front of us even if it's been there for multiple years is not the only way that things  could be.  I think growers both you know are the eternal optimist right because they have to start  every springtime you know here in Indiana it's springtime it's grass is turning green  
**[0:41:21-0:41:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:41:21):**  daffodils are blooming red buds are coming out growers are always come to a new season  with the belief that things can be better and we're pulled to that that drive to grow  things and and that the pull of agriculture and working with the soil to do the work that  we do on a yearly basis the hard work the difficult work the long hours you have to  have that constant belief in renewal and new opportunity and I think that's that often  
**[0:41:46-0:41:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:41:46):**  gets blunted or or ground down in growers over the years when things don't go as they  had hoped or things don't work out quite like they need to.  Being able to take that that more optimistic and hopeful side of things and then augment  that with the right tools and with the belief that with those right tools very important  and beneficial changes can be made can help growers to really create a new sense of ability  
**[0:42:16-0:42:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:42:16):**  to make important changes you know on their farms.  Jason what is something that you would like to speak more often about or something that  you think is really important but you don't often talk about it because you sense people  may not be ready to hear it yet?  I think the the importance kind of going back to my previous point of discussion there just  
**[0:42:37-0:42:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:42:37):**  the importance of belief and intention in any given situation whether that's in relationships  in in business in agriculture and we see this over and over again with people that work  with us the people that believe things are going to work and believe things are going  to change overwhelmingly see success people that believe that they're not going to work  probably aren't going to see success you know and that doesn't have to be necessarily some  
**[0:43:06-0:43:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:43:06):**  esoteric woo-woo thing right if you very practically if if you believe in something you're going  to do the things and the little things necessary to make that successful and you're going to  pay attention to it and you're going to go out and check on it and you're going to make  sure the applications got made and that the mixes were right and that they know that the  irrigation profile was correct and all those little things they go into making growing  
**[0:43:28-0:43:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:43:28):**  season successful you're going to do those and if you if you don't believe that then  maybe some things could let that go other things get more important you know you go  do something else it you know just it can take shape in a myriad of decisions and small  actions over the course of a year you know say what's the one criteria of all the growers  you know the thousands of growers we've worked with you know over the last decade was the  
**[0:43:54-0:43:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:43:54):**  one thing that separates people that are successful from those who who haven't been is really  that that believe that it's possible make a change and the belief that that it can happen  and and the belief that they have the ability to you know create that that different outcome  that they're looking for you know we we'd like to joke around ae that we need to have  t-shirts that says ae it works if you put it on because i don't know i don't know how  
**[0:44:22-0:44:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:44:22):**  many how many growers that you know have said well this stuff didn't work and i want to  return it and they want to return 60 of what they were supposed to put on because they  didn't have time to put it on i got busy i you know whatever tractor broke sprayer broke  what you know whatever the reason right it didn't get put on and you know it didn't work  you can trust that to other growers who have the same problems and the same stuff breaks  
**[0:44:48-0:44:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:44:48):**  and and the same issues and the same labor problems but they managed to get it on and  managed to to follow the programs and and make things happen and what do you know it  the stuff worked for them so you know it's it's really that that piece you know and occasionally  you'll see people that can come in and and have a change of heart and you're skeptical  to start with but then that you know they see some small things during the year bigger  
**[0:45:12-0:45:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:45:12):**  leaves or you know shoot caliper or root growth or whatever right they start to believe it  over the you know over the course of the season and by the end of it you know they really  see that things are possible so that it is possible to start skeptical and grow into  it but man the people that come in i'm doing this because you know somebody made me or  whatever things like that there's not a lot of room for for for good things to happen  
**[0:45:35-0:45:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:45:35):**  in that scenario yeah i think there are many people who can relate to that observation  and that is another element of uh we create the reality that we believe in or we create  the reality that we want to be true exactly jason i want to say thank you for joining  us here for sharing your thoughts and wisdom and look forward to seeing you more in the  future on other aea podcasts and webinars and so forth all right thank you john thanks  
**[0:46:03-0:46:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:46:03):**  for giving me the chance to come on  the team at aea and i are dedicated to bringing this show to you because we believe that knowledge  and information is the foundation of successful regenerative systems at aea we believe that  growing better quality food and making more money from your crops is possible and since  2006 we've worked with leading professional growers to help them do just that at aea we  
**[0:46:31-0:46:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:46:31):**  don't guess we test we analyze and we provide recommendations based on scientific data knowledge  and experience we've developed products that are uniquely positioned to help growers make  more money with regenerative agriculture if you are a professional grower who believes  in testing instead of guessing someone who believes in a better more regenerative way  to grow visit advancing ecoag.com and contact us to see if aea is right for you thank you  
**[0:46:58-0:47:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jason_Hobson_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:46:58):**  for listening and we look forward to working with you  