### Regenerative Agriculture Podcast  (2021-27-23)
**[0:00:00-0:00:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:00:00):**  Hi friends, this is John and this is the Regenerative Agriculture Podcast where we talk about the  agronomic science and the cultural management practices that regenerate plant health, soil  health and public health. My guest for this episode is Dale Strickler from Green Cover  Seed and from many other places as well, not just Green Cover Seed, but I think when we  look geographically at all the places Dale has been, then it would make for an interesting  
**[0:00:25-0:00:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:00:25):**  map. So Dale, thank you very much for joining us. I've been really been looking forward  to this conversation. Thank you for having me. Yeah, you have lots of experience on cover  crops and on regenerating soil in lots of different landscapes and ecosystems. Can you  tell us a little bit about your personal story and kind of the background, the context of  your work and what you're really passionate and inspired about? I grew up on a farm, Southeast  
**[0:00:53-0:01:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:00:53):**  Kansas. I actually recently moved close to where I grew up as is a little town named  Colony, Kansas. Father was a basically a sharecropper for a long time and then eventually bought  land and and so we had hogs and cattle and crops and occasionally sheep, ducks, goats,  the whole old McDonald thing. So we were very diversified and went to school at Kansas State  University and got a couple of bachelors there and then a masters and then taught agronomy  
**[0:01:34-0:01:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:01:34):**  at a community college for 15 years and thoroughly enjoyed that experience, but found it's hard  to raise a family in the manner I'd like to on a teaching salary. So I entered private  industry and I worked for Land O'Lakes, Agri Alliance, you know, all these different, you  know, permutations of Land O'Lakes that they had in agronomy at the time. It was a great  learning experience as well. Got to learn, work with a lot of really good people and  
**[0:02:07-0:02:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:02:07):**  worked for Starseed for a while, and Valent USA. And now I'm with Green Cover, which is,  I don't know if I could write a job that really fit me better personality wise or interest  wise. I've always been fascinated by cover crops. I've been fascinated by soil. What  makes soil better? A number of experiences early on in my life that made me very interested  in soil. And when I went away to college, it was, you know, every summer where I live  
**[0:02:45-0:02:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:02:45):**  now we get about 36 inches of rain, which should be fully adequate. But every summer  our crops would just burn up. Wow. You know, I just thought we didn't get enough rain because  all summer long, boy, we could use the rain, boy, we could use the rain. And just like  yesterday, I was driving through and the area where I live now, we only got into the field  to start planting seven days ago. And yesterday, a hundred degree day, the corn is already  
**[0:03:20-0:03:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:03:20):**  rolling. Wow. And that's seven days after being saturated. Seven days after being too  wet to plant, we've got corn that's suffering. And so they say here, we're always one week  away from a drought. And it's true. It's like, I just grew up assuming that's normal. You  know, this is how it is everywhere. You got to have rain every week or you're in trouble.  And then I moved away and went to places where they have this stuff called soil. And like,  
**[0:03:54-0:03:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:03:54):**  you mean you can go a whole month without rain or two months without rain, your crops  don't just die? Wow, this is great. And so I looked at our really heavy clay soil. I  mean, brickmaking has historically been a huge industry in this area because the soil  is better for making bricks than it is for making crops. And it's like, I don't like  just accepting that's the way things are. And so it's like, how can I fix the soil?  
**[0:04:28-0:04:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:04:28):**  What can I do? Well, the answer obviously is organic matter. How do you increase your  soil organic matter? Well, if you open a garden book, it says, well, you import, you know,  all these lawn clippings or leaf mold or...  What you can do if you're farming 100 acres.  Right. It's like, you know, and what advice is that on the planetary scale? You know,  
**[0:04:52-0:04:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:04:52):**  are we going to go to different planets and take all their organic matter and bring it  back here? If we're going to seriously impact agriculture with organic matter, where's it  going to come from? And so that makes it necessary to grow the organic matter on site. And each  and every acre gets enriched with more organic matter. How do you do it economically? How  do you do it in an environmentally responsible manner? How do you do it without taking from  
**[0:05:26-0:05:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:05:26):**  one field and robbing one field to enrich another? And so that kind of became my challenge.  So you've been working with that challenge for a number of years now, and I'd like to  hear a bit about the results that you've experienced. What have you observed with this soil that  does better for making bricks than growing crops?  Well, I just moved back here for a while, but my brother has been farming family ground  
**[0:05:54-0:06:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:05:54):**  along with my father who now in a nursing home, but a couple of the practices that I  really promote. One is really minimizing tillage, no till where you can. And the other is continual  flow of root exudates in the soil with cover crops or perennial crops. It's hard to get  quantifiable results. And sometimes measuring soil organic matter doesn't always measure  soil function. It's like a savings account. The most important thing is that savings account  
**[0:06:32-0:06:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:06:32):**  getting bigger or is it getting smaller? And what's your cash flow? Things like that. But  I can relate an experience that the farm I had where I previously had a small ranch for  20 years. When I bought the place, it was an irrigated corn field. One field had been  continuous corn for 42 years prior to my buying it. And then within, well, I instituted no  till and some other things, cover cropping. And then I decided that I would convert it  
**[0:07:09-0:07:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:07:09):**  to an irrigated pasture. I was told subsurface drip irrigation. It was furrow irrigated,  converted it subsurface drip irrigation. And I was told at one time I had the only subsurface  drip irrigated pasture in the entire world. I have no idea if that's true or not, but  I got my irrigation equipment from Netafim. And one of the Netafim executives said, there  is no drip tape irrigated pasture anywhere in the world. So I guess that was rather unique.  
**[0:07:43-0:07:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:07:43):**  But the drip tape allowed me to eliminate tillage and also to put a perennial crop out  there with, you know, on the flat. I didn't like having the intentional gullies out there.  I'd like to talk about drip irrigated pasture for a little bit. I'm of the persuasion that  if people manage their pastures as well as they manage their cash crops, their pastures  would be more profitable. They would be more profitable than their cash crops, particularly  
**[0:08:11-0:08:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:08:11):**  in the case of corn and soybeans. I agree. You mentioned that you're doing drip irrigation  pastures to eliminate tillage. How do those two dots connect? Well, furrow irrigation  was, I remember, you know, I was so excited when I bought this farm and I began farming  just like everyone else in the area, you know, furrow irrigation group soybeans, decided  to grow soybeans because it had been corn for 42 years and well, I'll start rotating.  
**[0:08:44-0:08:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:08:44):**  Did the irrigation, the furrow irrigation, setting the siphon tubes and I went down to  the bottom of the field to see, you know, where the water was coming out the bottom  end of the field and there was a big pile of soil that was there. And then after my  first season, all that soil was now in the county ditch and a county crew came along  in the wintertime and scraped the ditch and took trucks and put it back out in my field.  
**[0:09:19-0:09:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:09:19):**  Like how often do you guys do this? Oh, every few years. I'm like, oh my gosh. Wow. How  devastating is this furrow irrigation to my soil quality and I grid sampled the field  and the phosphorus test just stair stepped down away from, I mean, all my soil was moving  downhill and it was really impactful. So I decided, first of all, I got to get rid of  the furrow irrigation. When I bought the farm, I had 17 acre inches allotted of irrigation.  
**[0:09:53-0:09:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:09:53):**  And then that year, the year I bought it, we had water dispute with Nebraska. The river  got my irrigation from the original source, dried up. My irrigation allotment got cut  back to five acre inches. And I mean, that's essentially two waterings with furrow irrigation.  It's useless. I said, well, this, this is the future. So I'm going to learn to stretch  my water that involves no till. The subsurface drip was more than sufficient. And the neat  
**[0:10:25-0:10:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:10:25):**  thing about putting that to pasture and drip irrigation pastures, great marriage because  I mean, perennial vegetation just is great. But one of my goals was, was to restore my  soil, the furrow irrigation, the tillage, you know, it just, it doesn't do soil any  favors. When I planted the pasture and the pasture was Eastern gamma grass, alfalfa,  checkery tree foil, a whole complex blend. My soil organic manner was 1.9%, which is  
**[0:11:02-0:11:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:11:02):**  fairly typical for tilled fields in the area around 2%. I took a soil test just recently  and after I sold the farm, it was of course tilled and put back to back to corn production.  And yeah, that's a hard kill.  Let's go, let's go, let's go back and mine it again.  It did provide me an opportunity though, because the ultimate measure of land quality in a  
**[0:11:31-0:11:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:11:31):**  farmer's eyes, well, how many bushel corn can this acre grow? It's like the hundred  meter dash for, you know, how fast are you? Well, how fast do you run the hundred meter  dash? How productive is this soil? How many bushel of corn can it raise? So I'll have  an opportunity to find that out. But it also gave me an opportunity to soil sample it because  Eastern gamma grass is, it's very clumpy, has an extremely dense root system. We tried  
**[0:12:00-0:12:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:12:00):**  to soil sample it, actually used a hydraulic probe, stuck it in the ground and the truck  went up in the air. The probe would not go in the soil. It was so dense with roots.  Sounds to me like you had compaction issues.  No, no. It was not compaction. It was roots. And you know, it's like, oh my gosh, what,  what is the organic matter on this place? Well, once it was tilled up, and I don't know  
**[0:12:31-0:12:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:12:31):**  how many tillage passes it took, but it had to be a lot. I went out there and grabbed  a sample and 8.7% organic matter in 15 years.  In 15 years. So that's a-  So one, nine to eight, seven in 15 years.  So 6.8% gain in 15 years, round up to seven. It's roughly a half a percentage point per  
**[0:12:56-0:12:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:12:56):**  year.  Roughly a half percentage point a year. And that's just the surface six inches. I dug  a trench in there. I had to repair a leak and I said, you know, while we're at it, let's  just see how deep these roots go. So the backhoe operator went nine feet. He said, that's all  the farther I can go. We've got safety things, you know, collapse. You know, we have to start  
**[0:13:20-0:13:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:13:20):**  and I said, well, I don't want to stair step down. So just reach in there, dig a little  hole. And there were roots in abundance, nine feet down on this gamagrass.  I know you and I have both been told that it is impossible to raise your soil organic  matter. There are still soil scientists today who will say, hear that story I just told  you and call me a liar. So that that is impossible. So why did it happen?  
**[0:13:55-0:14:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:13:55):**  It's very common for people to say, and there are different opinions, of course, but there's  still the prevailing perspective that you can't increase organic matter beyond what  the native original profile was and pick a number. Let's say that native profile was  400 years ago or whenever it was. And yet there are any number of farmers who have had  a very different experience from that. Yes. Yeah. And native in this area runs six to  
**[0:14:22-0:14:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:14:22):**  seven percent organic matter. So in 15 years, I was able, not that I'm anything special,  but a C4 perennial grass with, you know, very productive legume companion crops and biodiversity  and managed grazing, you know, daily moves and so forth. Yeah. You can accomplish some  amazing things in soil quality. And I'm sure you know the math a lot better than I do.  But if climate change is an actual thing that we're facing from too much carbon dioxide  
**[0:14:57-0:15:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:14:57):**  in the atmosphere, you can do the math. It would not take a whole lot of acres worldwide  to make this change, to suck all the extra CO2 we've put in in the atmosphere in the  last 200 years and put it in the soil. And then whether you believe in climate change  or not as a threat, all that carbon in the soil is a good thing. All that carbon in the  soil is a good thing from an agriculture perspective. I think different people have different perspectives  
**[0:15:27-0:15:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:15:27):**  on climate change. But leaving that hot button topic to the side for the moment, the  one thing that all of us as farmers do care about is water and water cycling. And when  we recognize that, as Walter Yenny and others have so brilliantly described, that once we  restore the carbon cycle and we store organic matter in our soil, it's not just about water  holding capacity in our soil, although that is also interesting. What is even more important,  
**[0:15:58-0:16:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:15:58):**  I believe, is restoring the small water cycle, restoring local rainfall consistency. I'm  still a very young man, but in our local region where I grew up, I remember 15 years ago,  20 years ago, rainfall being consistent every eight to 10 days, unless there were occasional  severe drought years. There was some annual variation, but I would say six years out of  eight, we had very consistent rainfall. That is gone. I remember this quote from Jerry  
**[0:16:29-0:16:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:16:29):**  Bernetti. He used to say that we don't have a climate anymore. We just have vagaries of  the weather. And that's come about. We don't recognize this because many of us aren't meteorologists  and don't connect all the dots, but this has really come about as a result of a dysfunctional  carbon cycle. So when we restore soil carbon, we also restore the rainfall cycle as well.  Yeah, I agree. I tell people when they ask me who are not familiar with Kansas, what's  
**[0:17:02-0:17:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:17:02):**  the weather like in Kansas or what's the climate like in Kansas, I say, oh, it's a desert where  it floods a lot. And that's true. Like you said, we used to have gentle rains in spring  and fall and then thunderstorms in the summer. And it used to snow in the winter. Now, hardly  ever snows in the winter. We get thunderstorms punctuated by long periods without rain, you  know, intense thunderstorms, long periods without rain, it seems like. And old time  
**[0:17:35-0:17:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:17:35):**  farmers say, I don't think the climate's changing, but the weather sure is getting funny. It  is. Yeah, it does seem to be making, you know, I don't believe in climate change, but this  weather sure is getting funny. Yeah. And I think that's true. We do seem to be seeing  more intense rainfall with less frequency. I don't think many people would argue that.  I haven't found anyone that would yet at this point. And in fact, even if they would desire  
**[0:18:01-0:18:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:18:01):**  to argue that the data indicates differently, as Jerry Hatfield has eloquently pointed out.  So in addition to the experiences on your own farm, you've also had the privilege of  working with lots of different growers in many different types of environments and ecosystems  implementing cover crops. What are some of the memorable moments or remarkable experiences  you've had that really stand out in your memory? Oh, gosh, I've had so many. I remember Keith  
**[0:18:27-0:18:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:18:27):**  Thompson. I spoke at a little farmer meeting about cover crops and Keith Thompson spoke  about no till. And then we spoke just a little bit about marrying the two practices. And  this was a long time ago, and years and years ago, and I was just starting to make these  changes on my own farm. And Keith told me, he said, you know what, you'll find out about  combining no till and cover crops, said your ground is going to stay wet longer and dry  
**[0:19:03-0:19:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:19:03):**  out quicker. Keith, that's an oxymoronic statement. That's mutually exclusive. That doesn't work.  He said, you will know what I mean in about five years. And sure enough, I discovered  what he meant. The soil does hold moisture longer, but it also becomes, it doesn't dry  out quicker, but it does become plantable quicker because the cover crop pulls moisture  out of the surface. Yeah. And it, you know, all the bad things about planting in the mud,  
**[0:19:44-0:19:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:19:44):**  the sidewall smearing, the seed furrow, the seed trench cracking open, you know, when  it dries out, the compaction, all the problems with planting too wet just kind of diminish  over time. And, oh wow, that's cool. You know, another opportunity thing that I saw, I went  to visit Shane New, who's now with Understanding Ag, and Shane's a good friend of mine for  a while. And he just culled me out of the blue one time. I went over to visit him and  
**[0:20:17-0:20:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:20:17):**  he showed me this pasture, fescue pasture, where he had taken, essentially he had summer  annual cover crops and he had some seed left over in his drill. He said, I don't want to  feed mice with this. And it's too late at night. I don't want to run the shop back and  clean that drill out. I'm just going to make enough passes that it empties the drill. Here's  this fescue pasture here. So he just drilled it out in the fescue to get rid of it and  
**[0:20:46-0:20:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:20:46):**  not expecting any results. And it was just a winter-grazed fescue patch close to the  house for wintering animals. That stuff grew and grew like crazy and made a huge amount  of biomass. And then you'd think that would choke out that fescue. No, the fescue grew  so much better under that canopy. So it just really, really changed the productivity of  that pasture. It got me thinking about sunlight and sunlight capture. I think we really, really  
**[0:21:27-0:21:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:21:27):**  overestimate our ability to capture sunlight. And so much of our agronomic systems just  don't capture sunlight at all. If you look at corn-soybean rotation, how many months  out of the year do we actually capture sunlight? It's only 60 days or so of peak period. It  actually for corn, it's 45 days of peak photosynthesis. Yeah. I mean, you said a pasture can be more  profitable than a cornfield. Well, the unfair advantage of the pasture is that you can design  
**[0:22:02-0:22:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:22:02):**  that pasture to capture sunlight over a much longer period of time. You can operate at  peak photosynthesis for a long period of time. You can't on a cornfield. If you are growing  corn in a monoculture, no cover crops, no companions, you are not operating at peak  photosynthesis, but just a small fraction of the year. And that experience really made  me start thinking about our solar efficiency. And of course, that, you know, a cool season  
**[0:22:35-0:22:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:22:35):**  grass does not operate at peak efficiency in July and August. So what Shane did was  he introduced some C4 warm season species that could make better use of that sunlight  in the heat of summer period. You know what people in fescue pasture areas call summer  slumps. Why not let a more productive plant species get first crack at that sunlight?  And then it got me thinking about temperature relations. How come that fescue grew better  
**[0:23:12-0:23:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:23:12):**  underneath that canopy than it did in full sunlight? Well, fescue grows better in October  than it does in July, even though there's half the sunlight. I don't know the actual  fraction, but there's far less sunlight in October than there is in July. So by putting  that canopy over that, it essentially, as far as the fescue is concerned, it changed  the July day into an October day. Less sun, but 20 degrees cooler. And it was amazing.  
**[0:23:42-0:23:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:23:42):**  There's lots of dynamics in play there. And I think your comment about combining different  species, warm season grasses, I shouldn't say species, but different types, warm season  grasses, cool season grasses, legumes, and so forth is an important framework to keep  in mind when we think about developing different combinations and so forth. But when we think  about photosynthetic efficiency, I've been beating the drum for a decade that our plants  
**[0:24:10-0:24:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:24:10):**  are only photosynthesizing at 15 to 20% of their inherent photosynthetic potential. And  often enough that people, they understand intellectually that that's the case, but it  hasn't really penetrated what that actually means for plant performance. And you're describing  a couple of different aspects. One is having plants present during all the days where photosynthesis  is possible, that are capable of capturing that sunlight. So it's extending the window,  
**[0:24:39-0:24:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:24:39):**  if you will, of photosynthesis.  The duration of photosynthesis. Yeah.  Yeah. And which is very important. And then there's also what you described with fescue  is that you can increase the photosynthesis of a plant based on the environment that it's  in and based on its nutritional profile.  
**[0:24:54-0:24:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:24:54):**  It sure added to the productivity of that pasture. I'll tell you that. And that was  a real eye opener there. You assume it's like the elephant that, you know, when you take  a baby elephant and you tie it to a stake and it pulls and it pulls and it can't get  away. And then that elephant as an adult, you just put it to a little stake in the ground  that it could pull out in a flash, but it doesn't because it assumes that it's impossible.  
**[0:25:23-0:25:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:25:23):**  And I think we are, we are so often elephants tied to a stake.  I love that.  Because we have put limitations. That's the maximum we can do with this. And you hear  that said, well, that's the best we can do around here. Like, and everywhere you go,  farmers use that term around here and that won't work around here. That won't work around  
**[0:25:46-0:25:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:25:46):**  here. You can't do that around here. And like the laws of physics change, you know, within  30 miles of their house.  Yeah. And if a farmer five miles away is successful in implementing something, oh, it rained more  over there or less or whatever.  Yeah. And it's basically just a rationalization of the mental limitations that we put on ourselves.  
**[0:26:10-0:26:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:26:10):**  I finally found, and I do this in presentations sometime, I give them a map of where around  here actually is. I've looked for the place for years and years. And around here is one  side of the property boundary is a left ear and the other side is right ear. That's where  around here exists. And that is, you are right, that is a place where nothing ever works.  Because we have put those limitations on ourselves. And you talk about the guys that win the national  
**[0:26:45-0:26:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:26:45):**  corn yield contest and like, oh gosh, you can't do that around here. You know, it's  like, you know, none of those guys have neighbors that are producing 600 bushel corn. I'm sure  their neighbors are saying, oh, that won't work around here either. And then you think  how amazing 600 bushel corn is. And then you realize, like you said, corn plants only operating  at peak photosynthesis for 45, 60 days out of the year. Like how much more can we derive  
**[0:27:18-0:27:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:27:18):**  from our land? And I think one of the biggest mental changes a farmer can make is stop thinking  about I raise corn or I raise soybeans or I raise cattle or oranges or blueberries or  whatever your crop is. And say, my goal, my job is to harvest sunlight and harvest rainfall.  And extract nitrogen from the atmosphere. And have gas exchange in my soil. You know,  pull oxygen into my soil and exhale carbon dioxide out of my soil and to capture that  
**[0:27:52-0:27:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:27:52):**  carbon dioxide back in your canopy. When you start thinking of your goals as optimizing  your ecosystem function, you know, maximizing photosynthesis through solar capture and carbon  dioxide capture, harvesting rainfall, biologically fixing nitrogen, then all of a sudden you  start seeing all the tremendous waste that we currently have in agriculture and you think  what percentage efficiency are we operating at now? It's ridiculously low. And when you  
**[0:28:26-0:28:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:28:26):**  see all this waste, you see opportunity.  It's ridiculously low. You know, I think if we were to look at our production and productivity  from a global macro perspective, we get caught up in what are yields per acre and the marketing  mantra that has been developed by agribusiness to use farmers to do the marketing for them  that we are feeding the world. But in fact, if you started looking at measuring yield  
**[0:28:54-0:29:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:28:54):**  and measuring productivity in terms of calories per acre and grams of protein per acre, all  of a sudden you would realize that we are actually doing a very poor job of harvesting  sunlight and converting that into calories and protein and that there is a lot of untapped  opportunity left on the table. So it's a different perspective than looking at it purely in terms  of bins and bushels per acre.  
**[0:29:18-0:29:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:29:18):**  You grow up thinking, you know, we're Americans, we're the most efficient people in the world.  We put a man on the moon, you know. Yeah, we have some exceptional technological developments  and we see ourselves as the most efficient farmers in the world and think, well, how  are we measuring that efficiency? Well, I drive by the billboard all the time. One Kansas  farmer feeds 155 people plus you. So we're efficient because one farmer feeds all these  
**[0:29:49-0:29:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:29:49):**  people. But when you look, like you said, when you look at calories or grams of protein  per acre, we're miserably inefficient. We're not harvesting sunlight. We're not harvesting  rainfall. Every time it rains, the river comes up. And so how much of the rainfall that I  know in my area of our 36 inches, a miserably poor percentage actually gets in the soil  and stays in the soil to grow crops.  
**[0:30:21-0:30:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:30:21):**  I think because we are in this developed country, in this Western civilization here in the United  States, many of us readily lose sight of what agriculture looks like in the majority of  the world and the rest of the world. And I think it would be wise for us to remember  occasionally that when we look at global agriculture as a whole, this type of agriculture that  we are all familiar with that we today call conventional or commercial agriculture, mainstream  
**[0:30:51-0:30:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:30:51):**  or whatever you want to call it, it's mainstream here. That type of agriculture uses 70% of  all the inputs globally in both terms of fuel and fertilizer and so forth. It uses 70% of  the total inputs and it produces 30% of the total production as compared to small scale,  small holder agriculture, which is most of the rest of the world.  So you think about what that means. That means that smaller scale, small holder agriculture  
**[0:31:21-0:31:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:31:21):**  uses 30% of the inputs to produce 70% of the output. And all of a sudden it starts raising  some question marks about the real efficiency of the system that we're actually using.  You know, of course, a lot of those small holder farms are farmed with hand labor and  hand labor allows you to do, you can do things on foot you cannot do with a big tractor.  We think that intercropping or companion cropping is a new concept. No, it's an ancient concept  
**[0:31:55-0:32:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:31:55):**  that we have completely forgotten about in the industrialized part of the world because  you know, and intercropping was common as recently as 100 years ago, you know, before  mechanized combines. It was very common that you would put pumpkins in corn after the last  cultivation to provide basically post harvest, you get two crops off the same and the cattle  could pasture pumpkins and corn stalks at the same time after the corn was handpicked.  
**[0:32:26-0:32:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:32:26):**  Of course, once mechanical combines come around, people stop doing that. Once residual herbicides  came out. Yeah, we do a better job growing corn, but we do a poorer job harvesting sunlight.  And that's the ultimate measure of efficiency. We have the wrong metrics by which we judge  our our standard in really the acres farmed per person. I think that is a negative. It's  like on that same billboard, each farmer feeds 155 people plus you, they ought to say 12  
**[0:33:07-0:33:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:33:07):**  families farm this land at one time and now it's farmed by one. And that's why our small  towns are drying up. And the rural areas are becoming impoverished. We've actually lost  efficiency when you when you look at the true metrics. Something else actually that I think  we should look at from a true metrics perspective, given the changing world that we live in,  I don't think we should just exclusively measure calories or protein per acre. I think instead,  
**[0:33:39-0:33:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:33:39):**  we should look at calories and protein production per gallon of water. And how much water do  we actually keep and utilize. And all of a sudden, that really amplifies our water use  efficiency and and the way that different crops respond to that as well. So yeah, that's  that's another interesting perspective to keep in mind. I've really enjoyed the books  that you've written. I know that you have another book coming out. We want to talk about  
**[0:34:02-0:34:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:34:02):**  that a little bit as well. One of the observations you made that really caught my attention was  your photo of you at the moral plots. Can you tell us a little bit about that? What  was happening? What was going on? I had an opportunity with my boss, Keith Burns. We  traveled east towards your direction and went to meet with some customers and business partners  that we have in Indiana. Keith asked me, where would you like to stop along the way? And  
**[0:34:32-0:34:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:34:32):**  one of the places I said was the moral plots because that's the longest running continuous  experiment field in the northern hemisphere, I believe that people may argue that I don't  know but that that's what I've read. We stood there and there's just this distinct change  in elevation. I mean, this is tabletop flat, surrounded by buildings and trees. So there's  really no water movement. There's no wind. And the tilled area within that plot, what  
**[0:35:09-0:35:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:35:09):**  did it look like in the picture? I would guess two feet lower elevation compared to the grassy  strips around it. Those 150 years ago, 170, whenever they started those plots, that was  all the same elevation. But that farmed area has subsided. It has sunken like a bathtub.  Now the whole thing ponds water because it is a lower elevation than everything around  it. And so what happened? Well, and gosh, I posted that picture on Facebook. Oh, man,  
**[0:35:48-0:35:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:35:48):**  the comments started coming in and said, oh, that's erosion. No, there's no place for it  to go. Water doesn't even run off the spot. It sits there like it's a bathtub. And said,  oh, that's wind erosion. No, you don't, you'd have to see the thing. It's surrounded by  a hedge. And it's just simple soil subsidence. So what did the soil lose? And obviously,  some of it was soil organic matter, but the other was pore space. I watched some of your  
**[0:36:23-0:36:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:36:23):**  things on gas exchange in soil and wow, what a sight to drive home that concept is that  how much the soil has lost. I don't know what percentage of that is due to loss of organic  matter, how much of it's due to loss of pore space. But it's just such a striking visual,  very impactful to me. Yeah, it is. And you think about soil losing two feet, let's be  really generous. And let's say that at the beginning before tillage, it was comprised  
**[0:36:55-0:37:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:36:55):**  of 50% pore space, which is I think, that's reasonable, that's achievable. That's the  statistics that John Brown and others have been sharing from Gabe Brown's ranch and others.  So if you have 50% pore space, then that means to lose two feet of elevation, you now have  compacted into the remaining two feet, all the slow that was originally in four feet.  And what does that do for water holding capacity? What I mean, as you said, the water now ponds  
**[0:37:22-0:37:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:37:22):**  there because it probably has less opportunity to infiltrate and you no longer have good  gas exchange. That's just, I'm really struck by the statistics from Iowa, that the state  of Iowa loses two pounds of topsoil for every pound of corn produced. I haven't done the  math for other states, but I have no reason to believe that the data is significantly  different for most other states in the Corn Belt. That is kind of a punch in the gut to  
**[0:37:46-0:37:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:37:46):**  realize that you're losing two pounds of topsoil for every pound of corn. That means soil is  your biggest export. It's double your export of grain. And you're sending that down the  Mississippi River every year. So that is kind of a big deal. But then to also realize that  not only are you sending it down the river, because what happens when you have that subsidence  and that collapse of soil structure, you now are also losing the available soil for the  
**[0:38:14-0:38:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:38:14):**  crop roots to interact with because they no longer can interact with the bulk soil environment  in the same way.  I saw the results of a very, very long term tillage versus no till study out in western  Kansas. Been going on for 20 years, something like that. And they saw the results. They  measured all these different parameters and the long term no till was out producing the  
**[0:38:40-0:38:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:38:40):**  tillage field two to one. You know, an arid environment, you would expect that no till  would easily rise to the top. And you ask why is that? And oh, well, it holds more moisture.  Well, they measured the water holding capacity of each soil, the ability of the soil to hold  the grams of water per kilogram of soil, you know, took a core of each and put it in the  lab, measured the water holding capacity, and they were virtually identical. Well, wait  
**[0:39:17-0:39:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:39:17):**  a minute, interest, you know, I thought the ability of soil to hold water would improve  with no till and it did, but it was extremely slight. You say so where's all the extra water  coming from? Increased root depth. Because of that pore space, you get this increase  in pore space and soil structure and the plant roots could just go that much deeper and when  they measured water extraction by foot, that's where the extra yield was being made. Greater  
**[0:39:51-0:39:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:39:51):**  rooting depth because of the greater porosity and better gas exchange in the soil. I think  this is a really important point. I have fresh in my mind the course that Harriet Mellow  has put together for Kind Harvest, which I've just been reviewing again this last week and  it just startlingly fresh perspective from a completely different perspective than we  often hear, even in the regenerative agriculture space. And she made the point that when you  
**[0:40:18-0:40:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:40:18):**  compare everyone talks about organic matter and one of the significant benefits of organic  matter being additional water holding capacity. And she makes the point that when you do the  math and you compare the increased water holding capacity of organic matter compared to what  that soil should actually be able to hold on its own, it's actually not that significant  of an increase, which is exactly what you described. So, and when you look at it in  
**[0:40:40-0:40:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:40:40):**  terms of percentage increases, it's actually not that significant. Five to 10% increases  in water holding capacity, but it increases the pore space and it increases the soil rooting  depth, which you pointed out, which is exactly right. You know, we measure water holding  capacity a lot of times is volume of water per volume or per weight of soil. Well, one  thing that extra pore space does is it reduces the weight flux that reduces the weight. So  
**[0:41:10-0:41:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:41:10):**  maybe we're measuring that the wrong way. You see the higher yields in a very arid environment  and that's obviously due to greater moisture availability. And when you take the same amount  of soil and you increase the volume, then your water holding per weight of soil may  not change, but your water holding per volume of soil and having simply more volume of soil,  like you know, that photo in the Moro plots, there's obviously more volume of soil on the  
**[0:41:43-0:41:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:41:43):**  edge of that than there was in the tilled area. And that won't show up in water holding  per gram because the two soils don't weigh this thing. Right. What you're describing  is essentially a parallel of the challenges of measuring carbon in the soil profile. And  perhaps we should be measuring total water holding capacity in a four foot depth area,  or we need to look at it in terms of volume rather than in terms of on a weight weight  
**[0:42:10-0:42:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:42:10):**  basis. You've had many different experiences and I really appreciate your writing style  in the books that you've written of being able to share stories of things that you've  observed. And with all of the different experiences that you have had, what is something that  you believe to be true about agriculture that is very different from the mainstream view  or from the view of others in the ag community? I think we kind of alluded to it. I think  
**[0:42:39-0:42:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:42:39):**  that we not sure quite how to word it, but that we've somehow hit some sort of ceiling  on what we can do in agriculture. People say, Oh, you know, we're never going to be able  to feed 10 billion people on the planet. I think that's a ridiculous statement because  our current state now is just so inefficient and I see wasted potential everywhere. I don't  see those limitations. I see opportunities everywhere. I drive down the road and, boy,  
**[0:43:10-0:43:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:43:10):**  if they just do this and this, there'd be so much more productivity off that acreage,  whether it's putting in a cover crop post harvest on a cornfield or interseeding or  aerial seeding or something they could run, you know, crop of cattle on here. I said,  gosh, if they just rotationally graze that pasture or, you know, not graze it into the  ground, leave enough canopy that's fully photosynthesizing throughout the growing season. I think the  
**[0:43:40-0:43:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:43:40):**  thing is we have put such mental limitations on ourselves. I strongly agree with you. Just  the framework that you raised of thinking about not being able to feed 10 million people  in 20 years from now or whatever, 10 billion people rather. That is several people who  have had a podcast have made, have strongly refuted that statement, citing the large number  of food that is proportionate food that is wasted and so forth. Just as a mental thought  
**[0:44:07-0:44:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:44:07):**  experiment, imagine what our agriculture would look differently if we and our food production  would be different if we just converted the 40% of corn acres that go to ethanol to actual  food crops. What if we started growing tomatoes and potatoes and rice on those 40% corn acres?  There would be zero problem growing a surplus of food. That is not going to be a problem.  We just simply have to shift and change the types of crops that we're growing. It's not  
**[0:44:40-0:44:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:44:40):**  that big a deal.  Yeah. And I think another myth, and I have this recurring argument over and over, you  get into circles where people are very concerned about the environment and the future of the  planet. And I run in a lot of those circles, or I'm kind of an oddball because I'm a cattle  rancher and so people say, oh, you should be loved in those circles, but you're not  
**[0:45:08-0:45:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:45:08):**  probably.  I am dubiously accepted by some of those because they've had this idea drummed into their head  that cattle are somehow, we've had ruminant animals on this planet for millions and millions  of years. And when you look at the digestive system of some of the dinosaurs had a fermenting  digestive system as well and belching methane and just like cattle do. And so we've had  
**[0:45:37-0:45:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:45:37):**  these animals, herbivorous animals with fermenting chambers in their digestive system for millions  and millions of years. And now all of a sudden they're changing the climate to the negative.  It's absolutely ridiculous. And people say, well, if we just take all these pastures and  we just plow them up and grow spinach on them, we can feed the planet and we'd be so much  better off. And to me, the absolute most biologically, ecologically friendly food production system  
**[0:46:19-0:46:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:46:19):**  is well, maybe not a pasture, but maybe like a silvopasture, a two story agriculture that  incorporates large ruminant animals because of their ability to harvest high cellulose  materials at the same time that those perennial herbaceous plants are sequestering carbon  in the soil at an insane rate compared to our annual crop agriculture and produce a  very nutrient dense compound. And the idea when you look at our average pasture efficient,  
**[0:46:55-0:47:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:46:55):**  you know, I talked about efficiency of corn. The management we give our pastures is so  ridiculously low. You talk about a place we put mental limitations on ourselves. I mean,  corn feels bad, but a pasture is 10 times worse. And I think their potential to produce  more food product from a pasture, that's where the real low hanging fruit in agriculture  is right there.  
**[0:47:22-0:47:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:47:22):**  A number of occasions I've spoken about CJ Fenzel's experimental work back in the late  70s. And I've written a blog post about it and republicized some reports of his original  work. But let's just summarize it very simply and say that he was producing 6,000 pounds  of meat, not beef, not live weight on the hoof, 6,000 pounds of meat per acre on intensively  managed pastures. What type of corn crop can do that? The answer is none. You cannot approach  
**[0:47:52-0:47:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:47:52):**  that. And so again, if you go back to looking at protein production per acre, meat production  per acre, pastures and forages can absolutely win that. And you know, Dale, I completely  agree with you on misconceptions around herbivores. And it's such a ridiculous conversation. It's  not even worth you and I getting into that discussion at this point. But we could have  a series of podcasts on that topic. Yeah, but it's not really worth it because my perspective  
**[0:48:20-0:48:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:48:20):**  is it's simply that livestock producers are such a small percentage of the population  that they are convenient and easy to blame. And they're more convenient than giving credit  to the airlines where credit is really due. Yeah. I'm really interested in your perspective  on this question. Given your perspective that many of the challenges we faced are based  on the mental limitations that we impose on ourselves. Where do you see areas of opportunity  
**[0:48:47-0:48:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:48:47):**  for growers today? I think the biggest opportunity is self education. Look at you, you are probably  the best example I have ever met of a man who self educated and you probably have the  the learning equivalent of several PhDs. And you've done it yourself. The last class I  taught, I told them that 20 years from now, if you think I'm the best teacher you ever  had, then I have failed. Because if I really succeeded as a teacher, the best teacher you'll  
**[0:49:27-0:49:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:49:27):**  ever have is yourself. And nowhere in history have we had as much ability. I mean, unless  you had a, you know, a cot set up in the library of Alexandria or the library that you know,  there in Persia, not even then would you have had the opportunity to learn. I mean, what  we're doing right now, podcast, you can be getting a university quality education in  the cab of your tractor as you're going back and forth. And to me, the greatest opportunity  
**[0:50:06-0:50:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:50:06):**  we have in agriculture now is to cultivate our minds. And I love the podcast that you  do. I'm very visual learner. So I like, like when you do the videos and people present  their PowerPoints. But the ability to, to obtain that education in your tractor cab  while you're bailing hay or do another unnecessary tasks is just a  dissing tractors Dale.  
**[0:50:40-0:50:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:50:40):**  The greatest tool we'll ever have is our own mind and the ability to sharpen that tool  right now. The audio, the visual that all this stuff is really, it's literally mind  expanding. It's mind blowing. It is. And I love the things you do because you gathered  the minds, great minds and some of the people you have and the discussions you've had, you  know, the James whites, those people that just, wow. And the ability to take advantage  
**[0:51:16-0:51:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:51:16):**  of that as you know, normal farmer there in this tractor cab or going down the road, running  for parts or whatever you're doing, you have the ability to learn it and sharpen your mind.  Thank you for the compliments, Dale. I agree with your perspective on the potential of  learning and education. And that that is perhaps one of the biggest untapped potentials. And  I would say there is another that kind of parallels that. And I think what, what limits  
**[0:51:44-0:51:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:51:44):**  us from learning and from what limits us from expanding and considering new opportunities  is often fear, fear of some type and every person's fears are different, but, and that  they are often subconscious. You may not even be aware of them. It's really, fear is the  foundation of what keeps us from moving forward. And so addressing that, learning about that  and the personal development is, should include and incorporate that in addition to the intellectual  
**[0:52:15-0:52:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:52:15):**  learning. Just one comment that I'll make on the intellectual learning is I strongly  believe that we, that the collective we, society at large and the scientific community at large,  we have all the knowledge and information that we need to develop a completely different  agriculture and a completely different approach to plant nutrition. This is one of the pieces  that I'm so amazed by. We're working on a project right now to write a deep white paper  
**[0:52:47-0:52:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:52:47):**  on a specific disease that is a quote unquote incurable disease. And so we started pulling  together all of the literature and all the research on this specific disease that has  been published over the last 60 years in the scientific community. And you know, it is  absolutely, when you start doing that deep dive, it is incredible. All the information  is there over the last 60 years, they have identified exactly what amino acid profile  
**[0:53:11-0:53:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:53:11):**  that this organism requires. They've identified the carbohydrate profile that it requires.  They've identified the osmotic potential that it requires. They've identified whether it  needs an alkyl or acidic pH and what the redox environment is in the plant shoots where this  disease expresses itself. They've identified which enzyme cofactors are missing. Like when  you put all the research papers together and you read them as one whole from the perspective  
**[0:53:35-0:53:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:53:35):**  of looking at this from a nutrition management perspective, the information is all there.  We've had it all along, but the mainstream perspective is not evaluating that information  through a lens of managing nutrition and managing immunity. Instead, they're looking at it from  the perspective of how can we develop a bactericide or a fungicide for this problem. It's incredible  to me that the knowledge of how to completely prevent this disease with nutrition management  
**[0:54:06-0:54:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:54:06):**  is all there and has largely been there for 30 plus years. And no one is implementing  it. It is considered to be an incurable disease that decimates orchards across the country  every year. And yet, no one is really taking a different perspective on it. And so my point  is out just to say that to your comments about self-education, sure, there are additional  pieces that would be interesting to know. We could conclude every research paper by  
**[0:54:32-0:54:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:54:32):**  saying that there's more research that needs to be done, but we already know enough, in  my opinion, we already know enough to have a completely different approach to what we  do right now. So anyway, that's my soapbox.  Well spoken. I have to agree. I mean, there's always more to know, but like put it into  farmer talk. I already know how to farm better than I do. And we do. I mean, the knowledge  
**[0:55:01-0:55:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:55:01):**  is there and it just behooves us to assemble all that knowledge into one entity and then  take action. We don't do a great job of that in agriculture.  Yeah. So with this perspective of self-limiting beliefs that we have and the limitations that  we impose on ourselves, if we were to remove those limitations and we were to fully invest  everything and make all the changes that we know and farm as well as we know how with  
**[0:55:37-0:55:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:55:37):**  what you have observed and the depth of experience that you have, what do you think the opportunity  looks like? What's the unrealized potential? In other words, what is the upside that farmers  would be able to achieve? You're really good at telling stories, which is one of the things  I really appreciate about the books that you've written. Give us a story of what does the  opportunity actually look like? Oh my, that's a moving target because it's  
**[0:56:03-0:56:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:56:03):**  like plant geneticists. I remember reading that we have the corn plant has the potential.  Back when the world record corn yield was like 300 bushel an acre, Herman Warsaw, I  remember reading that plant geneticists said that corn has the potential to make 600 bushel  an acre under completely absolute perfect conditions. Everybody laughed. That'll never  be done. Guess what? Here we are. World record is in excess and there's no such thing as  
**[0:56:37-0:56:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:56:37):**  perfection in the natural system. He did not have perfect growing conditions for every  single need of that plant and we're there. We've exceeded it. I'm kind of a pasture guy.  That's my passion. I had this Eastern Gamma grass, alfalfa, polyculture and subsurface  drip irrigation. In an area where our native grass pastures produce about 25 grazing days  per acre, this pasture was producing over 300. Wow. It's 12 times the area average.  
**[0:57:16-0:57:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:57:16):**  Yeah, I said, oh, that's irrigated. It doesn't count. I actually stopped irrigating this  field because I never saw, never detected water stress after the first few years. It  just wasn't there. I stopped the irrigation. I only had irrigation for two months out of  the year. All the irrigation got watered, got diverted to the grain crops I grew. The  pastures didn't need it at all. I look back and it's like, all I can think of is all the  
**[0:57:48-0:57:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:57:48):**  wasted potential I had in that system. I was 12 times the area average and I could still  see, oh gosh, I really messed up there. I messed up there. I take all my mistakes and  all the things I did wrong. How much better could it have been? I don't have a good answer  to your question because I don't think we have any concept until we start looking at  all those ecosystem functions and the sunlight taking a look at every photon that hits bare  
**[0:58:19-0:58:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:58:19):**  soil is wasted forever. You can't get it back until we start looking at those things. Biologically  derived nitrogen, I think is, we look at our sunlight capture, we look at our water capture,  and then we start looking at the nitrogen that sits above every acre of land. What percentage  of the nitrogen needs of our crop do we capture biologically from the atmosphere? Oh my gosh,  that's ridiculously low in agriculture. And it could be 100%? Yeah. So you start looking  
**[0:58:57-0:59:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:58:57):**  at those things and gosh, I have no idea what that limitation is. You start talking about  the things that I don't know that I'll ever fully understand or even partially understand  about subatomic physics of plants. Whoa, we're really getting in the weeds here. You were  talking about the guy with the tomatoes that was getting him to harvest in just ridiculously  short amount of time by manipulating the subatomic physics on plants. I actually took a subatomic  
**[0:59:39-0:59:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:59:39):**  physics class in college. I didn't do well in it, but the things you're talking about  are just blowing my mind. I had no idea where that potential lies. It's so far out there.  It's over the horizon for me. Can't even begin to predict that. This reminds me of a conversation  I had recently with Steven Beerlink here on the podcast as well. He's an apple grower  from Washington. He was describing his own struggle with knowing where the goalposts  
**[1:00:09-1:00:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:00:09):**  should be because historically they used to manage their crop for 50 bins of apple production  per acre. So they knew based on that number exactly how many spurs to prune to leave on  a tree and how many apples to leave on a tree and how to manage the nutrition accordingly  and all the nuance that goes with that. Well then he starts working with AEA and the first  two years he gets a hundred bins an acre instead of 50. So now he's having to change his pruning  
**[1:00:38-1:00:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:00:38):**  management. He's having to change the number of fruit that he leaves on a tree and there's  all these. Now he's having to adjust nutrition to correspond to that. And then the next year  comes along and it's in 150 bins an acre. And so the way that he described his personal  challenge is he said, I don't know where the goalposts are anymore. I don't know what the  goals are anymore. I'm having to figure that out as I go along. And so that's an expression  
**[1:01:01-1:01:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:01:01):**  of what you're talking about. Yeah, I just know it's way out there. It really is. And  we start paying attention to some of these things. We know it's always going to be moving.  It's a journey, not a destination. Because as soon as you put a number out there, you've  kept your potential. I'll never see it in my lifetime. Maybe in yours, you're younger  than I am. Well, I think the conclusion of this conversation we've been having is that  
**[1:01:34-1:01:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:01:34):**  as we develop a better understanding, and as we work more closely aligned with the natural  ecosystems and allow themselves to express themselves fully, then there will be an ever  moving target, an ever increasing target. I think the better we develop ecosystems,  the better we manage them, then the more productive potential, there will always be upside untapped  potential because we don't live in a perfect environment. And as we look at epigenetic  
**[1:02:02-1:02:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:02:02):**  improvements and overall ecosystem improvements on the microbial level, on the plant health  level, it's just going to constantly keep expanding. I don't think we'll ever quite  arrive. It'll always be a journey. But if we want to think about arriving, we could  always go back to CJ Fenzel in 1978 and 6,000 pounds of meat per acre. I'm looking forward  to the day when someone who's grazing beef says, I want to irrigate my pastures and I  
**[1:02:26-1:02:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:02:26):**  want to manage nutrition intensively and manage the grazing intensively and I want to see  if we can replicate that because they did it 50 years ago and 40 years ago. And there's  no reason why we shouldn't be able to replicate that today.  Absolutely. Dale, what is something you wish all farmers knew?  One would be how to think like a scientist. Instead of when they try something and it  
**[1:02:52-1:02:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:02:52):**  doesn't work to their expectations, it's just, well, that doesn't work around here.  That's just ridiculous statement in my opinion. I think first thing is understanding how,  well, I guess the second thing was how does soil function? Most farmers have no idea how  soil actually functions. Figure out why something doesn't work. It's like when your car breaks  down alongside the road, we don't just say, well, I guess cars don't work around here.  
**[1:03:29-1:03:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:03:29):**  You check the gas gauge or the tires all aired up. You find out why. And farmers are very  good at figuring out what's wrong with a piece of machinery, but they're not very good at  figuring out what's wrong with the practice. We're very mechanically creative, but it doesn't  seem like we're very biologically creative. We look at machinery to solve our solutions.  If I tried cover cropping and it caused a yield reduction in the next crop, well, that  
**[1:04:05-1:04:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:04:05):**  didn't work and we give up. Well, let's look at what we want recipes. Just tell me what  to plant and I'll go do it. No, what are your goals and why will this cover crop? I can  take a rye cover crop and plant it in front of soybeans and get a really nice yield increase  in the soybeans. Well, where did it come from? Well, it could have come from reduction in  weed competition. It could have come from greater moisture conservation. It could have  
**[1:04:42-1:04:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:04:42):**  come from greater CO2 evolution during the bloom period of the soybeans. There's a number  of factors that caused that. It's not magic. There are growth factors that that rye cover  crop was able to supply. And I could take that same rye cover crop and put it in front  of corn and get a yield reduction. Well, I guess that just doesn't work around here.  No, it worked great in front of the soybeans. What happened in front of the corn? Well,  
**[1:05:13-1:05:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:05:13):**  maybe it was nitrogen sequestration. Maybe it harbored some army cutworms or something  that clipped the corn off or figure out why. I think if I could recommend farmers do anything  said figure out why things happen instead of just noticing what happened, analyze it,  be like announcers, the guys on football broadcasts that analyze everything ad nauseum and just  ruin the game. Instead of just learning the final score, figure out what happened. That  
**[1:05:50-1:05:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:05:50):**  would be something I'd like farmers to do. That's a great perspective, Dale. You've written,  I think you have two books that are published now if I'm not mistaken, and you have a third  one coming out. I've really appreciated the perspectives that you have shared in those  books. What was the intention or the thought process behind putting those books together  and putting them out there? I was hoping to get rich. I'm sorry. I'm sure you've been  
**[1:06:19-1:06:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:06:19):**  disillusioned. You're not going to get rich writing a book about agriculture. I mean,  that's just my now ex-wife. She said, why don't you just title this thing 50 Shades  of Dirt and maybe people will buy it by accident. That's a great idea, but my publisher shot  it down. Dale, if I publish a book titled 50 Shades of Soil, you'll know where I got  the idea. When I was teaching, I had all these wild ideas that were kind of radical at the  
**[1:06:56-1:07:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:06:56):**  time. My students just sit there and said, one of my students, Chad Buckley, I still  remember him sitting there, says, why don't you just put all these harebrained ideas in  a book? That's kind of where the seed first got started. The summer of 2012, just devastating  drought. My area actually was lucky enough that we caught a couple of really big rains  during that summer. Even given those big rains, but we got a couple of three inch rains that  
**[1:07:35-1:07:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:07:35):**  came very hard. There were people side by side, five wire barbed wire fence between  them and nothing else. There was 150 bushel dry land corn on one side and dead corn on  the other. On the same exact rainfall, same exact soil type. How come? You sure there  wasn't a difference in rainfall across that barbed wire fence? It sometimes happens to  you. Well, that's what I was told, but I refuse to believe it. It's amazing rain just stopped  
**[1:08:12-1:08:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:08:12):**  right here. Dangest thing you ever saw. Difference in practices make a huge difference in outcome.  It took that summer to really hammer home how much difference there was when conditions  get really severe. That's kind of what inspired me to write the Drought Resilient Farm. Then  my publisher asked, well, what else are you passionate about? I said, pasture. They said,  well, write about that. So I did. I really enjoy that. I look back at those books and  
**[1:08:49-1:08:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:08:49):**  I think, oh gosh, there's so many mistakes in these books. Not so much mistakes, but  things I've learned about since. I'd love to be able to update them from when I wrote  them because I've learned so much since then and mostly from other farmers and ranchers  that said, oh, I wish I'd been able to put this little bit of information in there, this  one. That's the problem with a book. Actually, the book that's coming out this fall was the  
**[1:09:22-1:09:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:09:22):**  first one I ever wrote, but I couldn't get a publisher to pick it up. Then when they  did say, well, it's time for your soil book to come out, I blew the dust off the manuscripts  and said, oh no, this will never do. There's so much more that needs added to this because  I've learned so much more. If I actually waited to write the book until I knew enough to write  the book, it would never come out. It's always going to be incomplete. It's always going  
**[1:09:52-1:10:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:09:52):**  to be insufficient. If you wait until it is, you'll never write a book. You got to stop  somewhere and just get enough.  Yeah. I know as you're describing, there's always lots of things that don't make it into  the book because either we don't know them yet or because there's just simply not enough  room for everything that we do know that we would like to include. It doesn't all fit.  
**[1:10:18-1:10:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:10:18):**  Is there anything that you would like to write about or to talk about, but you haven't, you've  been cautious because you were concerned about the reception. You were concerned that people  were not ready to hear it yet.  I have been somewhat reluctant to talk about climate change. It's a very hot button politically.  I can't claim to say I know climate change is occurring. I can't claim to have proof  
**[1:10:48-1:10:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:10:48):**  that it is or that it is not. Climate change has always, well, I think climate change has  always occurred and is occurring. I think the bigger question is how fast is it occurring  and are humans the cause of that? I think that's where the controversy lies. We all  know the climate is changing because climate has always changed. The question is how fast,  what direction are we heading and are we causing it? Then I think finally, can we stop it?  
**[1:11:22-1:11:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:11:22):**  Then I guess another question is should we stop it? We should be able to think about  potential climate change objectively and scientifically. Someone asked me, he said, why are people  farmers, why don't farmers believe in climate change? I said, I think if you talk to them  one on one, pretty much all of them do believe in climate change. What they don't believe  in, I guess the idea that they don't believe in the solutions that are being proposed to  
**[1:11:57-1:12:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:11:57):**  combat climate change. I think that's where the opposition lies. It's not in the belief  that the climate is changing. I think that's well accepted. It's the ridiculousness of  some of the solutions that are being proposed. Like getting rid of ruminant animals. It's  like, oh, it's the farting cows that are causing climate change. We need to eliminate beef  from our diet, which is one of the most ridiculous statements. Anybody who truly understands  
**[1:12:28-1:12:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:12:28):**  how ecosystems work, and I don't claim to be the world's foremost authority, but I do  have a basic understanding of the carbon cycle. And ruminant animals are not the problem.  In fact, they may very well be the solution if it is indeed a problem. It's the opposition  to the solutions that cause reluctance.  I think in large part, at least from my perception and my perspective, some of that reluctance  
**[1:12:57-1:13:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:12:57):**  also comes from the historical pattern of agriculture being, I don't know if I want  to use the word scapegoated, but agriculture is often credited with being the cause or  being the fault of different challenges, such as environmental pollution, groundwater pollution,  etc, etc. I certainly believe that there is an element of truth there. I don't want to  discount that entirely. There is an element of truth there. But why is it that only farmers  
**[1:13:31-1:13:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:13:31):**  are being held accountable for those different factors? If nitrate pollution and groundwater  in Iowa is such a big deal, what responsibility do fertilizer manufacturers have for that?  If any? It comes back, I made the comment earlier that it's a lot more convenient to  blame the cows and the farmers than it is to blame airlines because it impacts a lot  fewer people, and it's a minority of the population. How much of that holds true for other challenges  
**[1:13:58-1:14:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:13:58):**  as well? It's a convenient scapegoat group. Not entirely blameless, but still, my perception  is that there is an element within the agriculture community that people are very cautious about  immediately being blamed for things that they believe and they feel, not always entirely  true, but they feel they have limited control over because many farmers feel that they're  doing the best they can. While you and I may have a different perspective on that, they're  
**[1:14:30-1:14:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:14:30):**  doing the best that they know how at the moment, but I believe there's lots of room for different  types of management practices and so forth. But still, they feel stuck, they feel trapped.  And so being given credit for causing additional problems is not something they find particularly  appetizing. The flip side of that, though, being blamed for climate change or whatever,  is the other side of that coin is that if we are the cause of these problems, we are  
**[1:15:01-1:15:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:15:01):**  also the solution to those problems. And perhaps we should be compensated to be the solution  for those problems. I think there's an increasing awareness that farmers, our farm fields, if  indeed carbon dioxide, if indeed we are causing climate change, and if indeed carbon dioxide  in the atmosphere or even water vapor in the atmosphere, like Walter Yenny and some others  are starting to tell us, all those solutions can be created within our fields. And that  
**[1:15:38-1:15:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:15:38):**  may potentially be an income stream in the future that we look at. Maybe we will be compensated  for that at some point. And I think it behooves us to arm ourselves with knowledge on how  to do those things on our fields.  Agriculture in the near future is likely to look significantly different from what it  has for the last 70 years, because we have to recognize that there's different adjectives  
**[1:16:05-1:16:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:16:05):**  you can use. You can call it industrial agriculture, conventional, mainstream, whatever descriptor  you desire. But it's important for us to recognize that it is relatively recent in human history.  It's really only been since the green revolution, which is now what, 70 years old or something  like that. We are seeing a lot of the unintended secondary and tertiary negative consequences  of that. And it's reasonable to anticipate that agriculture in 20 or 30 years from now  
**[1:16:33-1:16:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:16:33):**  is going to be dramatically different from what it is today. We need to be prepared for  that. This comes back to the comment that you made about self-education. If we want  to be around for that time period and have a significant impact, then we should be preparing  for that.  Yeah, I agree.  
**[1:16:49-1:16:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:16:49):**  Dale, I've really enjoyed this conversation. Thank you very much for being here and for  sharing your wisdom and your thoughts. For all of our listeners, we'll include links  in the show notes to Dale's book. You have another one coming out. Dale, when is your  book on soil coming out this fall?  The Complete Guide to Restoring Your Soil.  
**[1:17:07-1:17:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:17:07):**  And what is the timing of when that will be available?  That will be available this fall. Right now, the target date is October, October 21.  Okay, wonderful.  I'm looking forward to it.  Dale, thank you for being here, for sharing your stories and your wisdom, and we look  
**[1:17:24-1:17:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:17:24):**  forward to talking to you.  Thank you for having me.  The team at AEA and I are dedicated to bringing this show to you because we believe that knowledge  and information is the foundation of successful regenerative systems. At AEA, we believe that  growing better quality food and making more money from your crops is possible. And since  
**[1:17:44-1:17:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:17:44):**  2006, we've worked with leading professional growers to help them do just that. At AEA,  we don't guess, we test, we analyze, and we provide recommendations based on scientific  data, knowledge, and experience. We've developed products that are uniquely positioned to help  growers make more money with regenerative agriculture.  If you are a professional grower who believes in testing instead of guessing, someone who  
**[1:18:09-1:18:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Dale_Strickler_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:18:09):**  believes in a better, more regenerative way to grow, visit advancingecoag.com and contact  us to see if AEA is right for you.  Thank you for listening, and we look forward to working with you.  