---
title: Episode 66 Jon Stika
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### Regenerative Agriculture Podcast  (2021-03-18)  
### Author(s): John Kempf  

**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:00:00):**  Hi friends, this is Jon and welcome back to the Regenerative Agriculture podcast where we talk  about the agronomic science and the cultural management practices that regenerate plant health  and soil health and ultimately of course livestock health and our own health as well and the health  
**[0:00:18-0:00:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:00:18):**  of the entire ecosystems. I'm very pleased for this episode to have as a guest Jon Stieka from  North Dakota. Jon has authored this very interesting little book that is titled  A Soil Owner's Manual and it is very seldom that I've read a book that contains as much information  
**[0:00:41-0:00:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:00:41):**  in as few paragraphs as this one does. It's something that I really highly recommend to all  of you to take a look at and we'll link to it in the show notes and when we put it out there.  So with that introduction Jon can you tell us a little bit about your background and history and  
**[0:00:58-0:01:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:00:58):**  story and what has brought you here and what led to the book and to the work that you engaged in?  Well I currently live in North Dakota and gained a lot of experience here. I'm originally from  Wisconsin. I grew up on a dairy operation and questioned a lot of things back then about the  
**[0:01:17-0:01:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:01:17):**  way that we did things in the field, the way we grew our crops. It was in 1992 as an employee  with Natural Resources Conservation Service that I was presented with a soil quality test kit  and at that time I was working as an agronomist and none of the soil scientists were really  
**[0:01:43-0:01:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:01:43):**  interested in the soil quality test kit because it didn't relate to soil classification which was  primarily what soil scientists with NRCS were involved with. So I said well I'd be interested  in looking at it and I began to look at it and it made me start to think about how the soil  
**[0:02:07-0:02:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:02:07):**  functions because we never really talked about that. We talked about how to classify it, how to  test it chemically, all of these things but we never really looked at well how does it function,  how is it supposed to function. So that led me on the path of exploring that and in 1992  
**[0:02:29-0:02:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:02:29):**  I actually gave a presentation to a group of producers here in North Dakota talking about  soil quality which we now refer to as soil health and I explained to them how destructive tillage  was and I only got to about my second slide in my presentation and the rest of it just  
**[0:02:49-0:02:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:02:49):**  turned into a big discussion which was very good. But then we went through a period here  in western North Dakota where we were primarily looking at controlling wind erosion and so we  started looking at no-till as a way to do that and no-till progressed from controlling wind  
**[0:03:11-0:03:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:03:11):**  erosion to conserving moisture to improving soil health and we started to talk to more soil  biologists and plant physiologists and began to realize that we're actually restoring the soil.  This is actually taking us on a path that's restoring what's been degraded  
**[0:03:30-0:03:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:03:30):**  and then I taught a soil health training with NRCS across the country for a number of years  before I retired in 2015 and since then I've been involved writing my book talking to groups that  are interested in soil health to stay in the stay in the loop on it and I also haven't tilled my  
**[0:03:55-0:04:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:03:55):**  garden or applied any fertilizer to my garden for probably close to two decades now just so I could  see for myself and learn for myself from my own garden.  I'm really interested in your perspective on the question of how our soil is supposed to function  
**[0:04:16-0:04:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:04:16):**  and where you started with that first presentation back in 1992. For the last decade or more I've  been talking about how we should consider soil function from the perspective of biology  and we have been perhaps blinded in our perspective by using primarily chemistry-based analysis and  
**[0:04:35-0:04:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:04:35):**  just taking a very chemistry-based approach. I'd love to get your perspective. How did this start  for you in 1992 and how is soil supposed to function? Well I guess the big epiphany for me  was that it is a biological system and looking at aggregate stability and how aggregates are formed  
**[0:04:59-0:05:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:04:59):**  was kind of one of the starting points but as I was exposed to various soil biologists,  Taycon Cesar who is a retired soil mycologist, Christine Nichols, Jill Clappert, Elaine Ingham,  all those folks that told me very matter-of-factly how the biology and the soil  
**[0:05:29-0:05:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:05:29):**  drove the majority of what we expect the soil to do as producers.  And it was at that point that I thought okay I have to throw away almost everything I've learned  about agronomy because this is a biological system and that's a whole different perspective,  
**[0:05:51-0:05:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:05:51):**  that's a whole different understanding in how we approach this. I think that's a key realization  that is often missed when we really appreciate the impact of biology. I think it has been the case  that many agronomists who've approached this biological approach or this regenerative approach  
**[0:06:10-0:06:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:06:10):**  to soil health want to continue working with what they learned in agronomy. They want to continue  working with balancing soil nutrients and so forth. There's not enough of a solution to this  and so forth. There's not enough appreciation that in many cases that may become largely or  
**[0:06:33-0:06:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:06:33):**  completely irrelevant. Well there's always been an acknowledgement that there's certain bacteria  in the soil that run part of the nitrogen cycle but that was it. You know that was it was just  tip of the hat to yeah there's a few bacteria that play a role in the nitrogen cycle and then  
**[0:06:56-0:07:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:06:56):**  the discussion and the thought process would go right back to chemistry again. And as I've learned  it's the biology that cause all of these changes in the soil to happen that cause the nutrients  to be available to the plants. Not just that this chemistry is present but how do the plants  
**[0:07:23-0:07:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:07:23):**  actually associate with the biology to get what they need. That's a whole different ball game.  It's not just plant roots lapping up nitrate nitrogen that happens to be laying right next to  them which is you know what a lot of agronomy had been based on. And it was very wasteful and very  
**[0:07:44-0:07:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:07:44):**  disruptive and but understanding things like rhizophage and all these other ways that  mycorrhizal fungi etc work with plants is a whole different paradigm.  At the time your book was published you offered a very neat and very concise summary and overview of  
**[0:08:08-0:08:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:08:08):**  kind of the science that was available up to that point. I'd love for you to expand just a little  bit on fertilizer efficiency let's say nitrogen for example or phosphorus applications. What  really happens to soil biology when we put on these synthetic fertilizer applications  
**[0:08:27-0:08:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:08:27):**  and how does that influence the capacity of the soil to regenerate? Well by applying these  nutrients in the forms that we've been applying them I think we basically sideline  a lot of the soil biology. They get shoved to the side or ignored because the plant has this excess  
**[0:08:50-0:08:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:08:50):**  of nutrients that's right there available. And even though it's terribly inefficient  it still is the easiest path at that time for the plant to absorb some of those nutrients.  But that lasts for such a short period of time that the plant then misses the opportunity  
**[0:09:18-0:09:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:09:18):**  to create these relationships with the soil biology. So when that quick flush of chemical  fertilizer is gone it's now left with having to spend a lot of energy and time to create these  associations and begin to be able to acquire nutrients in the form that it really needs.  
**[0:09:42-0:09:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:09:42):**  And if we're talking an annual plant we start running out of time. You know this plant is always  going to be behind trying to make all of that happen in a short growing season. When you were  speaking about the absorption of this flush of available nutrients from fertilizer applications  
**[0:10:01-0:10:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:10:01):**  you mentioned that even though this is an energy inefficient they still do that because it is the  most available form. Can you expand on that a little bit? What does it mean to be energy  inefficient? How are these fertilizers inefficient for plants to absorb? The forms of nutrients that  
**[0:10:24-0:10:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:10:24):**  soil biology can pre-package so to speak for the plants saves the plant having to spend its own  energy to get those nutrients from a very simple form to a higher form. So the plant can pick up  that very simple form like nitrate nitrogen but then it has to do all of this work to move it  
**[0:10:54-0:11:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:10:54):**  along the line up into amino acids proteins etc that the soil biology will do a lot of that  for the plant ahead of time will prepare those things for the plant ahead of time to save the  plant the energy that it would take to make that happen in the plant. As you've been assembling all  
**[0:11:17-0:11:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:11:17):**  of these different pieces and and putting this nice little booklet together what did you discover  that surprised you? What was unexpected on this journey that you've been through? Well,  that myself and a lot of others in the world of soil science and agronomy were ignorant  
**[0:11:38-0:11:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:11:38):**  to a lot of these things. I received a bachelor's degree in soil science. I worked as a conservationist  and agronomist for several years and didn't know a lot of this and that's what I did.  And that really surprised me and shocked me and I could see it was going to be an uphill battle  
**[0:12:03-0:12:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:12:03):**  trying to get other people on board trying to get other people to look at this because  we were so ignorant of all of these things for so long up to that point. How has that shifted over  the years? You started down this pathway now almost 20 years ago and I understand you retired five  
**[0:12:25-0:12:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:12:25):**  years ago or six years ago but is that still the case within academia and within the USDA and NRCS  and so forth that many people are unaware? There's a lot more people aware now than there were 20  years ago and I think there's a lot more people that are aware but not understanding, not taking  
**[0:12:53-0:13:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:12:53):**  it seriously. The progression of going from understanding to realization and actually  applying this and I think a lot of it is we have too much invested in the field of science and  invested in the chemical approach to managing soil that for someone who spent a career developing  
**[0:13:24-0:13:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:13:24):**  soil test recommendations based on chemical sampling and analysis to suddenly say yeah I  guess that was all wrong and I need to start looking at this from a biological perspective  would and is very difficult. We have a lot of industry that's built around that and that  
**[0:13:48-0:13:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:13:48):**  industry funds a lot of research, it funds a lot of things, there's a lot of money involved  and so it's very difficult to discard that, to move away from that, at least move away from it  quickly but as producers begin to understand how to manage soil as a biological system  
**[0:14:12-0:14:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:14:12):**  and head in that direction and that's what they're willing to spend their money on, I think that will  move things in that direction but it's not going to happen overnight.  You have a unique perspective in that you have some history of observing  
**[0:14:33-0:14:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:14:33):**  this transition over time over the last 20 years. What is a reasonable expectation for growers  during this transition process? I'm reminded of this quote from Charlie Walters who used to say  that people leave their senses as a group and they come to their senses one at a time and so for us  
**[0:14:51-0:14:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:14:51):**  as growers as we come to our senses one at a time and we want to begin managing our soils differently  how rapidly should we expect to be able to regenerate soil health and fully embrace a  biological rather than a chemical perspective? I think the regeneration when we made the  
**[0:15:11-0:15:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:15:11):**  transition to no-till we could see some pretty significant things, positive things happening in  the soil in about three years. By the time we got to six years we could see some very significant  changes and that's in the climate in western North Dakota. In other parts of the world I think that  
**[0:15:34-0:15:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:15:34):**  can happen faster in drier more brittle climates it might take a little longer but it's not  something that takes a hundred years it's something that's very doable in an individual's  lifetime. It took us about 15 years here in western North Dakota to make the transition  
**[0:15:59-0:16:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:15:59):**  away from tilled fallow and tilled cropping systems to no-till systems and now we have  a generation of farmers that are in their 30s early 40s that if you mentioned tillage to them  they would give you a puzzled look and ask well why would I want to do that?  
**[0:16:21-0:16:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:16:21):**  All that's going to do is cause a bunch of weeds and you know a lot of other bad things.  You know why would I want to do that? So how quickly the soil can change can be a matter of  a few years or less than a decade for people to get on board and really understand and do that  
**[0:16:44-0:16:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:16:44):**  maybe 15 to 20 years and economics is really the driver. We had producers here that were doing  about a third fallow and so they would only crop two-thirds of their land every year.  Once they went to no-till and conserved moisture realized we can crop this land every year.  
**[0:17:03-0:17:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:17:03):**  We're conserving enough water. Our aggregate stability is improving. Our water infiltration  is improving. We can crop this land every year. Well once they realized that the economics of  that was was huge and so it didn't take long for others to realize that also and move in that  
**[0:17:24-0:17:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:17:24):**  direction. I think it's worth noting that the perspective you describe is a very different  perspective from the perhaps the pedological view of that it takes centuries or millennia to build  topsoil and this has been a common refrain from guests I've had here on the podcast that in fact  
**[0:17:44-0:17:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:17:44):**  it doesn't take that much time to build topsoil or to regenerate topsoil. Do you have any additional  perspectives on the differences between building soil from the foundational bedrock versus the  activity that we're engaged in today of regenerating soil? If you look at the poster that  
**[0:18:00-0:18:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:18:00):**  NRCS put out several years ago that says it takes 500 years to form an inch of soil  and I looked at that as a soil scientist and I said well it does take a long time for a soil  to develop in raw parent material. You have glacial till or you have lacustrine material  
**[0:18:24-0:18:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:18:24):**  whatever that is then colonized by plants. It takes a long time for a soil profile to develop  but it doesn't take that long to restore a soil that already formed. It has just been degraded.  The soil is already formed we just degraded it now we can restore that we can overcome that  
**[0:18:51-0:18:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:18:51):**  we can regenerate that in a much shorter period of time than it took for the soil to actually form.  I think that's a key and important distinction that is often lost or not not really realized.  As you've been on this pathway of looking at all of the science and developing a different  
**[0:19:07-0:19:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:19:07):**  perspective on soil systems what has been something that you've found very rewarding or  very exciting personally? To see the lights come on in people's eyes as we talk about some of these  things and see them become students of soil health soil biology and head down that path and begin to  
**[0:19:32-0:19:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:19:32):**  do their own experimentation and so on and so forth. That first soil health presentation I gave  back in 1992 it was a group of maybe 40 people. And I think that's a really important point to  a group of maybe 40 people so a couple dozen farmers and their spouses.  
**[0:19:56-0:20:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:19:56):**  And by the time that whole discussion was over I think most of the men were a little disgruntled  with me because I was saying that what they had been doing for the last hundred years was not a  good thing for the soil. So afterwards we had some coffee some cookies whatever afterwards  
**[0:20:16-0:20:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:20:16):**  it was the the wives that came up to me and said you're right the soil is a living thing  we have to take care of it. This isn't just something we can beat up and throw chemicals at  and pull yield off of. You're right this is a living thing and so that was encouraging  
**[0:20:37-0:20:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:20:37):**  that they saw that they understood that right away but it takes time for people to realize that.  You just mentioned an important observation that is something that's really I've really come to  appreciate and value and that is the the engagement of the ladies in agriculture as well and in this  
**[0:20:58-0:21:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:20:58):**  process. And I've observed distinct differences in engagement and energy when we have a lot of  conversations and we have conferences where the ladies come along as well and don't just come  along but actually actively participate. And I think we would do well in the agriculture space  
**[0:21:18-0:21:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:21:18):**  to actively encourage that and invite that further engagement rather than I've been to entirely too  many conferences where the audience is 90 or 95 percent men and it's the ladies have a different  perspective that is really needed because agriculture over the last however many decades  
**[0:21:39-0:21:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:21:39):**  has really adopted an ethos of domination if you will of subjugation and bringing agriculture  bringing these natural ecosystems into our subjugation and this is a very different ethos  than the more feminine perspective of nurturing and supporting and caring for.  
**[0:21:57-0:22:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:21:57):**  And if you listen to a lot of what is said in modern agronomy you hear the word control  over and over again. Weed control, insect control, pest control, nutrient management, you know  everything is controlled and managed to our liking for our outcome which is usually measured by yield  
**[0:22:23-0:22:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:22:23):**  which is usually a pretty poor metric to measure any kind of success in agriculture but  yeah it's once people understand this is a biological system this is like like raising  an animal you have to care for it you have to provide for it if you expect it to grow  
**[0:22:44-0:22:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:22:44):**  if you expect it to become viable and productive and and profitable.  Jon with the different perspectives you have developed over the years what is something that  you believe to be true about mainstream agriculture or I should just say about  
**[0:23:00-0:23:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:23:00):**  agriculture that is different from the mainstream view? I think getting back to that the soil is a  biological system. Jon when we look at this different approach to agronomy and the way that  agriculture is evolving in general with interest in different markets and so forth different  
**[0:23:20-0:23:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:23:20):**  products different types of products where do you see opportunities for growers in agriculture today?  I see one of the things that even the producers that have been on this path for a while  still need to improve on is the diversity of the plants that they're growing so I see a lot  
**[0:23:40-0:23:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:23:40):**  of opportunity with growing a greater variety of crops that diversify their operations which  is a little more work takes a little more management but that diversity also stabilizes  their income. Jon when you think about the different areas of opportunity that growers have  
**[0:24:05-0:24:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:24:05):**  to diversify and to look at crop diversity there's this question that comes up or this challenge that  comes up in the context of cover crop diversity and the argument that having a diversity of cover  crops doesn't actually help to build soil organic matter faster and so forth this is coming from  
**[0:24:24-0:24:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:24:24):**  folks who have a more mainstream view if you will. Have you observed any science or research  on this topic that offers a different perspective? Not specifically there's some work that's being  done at ARS in Mandan North Dakota there's some that we've been doing here in Dickinson with a  
**[0:24:47-0:24:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:24:47):**  cropping and grazing study but there hasn't been any real specific testing or examination of  how is it affecting soil biology other than more nitrogen availability and better water  infiltration. Well you say other than those are both two very significant pieces. Yes they are  
**[0:25:12-0:25:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:25:12):**  and the study that we're doing here at Dickinson we've measured water infiltration that has changed  from a fraction of an inch an hour up to about eight inches per hour and our conventional  soil testing does not show the need for nitrogen fertilizer anymore so we're not applying  
**[0:25:39-0:25:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:25:39):**  fertilizer anymore on those studies and that's a study that includes  several crops in rotation along with a couple different multi-species cover crops that are then  grazed so it's a very diverse no-till system. Tell us a little bit more about this how much  
**[0:26:03-0:26:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:26:03):**  nitrogen is being generated in this if you're not applying any nitrogen anymore what types of  yields are you producing and if what types of crops are you producing? Well I think the  question is what types of yields are you producing and if what types of crops? There's wheat, sunflowers,  
**[0:26:19-0:26:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:26:19):**  corn, peas in that rotation and I don't have all that data in front of me but a certain  part of the production in that system is measured in pounds of beef in these these steers that are  on this that you know that are weighed going in and coming out so there's not the wheat yields  
**[0:26:50-0:26:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:26:50):**  and the sunflower yields are those are harvested conventionally and those yields have been very  comparable to yields in the area surrounding them in in the county in Dunn County but some of the  yield is measured by pounds of beef in the livestock that are coming off of that system.  
**[0:27:16-0:27:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:27:16):**  Yeah it's been our observation and the observation of many growers we have worked with that as soil  biology develops they can supply 100% of a crop's nutritional requirements and of course this is  as you've described looking at rotations and looking at incorporating livestock into the  
**[0:27:34-0:27:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:27:34):**  landscape that's one way not just reducing input costs but it's easy to talk about nitrogen and  nitrogen by itself is not such a significant input for many farms but there's much more that comes  with that you also regenerate the soil's capacity to deliver phosphorus and to deliver potassium  
**[0:27:50-0:27:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:27:50):**  and a whole bunch of other nutrients that you need to buy less of those as well. Right and in a lot  of our systems in our no-till systems we've documented reducing nitrogen in cutting nitrogen  in half cutting fuel in half and North Dakota State University in their fertilizer their soil  
**[0:28:16-0:28:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:28:16):**  testing recommendations include a 50 pound per acre per year nitrogen credit if the land has been no  tilled for at least five years so they're recognizing that there's at least a 50 pound  increase in nutrient availability from a soil that's not disturbed with tillage for at least  
**[0:28:44-0:28:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:28:44):**  five years they don't have that tied necessarily directly to biology you know they'll acknowledge  that that's probably where it's coming from or that's probably why it's happening so that's  significant just in and of itself that without the soil disturbance the biology can respond.  
**[0:29:07-0:29:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:29:07):**  When you think about all these various improvements the improvements in soil health  and the improvements in profitability and the economic drivers that you described from being  able to crop soils more consistently and more often it is interesting to contemplate why these  
**[0:29:30-0:29:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:29:30):**  production models have not become mainstream much more quickly from your perspective what would have  to happen or what would have to be true for these production practices to be more widely adopted?  Well and relating back to this this big paradigm shift we went through from tilled systems to  
**[0:29:51-0:29:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:29:51):**  no-till systems we had to work our way through getting everyone educated and getting everyone  on board we had to work with absentee landowners there were people that owned land but were retired  from farming lived out of state lived elsewhere and rented their land out and we had to educate  
**[0:30:16-0:30:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:30:16):**  them on how stopping tillage would regenerate their soil and not degrade their soil so that  they would communicate that to their renters and say you need to do this in order to regenerate  my soil not allow it to continue to degrade. Then we also had to work with lenders because  
**[0:30:47-0:30:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:30:47):**  the bankers were very skeptical of moving away from a system that had been proven for many years  this fallow system and tillage we had to educate them so they would be willing to lend these  producers the money to buy different equipment and take a little bit more risk up front to make  
**[0:31:09-0:31:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:31:09):**  this transition. So everyone needs to be involved the producers the landowners the lenders and then  obviously the you know extension and agronomists and and others all need to understand how this  works and that managing the soil the way it was designed to function as a biological system is  
**[0:31:35-0:31:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:31:35):**  the lowest risk way to to farm to produce. As you went through this process of trying to bring all  these different stakeholders on board and and developing a different perspective what were the  roadblocks that you encountered what were the where were the barriers to resi and the significant  
**[0:31:56-0:32:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:31:56):**  resistance? Initially it's a very it's a very delicate thing to tell someone to explain to  someone that your father and your grandfather degraded the land that you're now farming  and I always would approach that with they did not do that intentionally they were using  
**[0:32:29-0:32:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:32:29):**  the best information that they had at the time to do whatever it was that they did not do  the things that they did it just so happens that what they did with all the tillage and the fallow  and the lack of rotation diversity etc degraded the soil and now that we know that it's not a  
**[0:32:56-0:33:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:32:56):**  matter of pointing fingers at someone and saying you did these bad things it's now that we know  let's do better and let's restore what has been lost so it's it's it's very difficult and delicate  to point out where someone's family ancestors basically degraded the land that we that we have  
**[0:33:25-0:33:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:33:25):**  today but they did that with the best knowledge that they had at the time it was not the goal to  degrade the land and we can acknowledge that. When we consider the tremendous potential that  farms have for regeneration and that each one of us individually is on our own journey on this  
**[0:33:49-0:33:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:33:49):**  pathway as you describe what most limits farmers from achieving the potential that they are really  capable of and that their farms are really capable of what holds them back in some ways  I think the greatest block to learning is knowledge isn't that an oxymoron  
**[0:34:08-0:34:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:34:08):**  when you think you know how something should be done it often prevents you from questioning and  examining something different something more so if you grew up on a farm where things were done  a certain way for you to examine doing them in a very different way you have to overcome that  
**[0:34:40-0:34:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:34:40):**  you have to shift that paradigm you have to shift that thinking if you come into this I just spoke  to a group of beginning farmers here a couple weeks ago and most of them had no agricultural  background whatsoever other than maybe planting a vegetable garden or something like that a few  
**[0:35:02-0:35:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:35:02):**  times so to describe to them soil is a biological system this is how it turns this is how it needs  to be managed in that regard they just look at that and go oh well that makes sense yes that's  that's how we'll approach but if you already have a paradigm based on conventional anatomy  
**[0:35:29-0:35:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:35:29):**  you have to overcome that you have to deal with that before you can move on to the next  way of thinking so it's it's actually a bit of an obstacle that's an interesting perspective and  not a surprising one when you really think about it I wasn't sure where you were where you were  
**[0:35:48-0:35:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:35:48):**  going after when I responded to your first comment but yeah it is interesting that existing knowledge  is actually the barrier to advancing and I guess I suppose that's true in almost any scientific  pursuit isn't it that it is the existing knowledge that the kind of the status quo that prevents  
**[0:36:09-0:36:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:36:09):**  adoption of new ideas from spreading rapidly yeah we become comfortable with the whatever  understanding we have so when something comes along that changes that or shows that that's not  correct it does it's difficult to make that leap away from what you're comfortable with  
**[0:36:31-0:36:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:36:31):**  now john what is something that you've uncovered or observed that you wish all farmers knew  that just because our methods for testing the soil for nutrients are based on chemistry  and crop response doesn't mean that that's how the soil actually functions as a system  
**[0:37:01-0:37:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:37:01):**  and when people challenge me on well I do soil testing I send in my soil  samples they get analyzed they send me a recommendation I apply that amount of nutrient  and I get the yield that that model says should and I tell them I agree with you  
**[0:37:25-0:37:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:37:25):**  the models work very well for dysfunctional soil so if you have a dysfunctional soil  and you want to maintain a dysfunctional soil then that model works very well  if you have a dysfunctional soil that you want to restore to its full biological function  
**[0:37:56-0:38:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:37:56):**  then you have to take a whole different approach I cringe a little bit when people talk about  sustainable agriculture because I don't think we want to sustain a soil that's dysfunctional  and I prefer the term regenerative agriculture we want to regenerate these soils  
**[0:38:17-0:38:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:38:17):**  and then maintain them at that high level of biological function I really appreciate your  description of mainstream agronomy being successful for a dysfunctional soil because in  reality when we think about how this model of agriculture evolved and became adopted to be the  
**[0:38:38-0:38:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:38:38):**  mainstream during the green revolution 70 or 80 years ago it produced remarkable crop responses  on dysfunctional soil on the east coast of the United States and it's been a very  successful model on the east coast of the United States and around the world for that matter that  
**[0:38:58-0:39:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:38:58):**  had already been degraded so that also makes a lot of sense from a historical perspective  as well as from an immediate obvious practical perspective when we look at the various operations  that are executing these different models today yes the models were designed were created  
**[0:39:18-0:39:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:39:18):**  with dysfunctional soil as a basis like you said those soils were already degraded they  were already dysfunctional and then we developed a model for testing recommendations and crop response  using synthetic fertilizer on dysfunctional soil and so those models work very well  
**[0:39:40-0:39:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:39:40):**  that the problem is that they will keep you at a dysfunctional soil for forever if you don't change  the way you do the other aspect of these models is that they don't accurately consider all of the  secondary effects that we put on nitrogen fertilizer or phosphorus or potassium fertilizer  
**[0:40:03-0:40:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:40:03):**  and we further the development of a dysfunctional soil but at the same time we also get these  disease symptoms we get insect symptoms and I think one of the points you have mentioned in  previous conversations is the difference in perspective between symptoms and root causes  
**[0:40:24-0:40:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:40:24):**  and not understanding or not considering these different aspects what are the differences between  problems and symptoms from your perspective if you've spent time and that you have children if  you've spent time around a two-year-old the question they ask all day long is why  
**[0:40:44-0:40:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:40:44):**  and I think we need to ask why enough times to be able to identify what really is the problem  erosion for example soil erosion for example we've looked at that for decades as a problem  when actually it's a symptom of dysfunctional soil so erosion is not a problem symptom  
**[0:41:14-0:41:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:41:14):**  if we restore soil and the water infiltrates into the soil instead of off erosion is no longer an  issue so we need to be careful in making sure we get all the way to the root cause when we're  going to identify something as a problem versus a symptom because we can treat the symptom of  
**[0:41:41-0:41:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:41:41):**  erosion and have for decades but that hasn't improved the soil it hasn't really even done  that much to control or prevent erosion so people like to get caught up in in symptoms and tools and  and sometimes they'll even identify a problem as a goal my goal is to minimize this problem  
**[0:42:09-0:42:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:42:09):**  well a goal should always be should always describe what you want something to be  I want my soil to be fully functional not just I want my soil to erode less  while it remains dysfunctional if that makes sense and you also mentioned tools in your previous  
**[0:42:30-0:42:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:42:30):**  sentence how do you consider the use of tools in achieving these goals the thing with tools and  I think as humans we love tools and we love to argue about tools and the same is true agriculture  don't you know that john deere tractors are better than others yeah for that the husky  
**[0:42:52-0:43:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:42:52):**  warning chainsaw is better than a still exactly and it's it's not about you have a toolbox full  of tools when you need to do something in particular to achieve to move you closer to your  goal you grab the right tool and you apply it with that in mind but people look at no till  
**[0:43:18-0:43:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:43:18):**  and cover crops as the answer as the silver bullet that will solve all these problems  those are tools if those tools aren't applied with understanding of how the soil function  and within the context of moving toward a goal of restoring soil function then they may not  
**[0:43:43-0:43:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:43:43):**  move you in that direction at all you can give someone a power saw and they can use it to  build a really nice shed or they can use it to cut their fingers off if they don't understand  what they're doing and how to use it so yeah tools are tools are a touchy subject with a lot of  
**[0:44:04-0:44:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:44:04):**  people but we need to keep them in perspective are they a touchy subject just because of deferring  opinions or because of opinions but also because some folks want to be a good person  because some folks want to just point to them as the answer to a problem because it's easy to say  
**[0:44:30-0:44:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:44:30):**  cover crops are the answer to all of our problems or a no-till drill is the answer to all of our  problems when they're not they're they're tools that can certainly help us tremendously  in moving towards our goal but people like to simplify things and you know what what can I  
**[0:44:52-0:44:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:44:52):**  apply to my soil that'll fix it what chemical what product can I apply to my soil to fix it  well that's not how it works you have to understand how the soil functions then you can  choose the tools that will make some of those things happen what are some common abuses or  
**[0:45:11-0:45:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:45:11):**  misuses of tools that you have observed well getting back to cover crops in some ways as  humans and if a little bit is good more is better I saw a few producers that didn't understand  how to design a cover crop mix to achieve the goal or to achieve what it was they were after  
**[0:45:35-0:45:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:45:35):**  had one producer years ago that we talked about including turnips in a cover crop mix and he had  livestock so I said well if we have this mixture and we have some turnips in there you know they  provide pretty good forage late in the season they won't die until it gets to you know 10 degrees  
**[0:45:56-0:46:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:45:56):**  Fahrenheit not just a simple frost they will help cycle some of your residue because he had wheat  straw on there which is pretty high carbon nitrogen ratio and so we gave him some ideas  on how to design that mix and he said yep I'm going to do it and he went on his way and  
**[0:46:20-0:46:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:46:20):**  went on his way and put together this mix that had way too much turnip in it  so the carbon nitrogen ratio ended up being very low and we had snow cover that year  and all of his residue decomposed the soil was completely bare in the spring and he had some  
**[0:46:43-0:46:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:46:43):**  issues with wind erosion and his neighbors were getting on his case why did you till that field  last fall now it's all blowing away and he said I didn't till it they were just all the residue  imposed and it was black in the spring because I put too many in my cover crop mix so you know  
**[0:47:06-0:47:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:47:06):**  that's an example of how some of these things can if you're just using tools without the understanding  you can start to create some other issues that's a good example John what is a topic that you would  like to speak more about but you're hesitant to because you sense that growers may not be  
**[0:47:28-0:47:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:47:28):**  ready to hear it yet that fertilizer is almost unnecessary that the amount of fertilizer that  might actually be necessary to produce the desired yield in a fully functioning biological system  might be close to zero it's not anywhere near the levels of fertilizer I got in trouble when  
**[0:48:01-0:48:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:48:01):**  I worked for NRCS for saying that in some cases you don't need any fertilizer in some of these  systems that producers have been doing no till with diverse rotations for 10-15 years I suggested  that they leave a check strip with no fertilizer to see how well their soil would supply nutrients  
**[0:48:27-0:48:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:48:27):**  to their plants and a number of them did that and realized that they didn't need anywhere near the  amounts of fertilizer that the conventional chemical soil testing recommendations showed  well that got a lot of people in NRCS fertilizer industry and extension upset with me because I  
**[0:48:52-0:48:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:48:52):**  was suggesting that and pointing that out so that's something that I've learned to approach  carefully well it's certainly something I've been speaking a lot about and I know that others have  as well in the last half a dozen years or so when you ran these check strips you were  
**[0:49:13-0:49:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:49:13):**  looking at or the potential for no fertilizer needed what were you observing did you observe  significant differences between what the crop looked like visually and what the yields were  like and I asked this question because we've worked with growers who've run similar check  
**[0:49:28-0:49:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:49:28):**  strips and the area where the fertilizer is applied appears much more visually appealing  you might get larger plant biomass you might get might get more vigorous crop growth  particularly early on but when you get to the point of truth of actual yield and not I mean  
**[0:49:50-0:49:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:49:50):**  that's disregarding profitability which is a more important question when you get to the point of  truth regarding yield that we would often find that the fertilized area did not do any more than  the unfertilized area in some cases not even as much so what were you observing basically the  
**[0:50:08-0:50:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:50:08):**  same thing and producers were used to looking at this very deep green color in their crop very  early in the season as a result of these what I think were excessive application so where they  had the check strip those plants were not that deep green color early on and they were obviously  
**[0:50:40-0:50:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:50:40):**  concerned about that they said well you know this this is not looking good and I said just wait  the soil warms up the biology gets a little more active you know and it'll get on with it and  later in the season the area that was fertilized that was very dark green and it faded in how  
**[0:51:04-0:51:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:51:04):**  intense the color was and the strip that was not fertilized improved to the point where they looked  very similar so then you know at the end of the year the yield was often maybe five percent  different the the unfertilized was maybe five percent less than the fertilized now on the  
**[0:51:30-0:51:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:51:30):**  fields the producers that had been doing no-till and diverse rotations for oh at least 10 years 15  years where they applied and this is anecdotal but they told me that where they applied 40%  to 50 pounds of actual n on a check strip so they would do a strip with no fertilizer  
**[0:51:57-0:52:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:51:57):**  with 50 pounds with 100 pounds with 150 pounds whatever just to see for themselves that once  they got up to or beyond 50 pounds of n their yields actually declined that doesn't surprise me  my and my theory was that screwed up the soil and microbiology relationships that were there  
**[0:52:20-0:52:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:52:20):**  and ready to function but that fertilizer basically sidelined that biology and really  screwed up that relationship that you have in a functional soil and I said yeah you guys have a  pretty well functioning soil now that if you put that kind of fertilizer on you're going to mess  
**[0:52:43-0:52:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:52:43):**  things up not improve your yield as it would have in a dysfunctional soil  john that is such a key observation and something that we have also been observing and i've started  talking about it and that is we don't think of nitrogen fertilizer as having a yield drag  
**[0:53:01-0:53:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:53:01):**  effect we've been indoctrinated to think that yield drag comes as a result of nutrient deficiencies  but we've actually observed quite a number of cases of yield drag occurring as a result of  nitrogen and particularly nitrogen and potassium fertilization also phosphorus to a lesser degree  
**[0:53:24-0:53:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:53:24):**  where these soluble forms of fertilizers are being added and they're actually  limiting yields the healthier the soil becomes the more of a yield drag that these fertilizers have  and i think there's any number of reasons for that ranging from the nitrate use efficiency  
**[0:53:40-0:53:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:53:40):**  and the energy conversion cost that you mentioned at the beginning plus the impact that they have  on biology so i think the kind of the concluding point that really comes out of this conversation  for me is many of us don't have a frame of reference and we no longer understand what  
**[0:53:57-0:54:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:53:57):**  healthy functional soils actually look like and actually should behave like anymore because we  may never have experienced them that's true if you know our soils a lot of our soils have been  dysfunctional for human generations so we think that we should be able to do that  
**[0:54:18-0:54:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:54:18):**  so we think that what we currently have in the capacity of our agricultural soils to function  is normal and it's not it's a soil that's very degraded and its capacity to function is only  a fraction of what it really was or really could be and it's difficult for people to  
**[0:54:50-0:55:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:54:50):**  wrap their mind around that this soil can produce as good or higher yields with much fewer inputs  than you thought possible and that's exactly true no not very many people know what a functioning  soil looks like i haven't seen them for a while thank you john for all the thoughts and the wisdom  
**[0:55:17-0:55:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:55:17):**  that you've shared do you have any other thoughts that you would like to discuss before we wrap  things up i think just to get people to look at some of these things is going to require  a great deal of of education including demonstrations so people can see these things  
**[0:55:39-0:55:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:55:39):**  for themselves and learn how to manage the soil as a biological system and take that seriously  that this is for real soils really are a biological system that's the way they were designed to  function it wasn't something that i did or designed that's that's the way it always has been  
**[0:56:02-0:56:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:56:02):**  and the sooner we understand that it makes more sense environmentally and economically to manage  something the way it was designed to be managed the way it was designed to function um but we're  all going to be and the more productive and the healthier our agriculture is going to be and that  
**[0:56:25-0:56:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:56:25):**  we will be as a result true thank you john very much for sharing all of your wisdom and experiences  i highly recommend that everyone gets a copy of john's book a soil owner's manual the subtitle is  how to restore and maintain soil health and i am adding his book to my recommended reading list  
**[0:56:49-0:56:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:56:49):**  and we will include a link to the book in the show notes and wherever else that you might be  able to find this podcast so thank you much for being here john i look forward to more  conversations in the future thank you for having me it's been a pleasure  
**[0:57:04-0:57:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:57:04):**  the team at aea and i are dedicated to bringing this show to you because we believe that knowledge  and information is the foundation of successful regenerative systems at aea we believe that  growing better quality food and making more money from your crops is possible and since 2006 we've  
**[0:57:22-0:57:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:57:22):**  worked with leading professional growers to help them do just that at aea we don't guess we test  we analyze and we provide recommendations based on scientific data knowledge and experience we've  developed products that are uniquely positioned to help growers make more money with regenerative  
**[0:57:39-0:57:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Jon_Stika_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:57:39):**  agriculture if you are a professional grower who believes in testing instead of guessing someone  who believes in a better more regenerative way to grow visit advancing eco ag.com and contact us to  see if aea is right for you thank you for listening and we look forward to working with you  