### Regenerative Agriculture Podcast  (2021-27-25)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:00:00):**  Hi friends, this is John and this is the Regenerative Agriculture podcast.  Welcome back.  On this podcast, we talk about agronomic science and the cultural management practices that  regenerate plant health and soil health, that regenerate ecological health, and ultimately  that regenerate animal and public health, of course, as well, because those are all  
**[0:00:20-0:00:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:00:20):**  pieces that we care about and that are all important.  My guest today is someone that I've been wanting to speak with for quite some time.  I grew up, spent a lot of her time and career on the other side of the planet, Nicole Masters  from New Zealand.  Welcome, Nicole.  
**[0:00:34-0:00:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:00:34):**  I'm really honored to have you here.  Thank you for being here.  Thanks for having me, John.  I'm really excited to be here with you.  Nicole, I've really enjoyed reading your book, For the Love of Soil, and I really like the  
**[0:00:47-0:00:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:00:47):**  title as well.  Yeah.  Because I think all of us would do well to have more empathy and more appreciation for  soil and for the landscape and everything that is within that landscape because the  degree that we have empathy, of course, is the degree that we are able to affect change  
**[0:01:04-0:01:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:01:04):**  and to influence change.  Absolutely.  I'd love to learn a bit more about the things that you're working on and have you share  some of those with our audience.  But before we go into some of those, can you tell us a little bit about your story and  
**[0:01:19-0:01:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:01:19):**  the context?  What brought you to this work today?  What are some of the memorable moments on your pathway?  Great.  Thanks, John.  
**[0:01:27-0:01:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:01:27):**  Yeah, it's always such a big question.  You go, wow, which bit do you pick from?  And I was having a conversation with my grandmother recently, and she revealed that my great-grandfather  was one of New Zealand's first extension agents.  It blew my mind because I'm like, am I genetically programmed to want to be involved in agriculture  
**[0:01:48-0:01:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:01:48):**  and have some genetic threads around education?  It just blew my mind how maybe sometimes I don't have as much free will as I think I  do.  The epigenetics and memory transfer are very powerful things that we do not appreciate  fully.  
**[0:02:03-0:02:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:02:03):**  It does.  It boggles my mind.  And I often think about it in terms of, as New Zealanders, we really came from some pretty  tough stock of people that were travelers and traveled across the seas to one of the  last places that was discovered.  
**[0:02:17-0:02:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:02:17):**  And so these people were tough.  And so, yeah, I feel like I've come from tough blood that are also travelers.  So most of my life has been traveling.  My father was a pilot.  We never lived in a place for longer than two years.  
**[0:02:29-0:02:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:02:29):**  So we lived in the North Island and the South Island and in Hong Kong, of all places.  And all of that had a really formative impact on me in terms of seeing land from above,  so looking down from aircraft and just being really impacted by, in New Zealand especially,  like the amount of erosion.  And so from five years of age, my parents remember me pointing out erosion and being  
**[0:02:53-0:02:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:02:53):**  really worried about where was the soil going, which maybe I'm a weird kid.  I don't know.  But living in Hong Kong, the thing that I saw was like people will live in smog that  was covering all the vehicles.  Everything's covered in this black stuff that you could wipe off.  
**[0:03:09-0:03:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:03:09):**  And if I get into the bottom of a car parking building that's full of carbon monoxide,  I always feel nostalgic because that's what Hong Kong smells like.  And there's like all these plastic bags and garbage.  And I just remember thinking, wow, people will live in their own filth and it doesn't  create behavior change.  
**[0:03:27-0:03:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:03:27):**  Like what is it that actually will lead people to change?  And so part of it became a real driver for me in terms of I need to speak my truth and  be willing to speak up because if we don't speak up, nothing's going to change.  We're just going to go off the rails.  So when I was 25, my dad actually bought a property and said, yeah, let's do this together.  
**[0:03:50-0:03:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:03:50):**  He left lying and I left university.  And I think it was that, what do they say, green on green makes black and blue.  It was a little bit like that with both of us not understanding much about working with  landscapes.  But we restored a wetland and we planted 700 avocado trees, ran a galphy, bull stud.  
**[0:04:09-0:04:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:04:09):**  And it was a very deep dive.  And at the time, well, I think it's still true now.  I was a single parent and it is really hard to find work in rural communities.  And my dad actually helped me out by setting me up with a worm farm business.  So I brought a deceased worm farm estate and got into vermiculture.  
**[0:04:28-0:04:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:04:28):**  I had a background in soil science.  That's what I'd studied at university.  And no one had mentioned that the darn stuff is alive.  And then I went to a session with Elaine Ingham and she just talked about soil being alive.  And I'm like, nobody mentioned this and it's such a critical part.  
**[0:04:44-0:04:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:04:44):**  So I started to make a vermicast product specifically for strawberry producers, for pastoral producers  and for avocados.  And so catered that biologically for what we were doing and saw some incredible results.  So it just seems like a journey that we never stopped learning and it never stops evolving.  And because I'm not afraid of traveling, here I am right now, I'm in my horse trailer in  
**[0:05:08-0:05:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:05:08):**  South Dakota working with the Intertribal Agriculture Council.  Yeah, I'm just always in different places living with ranchers and farmers and living  in people's worlds and I love it.  So you've certainly gotten to observe and experience agriculture in many different ecosystems  and many different types of environments and both to see what the challenges and where  
**[0:05:29-0:05:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:05:29):**  the opportunities are, which are often opposite sides of the same coin, aren't they?  Absolutely.  I'm really intrigued by your mention of producing vermicompost for specific applications because  this is something that is perhaps not appreciated is how you can really customize microbial  applications to produce a specific outcome.  
**[0:05:47-0:05:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:05:47):**  Can you tell us a little bit about that?  What were the things that you were doing to try to produce specific changes for a given  crop?  Yeah, right.  So if you think about vermicast or you think about feeding worms, worms will eat pretty  
**[0:06:01-0:06:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:06:01):**  much anything that's lived before, any kind of organic matter.  And they are happy just eating manure or just eating vegetable scraps.  You meet people and you've got like little worm farms in their houses and they stink  and they make all this liquid and they're just feeding vegetable scraps.  And that makes a very, very, very bacteria dominated vermicast.  
**[0:06:23-0:06:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:06:23):**  And one thing you can do is you can actually take some vermicast or compost, put it in  a seedling tray and then just leave it outside and then observe what is it that grows.  So that germination signal is determined by microbiology, as you know.  And so what will signal will either be, hey, here's a whole lot of broadleaf weeds or here's  a whole lot of things like kosher or nettles, your nitrate weeds, or actually here's soft  
**[0:06:51-0:06:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:06:51):**  perennial grasses.  So it's a really interesting observation as to if you are buying compost is just leave  it outside and see what grows.  And if it just grows a whole of those annual or nitrate loving weeds, I wouldn't be using  that in my garden or certainly not in agricultural context.  
**[0:07:08-0:07:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:07:08):**  It's quite interesting.  So we did get into larger scale composting and we had a sitler turner.  What I found is as I've got older, maybe I've got lazier, but by the time I left my farm,  like I sold it seven years ago and I've been on the road for seven years, is we were just  making vermicast basically from wood chips, white wood chip species.  
**[0:07:31-0:07:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:07:31):**  So willow, poplar, and over here it might be cottonwood, aspen, species like that.  So fast growing soft white woods.  And we would put in maybe a little bit of manure, maybe a bit of fish hydrolizate into  that blend.  And then at the start of when, so we'd get like 200 cubic meters or 200 cubic yards of  
**[0:07:49-0:07:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:07:49):**  wood chips, and then we would actually leave the pigs on it.  So feeding pigs on wood chips and it's amazing how many wood chips they'll actually eat.  But then when you take the pigs off and the worms come in and we just leave it to mature  and it's really that maturation that really brings that fungal diversity out and the,  you know, the saprophytic fungi just go nuts.  
**[0:08:09-0:08:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:08:09):**  So the ones that are breaking down that complex wood chip.  So by the time it's finished, you know, you can still see that there's some wood chip  in there, but it's the most beautiful vermicast and the smell and it's amazing.  And when you look at underneath the microscope, it's absolutely a 10 out of 10 in terms of  beneficial nematodes and all your protozoa and everything.  
**[0:08:29-0:08:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:08:29):**  And so really it was from being really lazy that I could make a great fungal product,  which you know, things like in horticultural situations, you know, you've picked fruit  industry, certainly avocados and strawberries is where we're pushing for a very, very fungal  dominant type blend.  What I found was if we were doing stuff for vegetable production, then that could be the  
**[0:08:51-0:08:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:08:51):**  vermicast that we harvest earlier.  We were using, I say we, it was me.  I was using a lot of pig manure, so using pig manure as part of that food material for  worms.  So still mixing it with some cardboard and wood chips and maybe, you know, putting a  
**[0:09:05-0:09:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:09:05):**  little bit of guano or whatever it was that vermicast, I don't know, it was a lot of intuition  actually John that I think about it.  And then that product, if you harvested early on, would be really good for vegetables.  So I was looking at it under the microscope as I was going and I had indoor beds and outdoor  beds and I actually found that they produce different types of microbial diversity.  
**[0:09:26-0:09:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:09:26):**  So then I could choose which beds to use for which type of crop.  I think it's interesting as we're learning more about bacterial and fungal dominated  crops and how we can influence plant nutrition of those different crops.  But of course, one of the challenges, the reason I asked the question about vermicompost  production is one of the challenges that we have is actually producing materials that  
**[0:09:47-0:09:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:09:47):**  move the soil in one direction or another.  Or particularly in the fungal direction.  Like it's, we can, there are dozens of effective bacterial inoculants available in the marketplace,  but when you want to talk about establishing fungal populations, for the most part, those  are materials that you have to produce on your own in some way, shape or form by vermicompost  
**[0:10:06-0:10:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:10:06):**  or by the Johnson-Sue bioreactors or some form of composting that will lead you in that  direction.  So true.  And what's kind of interesting is that, so mycorrhizae obviously aren't going to grow  in vermicast or compost, but what we found was by that, and I guess it's the quorum signals,  
**[0:10:26-0:10:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:10:26):**  those metabolites that we're putting on when we're putting in these vermicasts, is that  we saw massive increases in the colonisation of mycorrhizae, even though there's no mycorrhizae  in it, it's that signal to germinate that the mycorrhizae was receiving from either  the biopriming of seeds or putting materials down with the seed.  So we're doing some really cool stuff here in Montana on rangeland by putting small amounts  
**[0:10:50-0:10:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:10:50):**  of vermicast down the drill.  And what we're seeing is the germination of species that we're not planting, the perennial  grasses that are responding to that signal.  So let's talk a little bit about this because I've been studying quorum sensing and quorum  signaling for quite some time, but I haven't yet talked about it here on the podcast because  
**[0:11:09-0:11:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:11:09):**  I feel like there's always more to learn before I dig into that a little bit more.  So what's happening with quorum sensing?  First of all, what is quorum sensing or, and also quorum signaling?  What are we talking about?  And it's so interesting, John, that I hadn't realised you haven't covered this topic.  
**[0:11:26-0:11:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:11:26):**  I mean, if you look in the literature, in the last three years, this space is just blowing  up and it's so fascinating because it's something that has been done by indigenous  people for a long time and you look at like natural Korean farming, it's all on this basis  of these quorum signals.  So if you think of a cell, like just any kind of bacterial cell, on the outside of that  
**[0:11:48-0:11:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:11:48):**  cell wall is a hundred thousand receptors.  And those receptors are waiting for some kind of signal because they can't see, they can't  hear.  And so those signals they're receiving could be electromagnetic, it could be temperature,  and it could be some of these chemical byproducts.  
**[0:12:04-0:12:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:12:04):**  So the secondary metabolites and the different types of signals that either biology releasing,  so there's different types of signals that the microbe will say, well, are you my friend  or are you about to eat me?  So they can recognise each other and there are organisms that will actually send signals  to try and pretend to be a different type of organism so they can blend in or they can  
**[0:12:26-0:12:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:12:26):**  signal to each other to hunt.  So they saw this really cool example of this where a bunch of protozoa actually hunted  down a nematode like wolves chasing down its quarry and it's all based on these signals.  So quorum sensing literally means that you have enough organisms to form a quorum of  agreement.  
**[0:12:46-0:12:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:12:46):**  So we have enough organisms and they get to a certain critical moment and now they switch  on that gene expression in that organism.  So that might be for bioluminescence or it might be for biofilms or it might be for virulence.  So you might have these organisms in your body and you're not sick and then they reach  a critical threshold, they send a signal, now they go virulent, they start to produce  
**[0:13:07-0:13:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:13:07):**  very quickly and now you're sick.  So they've developed one for cholera that you can actually drink the chemical signal  to turn cholera off and it's parts per trillion that we're talking about.  So these signals are very, very, very small amounts of these signals and it'll signal  to the cholera that basically there's too many other cholera here, you should just leave  
**[0:13:27-0:13:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:13:27):**  and then it will actually flush out of the body.  So we're seeing breakthroughs in this in terms of medical science because it could actually  replace antibiotics.  We could be very specific.  Now what's interesting about the cholera signal is it was the same signal to turn off  
**[0:13:43-0:13:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:13:43):**  botrytis in a plant.  So there's massive capacity out there to be thinking how subtle can I be, how little does  it need for a system to change?  And we've seen some stuff we've never been able to explain until now and we're seeing  it coming through in the literature.  
**[0:13:57-0:14:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:13:57):**  Why is it so important to have a seed microbiome?  Why is it so important to have that microbiology right at the start?  And then what are these signals to turn something on or turn something off?  So that's what these different metabolites are for.  And so the plant's doing it all the time.  
**[0:14:14-0:14:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:14:14):**  It's signaling to say, hey, I'm under attack, you know, I'm going to signal to some type  of biology.  And if that biology is there to respond, then it induces obviously all your induced systemic  responses and all the other things happen in terms of plant defense.  But if that plant signals and there's no microbe there to respond, that defense mechanism doesn't  
**[0:14:34-0:14:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:14:34):**  kick in.  And now what's really interesting, and we're seeing this with breeding, is that there are  plants now that no longer have the ability to signal.  So there's wheat that can no longer signal to protozoa or there's wheat that will no  longer signal to mycorrhizae.  
**[0:14:48-0:14:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:14:48):**  So we've corrupted this system by selecting for specific cultivars.  And I'm sure you know a lot more about that than I.  But I mean, I just I get so excited about it because we're seeing like phenomenal stuff.  I just had someone yesterday ring me up and they were so excited because for decades they've  just grown dandelion.  
**[0:15:07-0:15:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:15:07):**  And we talked to them last year about doing something different.  And this year she was like, the dandelion's totally gone.  And it's just it's so hard to explain it until you get into these mechanisms of what are  these signals?  What is it that we're putting down that's changing?  
**[0:15:22-0:15:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:15:22):**  Especially with annuals, how quickly we can change it.  And what I'm seeing is when we're putting stuff down the drill and cropping is they  might do a pre-emergent spray, but they're no longer requiring a post-emergent spray  because those signals are basically setting the scene in that soil and they're not signaling  to the primitive weeds to germinate.  
**[0:15:42-0:15:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:15:42):**  There's a couple of different aspects here that are worth unwrapping a little bit.  I find this entire topic really intriguing because one of my mentors who passed away  a number of years ago was Bruce Tainio.  And he was a leading microbiologist here in North America.  And he spoke all the time about quorum sensing.  
**[0:16:01-0:16:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:16:01):**  And I didn't hear anyone talk about it for 15 years.  And now we're having this conversation again, which I find really enjoyable.  So there's kind of two aspects in my understanding.  One of them is I like to separate out quorum sensing versus quorum signaling.  So quorum sensing is, as you described, when you have a large enough group of organisms  
**[0:16:25-0:16:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:16:25):**  that they change their behavior and they begin behaving as, for lack of a better term, they  begin behaving as a single organism rather than as a group of individuals.  Then of course, there's also the signaling aspect of how that group or how those individuals  both perceive signals and respond to those signals.  So you've been talking about germination of different crops and in signaling for defense  
**[0:16:51-0:16:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:16:51):**  mechanisms and weed seed development.  But it's really interesting how we all know that we can have a large bank of a certain  weed seed in a given soil profile, but it doesn't germinate.  And there's never been particularly good explanations for that.  There've been some people who've talked about, described the nutritional profile, say when  
**[0:17:12-0:17:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:17:12):**  you have a certain nutritional profile that influences the weed profile.  But we all know that there's more to the story than that.  So I know you spoke about that a little bit, but can you give us some examples of specific  case studies of what you have done to produce different weed populations?  It's probably the thing I'm most fascinated about in terms of the soil is because it's  
**[0:17:33-0:17:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:17:33):**  so obvious above ground.  And I often think of it like being someone's fingerprints.  You can kind of see what someone's been doing across the landscape by the different types  of plant communities that are growing.  And so if we think about weeds, and whatever a weed is, a weed to you might be forage to  
**[0:17:49-0:17:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:17:49):**  somebody else, but thinking about these plants as indicator species.  And so there's more than just a nutritional element involved because it could be something  like we have bare soil, right?  That's going to create some plants to germinate.  Could be a light response as well.  
**[0:18:07-0:18:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:18:07):**  Could be low organic matter is going to cause a response.  It could be the microbial communities or imbalances, a mineral community or imbalances, and then  a toxin release.  And so one of the ones I found really interesting was seeing milk thistle, and it was in a gully.  You guys say gullies, coolies, gulch, I don't know.  
**[0:18:28-0:18:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:18:28):**  And it was only this one place on this whole farm where all this milk thistle was growing.  And I said to the farmer, what's under the ground there?  Why?  You know, that's interesting.  So it's an old dump and we have a whole lot of batteries in there.  
**[0:18:40-0:18:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:18:40):**  So the batteries had been leaking and this milk thistle had responded to it.  And then the second time I saw milk thistle, I was on the San Andreas fault line.  And all along that fault line, as far as you could see, was milk thistle.  And I'm like, that's fascinating.  I wonder what's happening.  
**[0:18:56-0:19:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:18:56):**  And then of all the things, I sat on a plane next to a woman who was a nuclear scientist.  And she started to tell me about how, you know, deep down in the ground, when you get  the plates moving, they grind and there's uranium down there and what's released is  radon gas.  And then it got me thinking, well, milk thistle, we use that in the human body as a liver detox.  
**[0:19:16-0:19:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:19:16):**  I wonder if it's detoxing these soils.  And sure enough, when we've tested in soils now, we were seeing these heavy dense populations  of milk thistle, there'll be some kind of contaminant.  Because we saw this blow up as well after the Christchurch earthquakes in New Zealand,  we saw milk thistle just turning up everywhere.  
**[0:19:32-0:19:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:19:32):**  So for me, it's the patterns of what is it that this particular plant might be doing.  We know that some are really good at pulling radiation out of the ground.  You know, sunflower has been used to do that.  Even like marijuana and hemp, you know, they have the ability to phytoremediate heavy metals  and different types of toxins.  
**[0:19:49-0:19:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:19:49):**  So observing where do we see these things grow naturally.  And what we see is how when we do have major mineral imbalances, we have what we call the  dynamic accumulators.  And these weeds will specifically be making nutrients available that are low in the soil,  but making them high in the plant.  
**[0:20:07-0:20:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:20:07):**  And then they will actually exude some of those minerals in a bioavailable form back  out their root system.  So not only in their leaves, but also in their roots, and then they're making that available  to the next plant community.  So they're actually shifting soils to become more advanced, if you're willing to sit there  
**[0:20:22-0:20:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:20:22):**  for 100 years and wait for them to do this shifting.  So we did some pretty extraordinary stuff by measuring or doing leaf tissue testing  of that specific weed and saying, what is it that this weed is trying to tell me?  What is it high in?  What is it trying to balance out?  
**[0:20:38-0:20:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:20:38):**  And the only time we find, the only exception to that rule would be sodium or nitrates.  So a plant that where soil is high in sodium or nitrates, we might find high sodium and  nitrates in that.  But otherwise we find mostly low soils, you'll find these nutrients high in the plant.  So I don't know if you've come across Betsy Ross down at Sustainable Growth Solutions  
**[0:20:58-0:20:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:20:58):**  in Texas.  She's absolutely incredible, but she does the same practice as I do.  And what she was doing was measuring mesquite and found that mesquite was very high in some  trace elements, including copper.  And I can't remember what the other ones were, but she basically made like a nutritional  
**[0:21:14-0:21:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:21:14):**  profile based on what the mesquite was high in.  And then she brewed that with a fulvic acid and some other materials, then sprayed that  back onto the mesquite.  And within a couple of weeks, all that mesquite Cambrian growth, the bark cracked open.  And so you can go where she's done these spraying and all of these mesquite trees are dead.  
**[0:21:32-0:21:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:21:32):**  So by looking at what is it that this plant's actually trying to address, you know, is it  a microbial or a mineral, then it actually gives us a whole new access to can we shift  the soil so that it no longer suits that plant.  Looks like magic basically.  This brings several pieces to mind.  
**[0:21:48-0:21:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:21:48):**  One of them is the story of giant ragweed.  So when you speak about bioremediation from milk thistle and also from marijuana and hemp,  I perceive that there is a similar bioremediation effect from giant ragweed.  And I look at the way that the behavior of giant ragweed has changed over the years.  I suppose the simple way to say it is that giant ragweed went from being an aggressive  
**[0:22:10-0:22:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:22:10):**  weed that grew several feet tall to a superweed that would germinate at all times of the year,  all the way up into September or into the fall and seed in a matter of 30 to 40 days  after germination and into a plant that would grow three or four meters tall in all the  environments that had chronic systemic pesticide applications.  Yes.  
**[0:22:38-0:22:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:22:38):**  Across the Midwest.  The worse the pesticide applications became, the crazier the giant ragweed went.  Totally.  So there's a parallel correlation if you look at the timeline, you look at the history.  Fifty years ago, giant ragweed was a relatively benign plant compared to what it is today.  
**[0:22:54-0:22:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:22:54):**  Yeah.  And I think kosher as well.  So you can measure kosher and see the same thing.  And there's another element to it too, which I guess comes down to herbicide resistance,  which is still part of what we're talking about in terms of gene expression.  
**[0:23:08-0:23:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:23:08):**  And so we think about how glyphosate operates on the shikimate pathway.  These herbicide resistant weeds have the ability to have an overrunning of that shikimate pathway.  So it's just spinning like a treadmill.  And so the herbicide can't work on that because it's spinning so hard.  And what they found is it's aromatic amino acids that shut that spinning down.  
**[0:23:32-0:23:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:23:32):**  And so people that are really looking at nutrition and they are maybe buffering the herbicides  that they're using or they're using products that are these amino acids, which I'm sure  that you are using, shuts that over expression of that gene down.  So there's so many different angles, I guess, to this weed thing that I just find so fascinating.  The next piece that I'd like to dig into following up on these healing herbs, which we sometimes  
**[0:24:00-0:24:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:24:00):**  call weeds, is what are the practices that you have observed?  What are the tools or practices that people can use to shift what is going on in an environment?  Yeah, I guess it depends if we're talking cropping or viticulture or if we're livestock  operations.  Just think everything that we do is a signal.  
**[0:24:23-0:24:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:24:23):**  It's either pushing for more disturbance or less disturbance.  What is our timing?  So thinking if you're in a grazing operation, you're grazing, trampling manure, urine early  in the season is actually a different signal than that grazing and trampling late in the  season, depending on what we're trampling or what we're feeding.  
**[0:24:40-0:24:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:24:40):**  I mean, I do think cover crops are an extraordinary jumpstart for people that are looking to kind  of start.  You know, what are some of the things that will reboot a system?  That really is just getting diversity out there, especially if we've been in a monocultural  environment for a while or asking the question when we're in horticulture of where would  
**[0:24:59-0:25:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:24:59):**  this plant grow in nature and what would be its companion species?  We saw some interesting stuff in apple production where using high fungal compost and humic  acids is suddenly wild strawberries started to grow everywhere.  The guy was kind of worried.  He's like, where are all these wild strawberries coming from?  
**[0:25:19-0:25:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:25:19):**  Maybe it's the neighbors who was a strawberry producer.  And I'm like, well, no, these are different species.  They were only responding where he applied the humic acid.  So where the humic acid had gone, you could see the line and that's where these plants  were germinating.  
**[0:25:32-0:25:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:25:32):**  And you know, strawberries, wild strawberries are a natural companion to apple trees.  So thinking, you know, if we got clover in there, have we got low growing perennial species  instead of these tall grasses or these weedier species?  I lost the beginning of your question.  I'll reframe a little bit.  
**[0:25:54-0:26:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:25:54):**  You mentioned how application of vermicompost in a drill has caused different plants to  begin germinating.  So my question would be, what are tools or practices that farmers can use to kind of  jumpstart and shift the microbial population in a different direction?  Yeah, I do think that's one of our best tools is if we are seeding or even if people are  
**[0:26:18-0:26:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:26:18):**  using any kind of mechanical interventions is to set your system up so that you can drip  some of these microbial down.  And if that's a Johnson Sue, if it's some of the Korean natural composting, if it's  vermicast, it doesn't take a lot of material.  Like we're typically using about two pounds an acre of vermicast in rangeland and we're  
**[0:26:38-0:26:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:26:38):**  putting that down.  So we might be actually spraying that as a liquid or a liquid slurry, or we're putting  that down directly with the seed.  And then what that does is, especially if you can coat the seed first, that's going  to give that seed a competitive advantage because a lot of people are concerned obviously  
**[0:26:55-0:26:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:26:55):**  about sowing into existing pasture.  But that bio-priming, so that's that coating of that seed with some of these diverse extracts  really sets that plant up for success and it buffers it against any issues around, let's  say aluminum, see my good American pronunciations, aluminum or sodium.  It's not aluminum?  
**[0:27:17-0:27:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:27:17):**  Come on.  I try.  I'm not sure what I'm saying if I say that or changes in pH or anything that's really  going to affect that plant's success in germination is we can get these extracts down at very  low rates.  
**[0:27:31-0:27:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:27:31):**  And then what it's also doing is waking up a dormant seed bank.  So I think Diane Ian Haggerty in Western Australia, many of your listeners have probably heard  of them, just the most extraordinary cropping operation over in WA.  What we saw one year when I was there was after they'd harvested their crops, they had  a light summer rainfall, just a little bit of rain came through and what germinated where  
**[0:27:53-0:27:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:27:53):**  that crop had come off down the rows.  So only down the rows was this serratia grass species that has been locally extinct for  like 60 years and it only germinated where that worm extract had gone down the drill.  It just looks like someone's sowing this native grass.  It's just absolutely amazing.  
**[0:28:12-0:28:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:28:12):**  And so that's given them summer forage now because they allowed that to go to seed, they're  increasing that seed bank.  But that seed was just responding to that signal that it was getting from this worm  extract.  And so we're seeing the same thing here in Montana is we're just seeing perennial grass  
**[0:28:28-0:28:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:28:28):**  species that haven't been seen and certainly not in high numbers suddenly turning up and  increasing, which is really exciting.  There's so many different dots to connect in this conversation that my thoughts go in  half a dozen different directions at once.  About wheat losing its capacity to signal soil biology.  
**[0:28:49-0:28:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:28:49):**  And of course, I'd like to talk a little bit about the function of biology in responding  to plant signals to actually enhance plants immune system and to give them disease resistance.  Because I think this is a piece that is not widely known is that when we talk about plant  immune systems and the systemic acquired resistance pathway and the ISR pathway, both pathways  can be triggered by biology in the root system that are responding to signals by the plant.  
**[0:29:21-0:29:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:29:21):**  So there's that aspect that comes to mind.  And then there's also the aspect of when we talk about quorum sensing, James White in  the conversation that I had with him here on the podcast talked about how organisms  that we label as pathogens can actually shift their behavior and begin behaving as beneficials  and have a positive relationship, a beneficial relationship with a plant.  
**[0:29:46-0:29:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:29:46):**  And ultimately what we're talking about is similar to the example that you shared of  cholera or an organism producing an infection in our body.  It's when you reach this critical threshold.  And so what changes when you have a critical threshold of beneficial organisms versus a  critical threshold of potential pathogens, you have signaling happening between these  
**[0:30:11-0:30:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:30:11):**  two groups behaving as an entire organism.  I want to hear your take on all those.  I put a lot out there fairly quickly.  You did indeed.  I think one example might be trichoderma.  
**[0:30:25-0:30:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:30:25):**  So if you think of trichoderma can be a plant pathogen, it can actually invade into plant  roots.  But what we find is in symbiosis with mycorrhizae, they both benefit each other.  So trichoderma is a fungus that eats fungi basically, but together and together with  Pseudomonas as well, that we see this cascading positive effect by introducing them to the  
**[0:30:51-0:30:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:30:51):**  plant if you are doing some kind of seed treatment with those organisms.  But that valuable role in trichoderma in terms of if that plant is under attack, it will  signal to trichoderma and trichoderma will respond back to the plant with different types  of chemical metabolites that then induce things like jasmonic acids or proteinases, depending  on what the plant is under attack from, that don't happen without trichoderma.  
**[0:31:16-0:31:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:31:16):**  And I remember years ago, maybe in 2006, I saw this photograph and it was a brassica  that had all of this white hyphae around its root systems.  And the farmer told me that he had sold it with Pseudomonas and mycorrhizae and it had  mycorrhizal colonisation.  And I went, well, no way, man, that's not true.  
**[0:31:39-0:31:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:31:39):**  And in the literature, it wasn't true at the time.  There's no evidence for that.  Brassicas are non-mycorrhizal, they won't form this relationship.  Well, sure enough, I've had to eat some humble pie in the last few years because the research  is showing that actually with the presence of trichoderma and Pseudomonas, mycorrhizal  
**[0:31:55-0:32:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:31:55):**  colonisations can happen in non-host plants and it will benefit, which I just think that's  just...  We experienced that a decade ago as well to say, well, the literature must be wrong because  it's happening.  It's happening, that's right.  
**[0:32:09-0:32:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:32:09):**  And to listen to people when they say that.  But I think this space is moving so quickly that if we're dogmatic and think we have the  total answers to any of this, we're dreaming, but I think that essential role of microbiology  in plant defence has been probably undervalued and is now what we're really seeing showing  up.  
**[0:32:28-0:32:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:32:28):**  And we can't predict what species is going to be needed in these relationships because  we still don't really know.  So that's where I think the biodiverse compost, the biodiverse cover crops in terms of cover  crops are feeding different types of microbial communities.  It's having all of this diversity in there is what's going to build resilience and what's  
**[0:32:50-0:32:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:32:50):**  going to build immune function for your following crop.  And there's some cool stuff that happens with weeds as well in terms of who they're signalling  to and how they control dynamics.  So they'll actually feed disease organisms to control other plants or things like nap  weed has specific types of carbons that it's exuding that suppresses your entomopathogenic.  
**[0:33:12-0:33:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:33:12):**  And I always hate saying that word, but entomopathogenic meaning insect controlling diseases, it will  suppress that system in the soil around it.  And it's like that those complexities are so fascinating.  They are really intriguing.  You mentioned a little bit ago and I referenced it as well.  
**[0:33:32-0:33:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:33:32):**  You mentioned that modern wheat varieties, some modern wheat varieties are losing their  capacity to transmit signals to soil biology to signal that they are being infected.  Can you tell us a little bit more about that?  Well, I mean, I think that any time we're breeding for some single trait that we're  wanting to select for, you know, people know this in breeding cattle or sheep, you know,  
**[0:33:56-0:33:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:33:56):**  we create unintended consequences when we start to do that.  And so there really hasn't been a focus on root systems or this need, vital need that,  you know, plants have evolved to have these relationships and actually through breeding  we're switched off those genes that will signal to mycorrhizae or switch off the genes to  communicate.  
**[0:34:17-0:34:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:34:17):**  And it's been interesting talking to plant breeders who are starting to realize what  they've been doing has been undermining resilience.  It certainly undermines nutrient density of what we're growing because it's just like  in our gut system.  If you think, you know, 90% of serotonin is produced by gut microbiology, they're now  
**[0:34:35-0:34:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:34:35):**  saying a hundred percent of immunological disorders come from gut dysbiosis and the  same is true for soil.  So if we undermine all of this different types of microbiology and signaling, we basically  have gut dysbiosis in the soil and then that's going to affect the quality of what we're  producing because we now don't have the hormones or the enzymes or the vitamins coming through  
**[0:34:56-0:35:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:34:56):**  to that end product and as a result, we're basically growing garbage and garbage that's  in signaling to insects and diseases to clean it up.  So if you think about it, if you were a seed producer and you were supplying fungicides  and pesticides and herbicides, it's the perfect sales model because here, use this product,  you're now going to need this product and then you're going to need that product.  
**[0:35:18-0:35:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:35:18):**  And what we're finding is we can set plants up for insect resistance by getting these  biopriming on the seed basically and setting that plant up nutritionally if that's what  the problem is or some of these natural, like the entomopathogenic fungi for instance, won't  live in soils that are really, really compacted and have had high chemical use.  So those natural organisms that control insects that are in the soil, so they actually live  
**[0:35:46-0:35:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:35:46):**  like endophytes.  So these fungi are inside that plant root system.  So if something comes to chew on it, they'll infect it and when that insect dies, they  actually go out and they bring that nitrogen back into the plant or that phosphorus or  whatever's inside that insect and then supply that to the plant in exchange for living inside  
**[0:36:04-0:36:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:36:04):**  its root systems.  So if we change that signal and we're messing with that plant and it no longer allows an  insect, like an insect control vector like that into its root system, we're basically  undermining that whole plant.  So there's another pathway, another mechanism for us to produce insect resistance in the  
**[0:36:21-0:36:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:36:21):**  soil for wire worm and corn root worm for all these larval insects and so forth.  Totally, totally.  You know, we dug some holes once and it was in a kiwifruit orchard and like they'd use  so much chemical, like you can smell it coming off the ground and it was all covered in like  slime molds and I didn't even want to dig a hole.  
**[0:36:40-0:36:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:36:40):**  And then when we dug holes, there was like in a spade shovel by shovel, we counted 20  years and that was all that was in that soil.  There wasn't any earthworms, there wasn't anything beneficial and it was like through  all that chemical use and compaction and loss of mineral cycling and organic matter, we  create the conditions for insect pests and then we're in a monoculture as well.  
**[0:37:01-0:37:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:37:01):**  So we don't have anything else growing and you know, off the thing runs rampant.  So we really do see a big relationship with compaction and your redox potential with insect  pressure.  You know, speaking of breeding and some of the perhaps unhealthy pathways that modern  breeding has gone down, it reminds me of a couple of examples of things that I've observed  
**[0:37:22-0:37:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:37:22):**  and experienced.  One is there are two breeders that I know personally who have both developed varieties  that they developed parent breeding lines that lasted for longer than five decades,  over years because they were so robust and so strong.  And these two different breeders were working on completely different crop species, but  
**[0:37:44-0:37:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:37:44):**  they shared one characteristic in common that their breeding and their breeding work, they  focused specifically on developing vigorous root systems and large vascular systems.  So large strong pipelines and large robust root systems.  And their parent breeding material was so strong that it is still being used today 50  years later.  
**[0:38:06-0:38:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:38:06):**  And that to me, perhaps gives us an indicator of some of the directions that we should look  at and go down in our breeding work rather than focusing exclusively on specific quality  characteristics or whatever the case might be.  When I think about wheat losing its capacity for signaling, when we think about plants  from a biophysics perspective rather than from a biochemistry perspective, then we recognize  
**[0:38:32-0:38:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:38:32):**  that a plant is essentially an electrical antenna plugged into a magnetic grid that  we call the soil.  And from this electro-magnetics perspective, DNA is essentially an antenna.  It's vibrating at different frequencies and those various frequencies produce different  compounds through signaling mechanisms.  
**[0:38:51-0:38:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:38:51):**  But what has happened with wheat is more the ancient parent wheat genetics.  When we used to have wheat that was five feet tall, six feet tall, had 18 chromosomes.  And as a result of mutation breeding to develop short, sturdy wheat varieties that don't  lodge, modern wheat now has 44 chromosomes.  So it is genetically bears no similarity to original parent wheat, or I shouldn't say  
**[0:39:23-0:39:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:39:23):**  no similarity, but very limited similarity.  So, when you look at that from a biophysics perspective, you'd say, well, this plant has  such a dramatically different plant genetically that it's no surprise that it can no longer  signal biology the way that the parents used to be able to.  Well, though you'd wonder with all the extra chromosomes, shouldn't that give it more opportunities  
**[0:39:47-0:39:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:39:47):**  to click into something else?  And I think that's where we're seeing more of this focus on epigenetics in breeding.  You know, if it's animals or plants, it's people realizing that five generations impact  that you can have through breeding.  And I wonder if potentially that could make wheat even better in terms of being able to  
**[0:40:08-0:40:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:40:08):**  adapt, because we've maybe built in some more adaptability than it would have.  But yeah, I think the epigenetics is getting more and more focused now and I'm hearing  more producers talking about it, or even if they don't know that they're talking about  epigenetics, that's what they're talking about, which is, you know, how can you grow a plant  and stress it intentionally for, you know, heat or cold or wet or dry or low nutrients  
**[0:40:31-0:40:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:40:31):**  and then continue to breed that plant that then has that expression so that plant has  the ability to kick in and survive when things go wet or dry.  You know, and I think with what we're seeing globally right now is we need to be thinking  more about resilience.  And I don't think you need to be necessarily buying seed from somebody to be doing that.  
**[0:40:49-0:40:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:40:49):**  But what is it that we're doing with our own cultivars or our own livestock to set them  up for resilience?  When you speak about the capacity of additional chromosomes, what appears to me to be happening  is that the antenna functionality shifts from being a resonant antenna to becoming a dissonant  antenna and it's no longer resonating well with the entire ecosystem.  
**[0:41:11-0:41:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:41:11):**  And so you actually produce signals in the ecosystem that we probably don't very well  understand at this point, or largely because we don't know about them and are not measuring  them.  But there's one example that comes to mind that I think speaks to this.  This is actually a cotton grower that we have worked with who has noticed very distinctly  
**[0:41:28-0:41:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:41:28):**  he's working with both Roundup Ready cotton and then he has some cotton that is both Roundup  Ready and BT and might have some other traits in it as well.  I'm not entirely sure.  But he has kept these different cultivars on separate soil.  He has not rotated the different cultivars.  
**[0:41:45-0:41:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:41:45):**  And so the soil that only has the Roundup Ready cotton has a very distinct weed profile.  The soil that has been growing cotton for the last decade that is both Roundup Ready  and has BT and has some of these other genetic modifications has a completely different weed  profile of much more aggressive weeds that are much more difficult to control.  The herbicide program has been the same.  
**[0:42:11-0:42:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:42:11):**  All the other many characteristics have been the same, except we have different genetics  being grown on one soil.  And so we know that there is horizontal gene transfer.  We know that the material of one plant is transferred to biology and then onto other  plants.  
**[0:42:24-0:42:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:42:24):**  And so my sense is that we are growing plants.  This is one of my concerns about genetic modification of some of the unintended and unknown second  and third order consequences is that we are introducing a dissonant signal into the ecosystem  that is carving different types of weed and disease and insect expression that we may  not fully grasp or comprehend at this point.  
**[0:42:52-0:42:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:42:52):**  Yeah.  Yeah.  Yeah.  I'm totally with you on that.  And I think the research that's coming out now on horizontal gene transfer, and it's  
**[0:43:00-0:43:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:43:00):**  like we knew this over, you know, probably 30 years ago.  And I mean, I was part of a group that we managed to create GU free New Zealand.  So New Zealand does not have genetically engineered grown plants commercially in the country.  The horizontal gene transfer was one of the arguments for that.  It's like we don't understand this.  
**[0:43:21-0:43:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:43:21):**  We don't know how far it moves.  And what we're seeing is that those genes can be moved way through the environment.  Yeah.  I mean, biology moves.  And it moves much faster than we might anticipate.  
**[0:43:32-0:43:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:43:32):**  Yeah.  Particularly when we're talking about biology and the soil profile.  Yeah.  So coming back to our conversation about signaling and biology and the impact of biology and  shifting this profile, producing disease suppressive soils, you mentioned a term that is not yet  
**[0:43:52-0:43:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:43:52):**  widely known, I think, at least here in North America, and that is biopriming.  All right.  Tell us a little bit about biopriming seeds as in the example you provided of the Hagerty  operation and how farmers can dig into that a bit deeper.  Yeah.  
**[0:44:08-0:44:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:44:08):**  And what I like is my passion is how do we reduce inputs and basically have closed loop  systems on farm or ranch?  So that's been something that I've been really passionate about for a long time.  So biopriming is very simple in terms of we're just looking at coding that seed in some kind  of diverse microbial inoculant or extract.  
**[0:44:29-0:44:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:44:29):**  So the Johnson Sue, which looking under a microscope, I see that as being very similar  to vermicast, good quality vermicast, some of the compost, some of the natural Korean  farming forms, and there's commercial inoculants obviously involved too.  Basically we see more rapid germination.  I just had a client send me through a whole lot of photographs that he's doing in Australia  
**[0:44:53-0:44:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:44:53):**  with a GRDC project, which is pretty exciting to get the conventional grain guys on board.  And looking at how much faster we see root development on seeds that have been bioprimed.  And you've probably had this too, John, is someone will call you and say, my crop's not  up yet, but the neighbor's crop is and they're panicking.  And I'll be like, well, dig a hole and take a look.  
**[0:45:14-0:45:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:45:14):**  And you'll find that you've got two or three inches of a root system before that shoots  even popped up above the ground.  That happens from these biological signals basically.  So all the different metabolites, all these things that microbes are exuding by getting  that extract.  
**[0:45:29-0:45:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:45:29):**  And again, it's parts per trillion onto the seed is setting that seed up because you think  these microbes produce things like oxens and gibberellins.  And so, you know, your plant growth hormones for root development and also microbiology  that are really good at releasing bound phosphate or dealing with excesses of nutrients or whatever's  going on in your particular soil is by biopriming it.  
**[0:45:52-0:45:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:45:52):**  We really give that seed a headstart out of the gate.  And then as that plant grows up and down, it's got microbiology all over it.  So it's like a just this racetrack across their whole system.  So as they grow, that microbiology is also populating and then making sure that it's  coating leaf surfaces.  
**[0:46:10-0:46:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:46:10):**  So if you look into, you know, what is it that breaks down waxy coatings, for instance.  So you've got a hydrophobic soil, which is a big problem in Western Australia.  Those waxy coatings are formed by bacteria trying to protect themselves.  In vermicast, there's four different organisms that are actually responsible for chewing  up and breaking down those waxy coatings.  
**[0:46:30-0:46:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:46:30):**  And then some of the microorganisms in vermicast are known to actually change how that plant  experiences leaf stress or wilting or water stress and actually increases the humidity  around that leaf zone, which is really cool.  And then we want to see these great big rhizosheets.  And I call them the rustafarian roots, is that with biopriming, the minute that seed  
**[0:46:52-0:46:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:46:52):**  comes out, we see that connection.  So you'll see soils totally covering those root systems.  So you can't actually see bare roots.  And that is the interface for health.  As far as I'm concerned, if you've got naked roots, you're in trouble.  
**[0:47:06-0:47:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:47:06):**  You've got no resilience.  It's this, it's this rustafarian root that can do incredible stuff.  Like it can actually buffer the pH in that rhizosheath by two units.  So you might have a pH of five or nine and that plants experiencing seven.  So they can buffer against heavy metals and all sorts of stuff.  
**[0:47:22-0:47:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:47:22):**  So we're seeing shrinking patches of alkali soils where we couldn't grow anything anymore.  By biopriming that seed and then drilling seed into those areas, we're seeing those  areas shrinking.  So that's been some of the cool visual stuff that we can see, but definitely seeing a reduction  in plant stress and better resilience against temperature fluctuations.  
**[0:47:43-0:47:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:47:43):**  Our observation, our experience has been that the use of high quality inoculation at planting  is the lowest cost, highest return application that we can make in the transition to regenerative  agriculture.  It just, oh, I love it.  It's it wins economically over and over and over again when you compare different applications  
**[0:48:02-0:48:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:48:02):**  on various crops.  Yeah.  Yeah.  We, we reckon it's costing because we're making it ourselves.  It costs anywhere from like 6 cents to maybe 30 cents an acre is what we're, what we're  
**[0:48:12-0:48:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:48:12):**  spending.  And it's like, that's a no brainer.  I mean, I've been trying to encourage one of my clients forever to build a worm farm  because he's got, you know, he's got yards, he's got organic material, he's got manure  and straw and it's like, what, you know, just build some worm farms.  
**[0:48:27-0:48:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:48:27):**  And he finally did two years ago after about seven years of nagging and we figured out  his return on investment, like his cost per hour, he's earning maybe $500 an hour on his  vermicast production.  And it's like, yeah, we need to be focusing on this stuff instead of like getting spread  very thin, vermiculture doesn't have to take a lot of time or investment into and a little  
**[0:48:50-0:48:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:48:50):**  goes a very long way.  And what's kind of cool is they're figuring out ways to kind of get those signals out.  So we're dropping bags of vermicast or compost into like irrigation ditches, you know, just  a burlap sack and just throwing it in a ditch.  You know, it doesn't have to be high technology or high cost and just starting to think every  
**[0:49:09-0:49:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:49:09):**  time we do anything, how can I get more microbiology out there?  So one of my guys is actually feeding vermicast to his cows.  So he's putting a little bit of that in his mineral and he puts it in his water and he's  like, I'm just, I'm going to inoculate that manure and use it as a probiotic and seeing  that manure breaking down so much faster.  
**[0:49:28-0:49:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:49:28):**  His dung beetles have now gone through the roof.  We counted 700 dung beetles in one dung pie and he sent it off to Jonathan Lundgren, 700  dung beetles in this.  He counted a very similar amount and you want to see it.  And it was kind of scary because we were doing a workshop and I pulled this cow pie out of  
**[0:49:48-0:49:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:49:48):**  the way because it was in the trench that we were looking at and it stank.  And suddenly it sounded like a swarm of bees, like it was scary.  And then there's all these dung beetles coming in.  And this guy, before we started working together and using the bio-priming, he had no dung  beetles on the ranch whatsoever.  
**[0:50:04-0:50:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:50:04):**  Now he has all this diversity and it's kind of terrifying.  Yeah.  Wow, that sounds like a lot of fun.  It's so fun.  So Nicole, you've had the benefit of observing and working with many different growers in  
**[0:50:20-0:50:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:50:20):**  different climates and regions and developing a very different perspective on agriculture  than the mainstream perhaps.  What is something that you believe to be true about agriculture that is very different from  others in the community?  And given your work in regenerative agriculture, I might even narrow that context a little  
**[0:50:37-0:50:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:50:37):**  bit and ask the question, what is the perspective and a point of view that you have that is  different from others in the regenerative ag community?  Oh, very good.  I have a strong background in adult education and systems thinking and organizational learning  and extension.  
**[0:50:52-0:51:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:50:52):**  So I think for me, a lot of the time I come back to who are we being in this space?  Like our observations and our actions are given by who are we being about whatever's  happening.  And what I find is that world of being shifts when people enter into regenerative agriculture,  because you go from being someone who's about control and dominance, about having things  
**[0:51:16-0:51:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:51:16):**  look really, really pretty and whatever you think pretty looks like, to being someone  who's willing to step outside of the norm.  And that is one of the most challenging things that we can do.  But if we just reach for a practice, if we just reach for a cover crop, if we just reach  to, hey, the answers here, we're back into that industrial mindset.  
**[0:51:39-0:51:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:51:39):**  So for me, the mindset stuff is probably the biggest part of my work and the stuff I'm  most excited about.  And we're doing some pretty big, I guess, behavior change type programs that we're seeing  some incredible success with.  And so I think for me, I'm really deeply rooted in the sense of being and that being also  
**[0:51:57-0:52:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:51:57):**  means where are we response able?  Where are we accountable for ourselves and our lives and our landscapes?  And like for me, there's no separation.  So I see that inner landscape so reflected in the outer landscape, but there's no separation.  We're seeing degraded, parched, dysbiosis across the world.  
**[0:52:18-0:52:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:52:18):**  And we're seeing that in people as well.  And so I think I kind of connect a lot of what's happening with people with the land.  And I'm really interested in that angle.  I've had conversations with people that have blown my mind, but I can really see how that  has shifted someone's entire world in terms of how do we look at land and how do we interact  
**[0:52:36-0:52:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:52:36):**  with it?  And I came across something recently that I wanted to share with you that I was reading  this book called The Longest Echo.  Sorry if this is a trigger warning for some of you, but it was about World War II and  during the German genocides.  
**[0:52:52-0:52:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:52:52):**  The true story is based in Italy and basically these SES agents come in and they kill all  the women, children, grandparents, everybody.  At the end of the book, they were looking at what happened to those SES agents after  the war.  And what they found was, you know, those people, many of them were very educated, very intelligent.  
**[0:53:11-0:53:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:53:11):**  They went back to having normal lives with their families and settling down.  You know, they didn't continue to be these mass murderers.  And they looked at a hundred different case studies of people that went to court for atrocities.  And they're like, you know, were these people threatened with their lives?  Were they threatened with something equal to what they were going to dole out?  
**[0:53:30-0:53:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:53:30):**  Was it going to be a horrible punishment if they didn't do these terrible things to people?  And what they found was that was not the case.  And so her take home was that, I'll just quote you this, that there's a simple truth.  It takes unimaginable strength to be different, to break away from what your peers are doing  is one of the hardest things for anyone.  
**[0:53:51-0:53:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:53:51):**  That those people, the SES agents were more concerned about fitting in and doing what  everybody else was doing and worrying about what the neighbors would think.  And it's one of the most powerful things around behavior change.  And we can use that for good.  We can use that talent because people are concerned about, especially in agriculture,  
**[0:54:10-0:54:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:54:10):**  what do my neighbors think?  And so I'm working with a producer right now who's, he's very humble.  He's very kind.  He's doing a great job with his land.  I mean, you see the water sink into his property.  
**[0:54:21-0:54:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:54:21):**  You see, you know, really, really healthy livestock.  He's just doing awesome stuff.  He doesn't tell anyone else what to do, but he talks to people quietly.  We've done quite a few workshops at his place and we calculated in a 10 mile radius that  50% of his neighbors now are running regenerative adaptive grazing management.  
**[0:54:40-0:54:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:54:40):**  And so my take home from all of this is we need to speak up.  We need to be willing to be at the pub or the saloon or wherever you hang out and start  speaking our truth because it's our truth that's going to make the difference here.  It's sharing our own personal stories and starting to communicate what's working well  for us is what changes things.  
**[0:54:58-0:54:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:54:58):**  It's not data.  It's not having more information.  It's not more trials.  It's us being willing to communicate.  And this is what I'm seeing with the Corum Sense Group in New Zealand is this extraordinary  
**[0:55:09-0:55:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:55:09):**  network.  They're a WhatsApp group.  They share their stories.  There's no dogma.  And I think that's what I love about regenerative agriculture.  
**[0:55:16-0:55:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:55:16):**  This is not dogmatic.  If you want to do a certain practice, you do that, you know, and sometimes you might  use antibiotics.  Sometimes you might be using herbicides or whatever, that there's this space that we  are all working through this and doing the best that we can do.  
**[0:55:30-0:55:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:55:30):**  But through sharing our successes and our failures, we're creating this this world that's  actually changing really fast, John.  And I'm very excited.  Yeah, one of the thank you for that perspective, that review, I completely agree with you that  it is it is up to each of us to help create the change that we wanted to see in the world  
**[0:55:50-0:55:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:55:50):**  by speaking up and by making our voices heard.  And within that context, there is a quote that I've shared many times with our team  here at AEA and I've even talked about it occasionally.  It's a slight paraphrase of a quote from Otto Scharmer, who's a MIT researcher on systems  change.  
**[0:56:09-0:56:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:56:09):**  The quote is, the outcome of an intervention has nothing to do with the skills of the intervener.  It has everything to do with the place within from which the intervener comes.  Yes, yes.  And so when you think about that, when you think about having empathy for the landscape,  having empathy for our neighbors who have a different perspective than we do, who haven't  
**[0:56:31-0:56:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:56:31):**  yet heard the things that we've heard, they haven't experienced what we've experienced.  It's when we are able to truly empathize with people and communicate from that place of  empathy, that will determine our ability to actually make a difference.  Yeah, yeah.  Yeah, I'm totally with you.  
**[0:56:49-0:56:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:56:49):**  And I think sometimes people feel like, who am I in this space or who am I to speak up?  Or, you know, I'm just doing this small part.  And it's like all of those smart, small parts of what's making the whole.  And I think don't undervalue that.  And yeah, this has been my joy, I guess, of being able to live with people.  
**[0:57:07-0:57:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:57:07):**  So I live on the road and I live in people's houses with families is that empathy is so  important because we all have these different challenges going on.  And I think no matter where you go in the world, people still care about the same things.  You know, they care about their families.  They you know, they want to they want to be healthy.  
**[0:57:26-0:57:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:57:26):**  They those relationships are the most important part.  And it's it is too easy to focus on the wrong and right when there's no wrong and right  in this space at all.  Yeah, it's just a journey of discovery.  Yeah, painting things is wrong and right.  
**[0:57:42-0:57:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:57:42):**  And negative or positive or black and white is generally not very helpful.  And I'm thinking specifically about till versus no till.  Yeah, yeah, I think one of the biggest the biggest fights I've ever seen was with a group  of biodynamic practitioners.  Like it was it was so funny to be an observer of the minute we start to get really like  
**[0:58:04-0:58:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:58:04):**  it has to be this way.  That's where conflict arises.  And I think we're just all going to be open to you know what works well for you.  And I think that's the context thing that's so important is, you know, we can read something  or see something or hear something that you know, so and so did this in Argentina and  
**[0:58:21-0:58:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:58:21):**  it worked really well and therefore it's going to work well for me and Alberta, Canada.  And I think always, this is what I love about this space is it's it is innovation.  And this is why I'm really resistant to this idea of like, we're gonna say what regenerative  agriculture is, because for me, the only way to frame it is through its outcomes.  You know, are you improving wellness?  
**[0:58:42-0:58:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:58:42):**  Are you improving water infiltration?  Are you improving the quality of what you're producing, instead of you know, regenerative  agriculture must be these things because it's an incredibly innovative space right now.  And it's a lot of fun.  This is really intriguing because I've not had this conversation publicly yet.  
**[0:58:58-0:59:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:58:58):**  I'm intending to write a blog post about it in the next week or two, but I share your  sentiment that regenerative agriculture should not be defined yet, maybe never.  And the reason I have that perspective is because first of all, if we have the desire,  and I think we should have, to have regenerative agriculture become mainstream globally, then  that by default means we have a desire for regenerative agriculture to be inclusive,  
**[0:59:26-0:59:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:59:26):**  to not have people who are in or out.  And we also need to recognize, as you pointed out, that regenerative agriculture is not  the destination.  It's about the journey.  It's about a journey, a constant improvement and constant further development.  
**[0:59:41-0:59:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:59:41):**  So I think one of the challenges, one of the reasons organic agriculture, organic certification  has not been more widely adopted is because the moment you create a standard and a certification  where there is an in-group and there is also by default an out-group, and that is not a  situation that we wish to see in regenerative agriculture, at least for the foreseeable  future.  
**[1:00:04-1:00:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:00:04):**  No.  You know, and there are a number of organizations obviously that are wanting to create certification  around this space, and for me it does come back to those measurable outcomes.  You know, and then someone said to me, well, if you have an asphalt car park and then you  have one weed growing in it, is that regenerative?  
**[1:00:24-1:00:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:00:24):**  Because we've got now a weed growing in there and we didn't have anything before.  You know, these challenges of, oh, how do you define that something is improving?  At what point is something improving or not?  But I think to have very clear, measurable outcomes of the things that we're concerned  about and I think we've seen some great studies on the reduction of greenhouse gases, you  
**[1:00:45-1:00:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:00:45):**  know, from regenerative practices or even nil residue for me, which is really interesting,  is we can still be using some agriculture chemicals and be measuring nil residues in  the crops that are produced because we have this biodiverse, very robust biological system  that is actually able to break those materials down.  So for me that's kind of fascinating in terms of what are some of the things we could measure.  
**[1:01:10-1:01:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:01:10):**  You know, we see more and more people coming to the table who have proposals around what  could be measured.  Nicole, from your perspective, what most limits farmers from achieving the tremendous untapped  potential that they're capable of?  Their mindset.  
**[1:01:25-1:01:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:01:25):**  Their mindset about what's possible.  It was quite funny.  I was talking to a cropping guy in Australia and he said, every time you talk to me, I  get a headache.  I'm like, oh, thanks buddy.  
**[1:01:37-1:01:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:01:37):**  But what I was finding with him is he would just immediately go into overwhelm and I'm  too old was the story he was telling himself.  And I'm like, dude, you're the same age as me.  You know, I don't want to hear that you're too old.  Is there's this thinking that even in the back of their minds, they're going to do some  
**[1:01:53-1:01:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:01:53):**  kind of practice.  All right, we're going to put in a cover crop.  In the back of their mind they're thinking, this is going to fail.  I know this isn't going to work.  I'm not going to get rain or this is going to be disaster or what will the neighbors  
**[1:02:02-1:02:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:02:02):**  think?  But actually that mindset, that really is what drags the system down.  And I know you've had quite a few people that have tapped into the energy component of intent  and you can see where intent can have an impact on landscape.  So I think if you've got a bad attitude, if your mindset is that you're not going to do  
**[1:02:22-1:02:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:02:22):**  things well, then you won't.  You'll get the timing wrong.  You'll seed at the wrong time.  You'll use the wrong crops if that's what you're using.  You won't manage your livestock.  
**[1:02:30-1:02:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:02:30):**  You won't move them in time or you leave them for too long or whatever because of your thinking,  I don't have the time.  I don't have the money.  I don't have all of this.  And it's all just an internal story.  
**[1:02:42-1:02:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:02:42):**  So one thing that my entire team goes and trains in is they go and do the Landmark Forum,  which is offered by Landmark Worldwide.  And it's a personal and professional development program.  And what it does is it enables you to see your blind spots.  And for me, that is the biggest part of the story is what is your blind spot around success.  
**[1:03:02-1:03:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:03:02):**  We're actually going to do, we're doing a number of courses that we've got online, but  one of them is going to be about the ecology of money and around how people see money and  how we have stories about money.  Like I can't have too much money because therefore I'm greedy or I've got a lot of Irish blood.  So life is struggle and money is struggle.  
**[1:03:21-1:03:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:03:21):**  We walk around with these stories about money and if we can uncover those stories of what  we have around success and money, it's extraordinary what then becomes possible.  So I really recommend people do professional development on themselves because we're running  businesses here.  And I think actually that was my biggest shock coming to the US is New Zealand farming is  
**[1:03:41-1:03:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:03:41):**  very much a business.  And I came here and it's like, it's especially ranching.  It's like a lifestyle.  That business component isn't necessarily there.  So yeah, there was a bit of a surprise.  
**[1:03:53-1:03:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:03:53):**  I find your perspective on money really intriguing.  The non-agricultural book that I recommend the most is Secrets of the Millionaire Mind.  When you go through that, it's first of all, it's an incredible book, but it really reveals  your perspectives on money and economics and success, which you described, which then also  those patterns, those beliefs, those hidden beliefs that you picked up from your family  
**[1:04:17-1:04:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:04:17):**  or your community or surroundings really limit your potential.  And you may not even be aware of them.  And to your point about having negative beliefs about your individual capacity to create change  and that those intentions manifesting, I've actually observed that to be true also when  some members of the team are not bought in to making change in the farms.  
**[1:04:41-1:04:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:04:41):**  If you have a larger organization, larger operation, there's multiple levels of management.  Sometimes a farmer farm owner wants to make changes, but the farm managers aren't bought  in.  They will find a way to make it fail.  Not intentional.  
**[1:04:57-1:05:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:04:57):**  They may not intend to have it fail, but it will not be successful if they don't believe  it's going to be successful.  It's quite remarkable to observe how that pattern repeats itself over and over again.  It's so very true.  And it's actually why we created what we thought of as our ideal client.  
**[1:05:12-1:05:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:05:12):**  And what was at the bottom of the list were the corporate organizations or absentee owners.  And they actually became, these are not clients that we want to work with.  And actually of this moment, and this is the first announcement I've made of this, Integrity  Soils, my company, is going back to its roots and we're no longer offering consultancy or  coaching in the field.  
**[1:05:30-1:05:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:05:30):**  We're just focusing on the education, which is where we came from.  And part of it is this complexity of working with corporate structures.  All it takes is one out of that entire machine to unwind everything that people were out  to create.  And they're going to have the best of intentions and just things don't go well.  
**[1:05:48-1:05:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:05:48):**  It was part of the reason I left New Zealand was working with three corporates and just  going, I just don't have the stomach for it.  Yeah.  What's something I want to have a follow up conversation with you about?  Yeah.  
**[1:06:01-1:06:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:06:01):**  Nicole, what is something that you wish all farmers knew?  Something I wish all farmers knew is, oh gosh, there's a few things.  But I think that to really recognize and celebrate the contribution that we add to the planet,  I mean, what are we up to now?  Like 98% of the world feeds upon the 2% on the ground.  
**[1:06:20-1:06:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:06:20):**  And what we are doing is growing food and growing extraordinary food.  And I think if you keep that in mind of just that beautiful creation that we're involved  in, it becomes very hard to do some of the inhumane practices that I see on some farms,  or it becomes very hard to go, I'm going to do this desiccant, this chemical desiccant.  You know, I hear from some producers how they grow their own organic food behind the house,  
**[1:06:48-1:06:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:06:48):**  but they would never eat their own food that they're producing.  And I think to remember what it is that we are producing and to keep honoring that because  if we all get back to that, then so much of this becomes abhorrent.  We can't be producing this chemical laden industrial food anymore.  Well, it's not even food because we are holding everyone's health in our hands, the health  
**[1:07:07-1:07:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:07:07):**  of the planet and the health of the people.  So interesting, I've heard that sentiment expressed as well that we're growing our own  separate patch of food for our own family.  And you know, that food that we would not, the stuff that we are growing that we would  not consider feeding to our family, there's a very good probability we're feeding that  
**[1:07:25-1:07:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:07:25):**  to our future sons-in-law or daughters-in-law that will become family.  So we do have a larger responsibility.  Yeah, and I think especially when we see what's coming out in epigenetics around fungicides  and pesticides and the effect on grandchildren and great grandchildren is we've already set  this wheel in progress.  
**[1:07:46-1:07:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:07:46):**  So how to kind of halt it now, we have an opportunity to halt that now.  And we used to produce just a small number of lambs and we had lamb farmers come and  buy lamb off us because they're spraying fields out with glyphosate and then feeding lambs  and ewes on it.  They know what they produce didn't taste as good.  
**[1:08:06-1:08:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:08:06):**  And I think if you're not happy eating your own food, you should really be questioning  what you're doing.  What is a topic that you would like to speak about more frequently, but you hesitate because  you sense farmers may not be ready to hear it yet?  Ha ha ha.  
**[1:08:20-1:08:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:08:20):**  Oh, you're good, John.  Yeah, I think it's a conversation that's opening up more and more.  And I think particularly, I think it's part of why I am a good educator because I feel  like I'm a good educator is that I listen to people, I listen to their body language,  I'm listening to all of the nonverbal signals and it's the same on landscapes.  
**[1:08:43-1:08:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:08:43):**  So I'm listening to land all the time from animals to hearing things.  And what's been interesting is how more and more I'm hearing the land speak.  And I was really reluctant to share that.  And so like last year I was on Olderspring Ranch, which I highly recommend people go  and look up and I spent two months out there and they practice what they call in herding.  
**[1:09:05-1:09:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:09:05):**  So they're basically moving cattle like the bison would have once moved.  And I look back over my shoulder and what I saw coming over the hill was bison, but  it wasn't, there were no bison there.  And I felt them come past me like I could actually feel their fur and the wind move  and hear the sound.  
**[1:09:25-1:09:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:09:25):**  And then I heard this voice very clearly say, we are so grateful that you are here.  Like the people, like the ranches themselves.  And so I went, I was kind of embarrassed and I was like, hey, this is going to sound really  weird, but I need to tell you this.  And so yeah, the ranch himself got quite teary and he's like, I know.  
**[1:09:45-1:09:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:09:45):**  And how much of this we actually know.  We know that the land is grateful.  We know that the animals are grateful.  And there, I've gone and shared it publicly now, but I feel larger from that experience.  Like my chest and my whole body expands when I'm in that space of just deeply listening.  
**[1:10:03-1:10:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:10:03):**  And so this is why it's weird these days for me to do podcasts, because I'm feeling like  it's not a time for me to be speaking.  It's a time for me to be listening.  And I think that's what's coming out of COVID is we've kind of grabbed onto this commodity  of knowledge and we're consuming information at this rapid rate.  
**[1:10:19-1:10:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:10:19):**  And what it's creating is more and more overwhelmed, more and more sense of like, either we're  stupid or we don't know enough or we got to learn more.  We're filling up this bag when really it's time to be still.  COVID is asking us to just stop.  And I think just go and stop and be with your animals, be with your trees and listen.  
**[1:10:39-1:10:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:10:39):**  And I've heard things from trees.  I've heard things from animals.  My mom's going to love that I share this because she talks to trees.  But some of my mentors, Bruce Tainio that I mentioned, who was an amazing microbiologist  and who was one of the breeders also that I talked about who produced this incredible  
**[1:10:56-1:11:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:10:56):**  parent seed stock, used to have conversations with trees all the time.  Yeah.  Well, yeah.  And what's often interesting to me is there is research that backs that up too.  So my analytical mind is like, there's no research for that.  
**[1:11:09-1:11:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:11:09):**  But actually there is.  Yeah, there is.  But the voices that I'm hearing are very much not my voice and they're very clear and they're  very encouraging and kind.  And I'm like, I don't know where it's coming from and I don't need to know where it's coming  
**[1:11:23-1:11:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:11:23):**  from.  I just want to celebrate the fact that while we're busy, busy up above the land, that the  land is actually listening and the microbiology are listening.  You know, you go into walk into a field and there is a signal that runs right through  that field and that those microbes are communicating to plants on the other side of that hill to  
**[1:11:41-1:11:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:11:41):**  say, oh, you know, John's back.  You know?  Yeah.  It happens instantly.  Instant.  
**[1:11:48-1:11:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:11:48):**  Magic.  Yeah.  Nicole, thank you very much for being here and for sharing your wisdom and knowledge.  I've really enjoyed this conversation.  I look forward to having many more in the future.  
**[1:11:59-1:12:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:11:59):**  It's been a blast, John.  Thanks so much for having me on and just a treasure to speak to you.  The team at AEA and I are dedicated to bringing this show to you because we believe that knowledge  and information is the foundation of successful regenerative systems.  At AEA, we believe that growing better quality food and making more money from your crops  
**[1:12:21-1:12:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:12:21):**  is possible.  And since 2006, we've worked with leading professional growers to help them do just  that.  At AEA, we don't guess.  We test, we analyze, and we provide recommendations based on scientific data, knowledge and experience.  
**[1:12:37-1:12:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:12:37):**  We've developed products that are uniquely positioned to help growers make more money  with regenerative agriculture.  If you are a professional grower who believes in testing instead of guessing, someone who  believes in a better, more regenerative way to grow, visit advancingecoag.com and contact  us to see if AEA is right for you.  
**[1:12:56-1:13:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_Nicole_Masters_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:12:56):**  Thank you for listening and we look forward to working with you.  