---
title: Episode 64 Ben Taylor Davies
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### Regenerative Agriculture Podcast  (2021-02-25)  
### Author(s): John Kempf  

**[0:00:00-0:00:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:00:00):**  Hi, friends. Welcome back. This is Jon and you are at the Regenerative Agriculture podcast,  where we talk about the agronomic science and cultural management practices that regenerate  plant health, soil health, and of course, ultimately public health, which is what  
**[0:00:15-0:00:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:00:15):**  regenerative agriculture really should be about. My guest for this episode is Ben Taylor-Davis,  who is a farmer and regenerative agriculture consultant from the UK. Ben, I'm really glad  to be able to have this conversation with you today. We're going to have some fun with people  
**[0:00:32-0:00:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:00:32):**  listening to you with your accent. That's going to be an interesting exercise for some people,  I suspect. So welcome here. Tell us a little bit about your personal story and background.  How did you get to be in this spot of having, as you say, all of your play and pleasure being in  
**[0:00:51-0:01:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:00:51):**  your business of doing regenerative agriculture consulting? Thank you very much for having me on.  And yes, my accent is a very broad, Gloucester accent, so from the West country of the UK.  The story as I, for myself and to get to this point where we're having this chat today,  
**[0:01:11-0:01:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:01:11):**  quite a long story, to be honest. And I'll keep it as brief as possible, but essentially,  I went to university, graduated, thought I'd come back to the farm. My father decided that  there really wasn't a position for me on the farm back here. So I applied for a job to become an  
**[0:01:27-0:01:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:01:27):**  agronomist. And that was in the traditional sense of the word with ag chem and fertilizer and  everything that came with standard agronomy. And that rather took me on a path, and a very  comfortable path for an awful lot of years. And I married my wife, Helen, three beautiful children.  
**[0:01:44-0:02:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:01:44):**  And then unfortunately, on the 28th of September 2012, my son, aged 16 months, was tragically kicked  in the head by a horse and suffered some very severe brain damage. And what was a very  comfortable life and a lovely life, all of a sudden was thrown into disarray. And we spent  
**[0:02:02-0:02:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:02:02):**  months and months by his bedside in intensive care. And pretty much my world collapsed,  and mostly mentally. So from that moment on, I probably spent a couple of years just wondering  why and how and who was I and what was I and what did I want. And my wife finally persuaded  
**[0:02:23-0:02:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:02:23):**  me to apply in the UK for a Nuffield scholarship that is offered to young farmers to travel the  world, an opportunity to travel the world and learn about agriculture from around the world.  And I grabbed that with both hands. And I was so fortunate, I'll never forget landing in Mino  
**[0:02:38-0:02:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:02:38):**  Airport in North Dakota, and really deciding that this was the moment where I really, really make  the most of agriculture and find out as much as I could. And needless to say, I had a most wonderful  time in America, in Canada, in South America. And I was fortunate to China and Russia and Australia  
**[0:02:57-0:03:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:02:57):**  and everywhere. And, of course, that's where I stumbled into people like Gabe Brown and things  like that and started seeing that there was an alternative way of farming that really just set  that little bit of a niggle in my mind. And I got home and I started talking to people about soil  
**[0:03:15-0:03:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:03:15):**  a little bit more. And I think I started reading a little bit and more and read more and then,  and then I started getting in contact with some authors of books and podcasts. And to my amazement,  they wrote back and said, Yeah, you know, this is really a journey and it's really good. And I was  
**[0:03:34-0:03:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:03:34):**  just overwhelmed by the response of people like yourself, you know, I made contact and you're  like, Yeah, sure, let's have a chat. It was fantastic. And that's where I started thinking,  you know, perhaps the the mainstream agronomy was something that was obviously becoming a problem.  
**[0:03:48-0:04:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:03:48):**  And after reading books like the Red, Chasing the Red Queen, really starts getting your whole...  You said that you read a little bit. I think I saw your reading list. I don't think a little  bit is the appropriate description anymore.  
**[0:04:01-0:04:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:04:01):**  No, not anymore. I mean, there's never a book that doesn't recommend two, three or four more.  And I find myself, I think I'm up to 600 books on as tentative as you call it regenerative  agriculture. But I mean, anything from rewilding to the fourth phase of water right the way through  
**[0:04:19-0:04:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:04:19):**  biodynamics and paramagnetism and all sorts of books in between. I just find them... And the  more obscure you think a book might be in terms of regenerative agriculture, the chances are,  the more you learn. I think the mainstream books you can probably... If you read five to ten really  
**[0:04:39-0:04:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:04:39):**  good books on regenerative agriculture, you know, I think that's as much as you need. It's the fringe  books that really do add and bring to the party a lot of information. And I'm staring at a pile  literally about three foot tall on my desk of to read. So yeah, I haven't stopped yet.  
**[0:05:00-0:05:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:05:00):**  That's as big as mine.  Bigger maybe.  Yeah, so on my own farm, I decided to start implementing all of the regenerative techniques  
**[0:05:10-0:05:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:05:10):**  and ideas. My father, interestingly enough, back in the day was a mixed farm of livestock and  arable crops. Of course, life became much simpler with the invention of ag chem and fertilizers and  things and didn't need the livestock so much and it was hassle. I've gone a bit crazy on livestock  
**[0:05:27-0:05:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:05:27):**  and decided the full integration of anything from pigs to chicken tractors to goats and sheep and  cattle or ducks and geese, all to try and bring diversity back into my farming system and implement  pretty much practice what I preach and demonstrate that as well.  
**[0:05:46-0:06:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:05:46):**  When you speak about diversity and bringing all these different forms of livestock and birds back  onto your farm, what type of scale are we talking about? And what are the different types of  crops that we're talking about? Are you doing a few dozen or a few hundred or a few thousand?  
**[0:06:02-0:06:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:06:02):**  So the farm, so in acres wise, is just over the 500 acres, which is about an average size farm  for the UK these days, I guess. It's probably edging on the small side, to be honest. So what  have I got? I've got 100 ewes. What makes it more complicated is I've got five breeds and they're  
**[0:06:21-0:06:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:06:21):**  only about 20 ewes within that. So we've got 20, essentially five 20 head flocks of which we spend  a lot of time trying to promote the breeds and the rare breeds in the UK. So we've got 100 breeding  ewes, so with about 150 lambs. We have anything between four and 55 pigs depending on farrowing  
**[0:06:44-0:07:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:06:44):**  exactly in the whole process of breeding. Cattle, we're only at 14 at the moment, just about to  increase that to 24. It's all a bit of a slow process in terms of getting our land in order  or a good enough order in order to extend the livestock in such a way that the idea for us is  
**[0:07:05-0:07:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:07:05):**  to try and get, and it's very hard in the UK to get two crops off a single cropping year, but we're  using clover understories and things like that and then enhancing that clover as soon as the harvest  is done, then the livestock and that and cover crops and that sort of thing. So the idea being  
**[0:07:24-0:07:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:07:24):**  to really make sure that the diversity crosses over between the arable side and the livestock.  You described your personal journey a little bit and the ways that you had accelerated learning  by reading a lot, listening a lot to what other people were talking about. How did things change  
**[0:07:40-0:07:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:07:40):**  on your farm as a result of all that learning? How have your farming practices transitioned over the  last decade or so? Okay, fairly massive. I've always been really into the environment and just  enjoying wildlife and nature. Back in 2000, I did actually plant 12 kilometers of hedges and we  
**[0:07:58-0:08:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:07:58):**  established quite a lot of field margins and things like that to try and protect species and  some of the rarest species in the UK. So that's always been part of it. So that's the start. What  have we done? We happen to live in the most beautiful triple S.I. which is a site of special  
**[0:08:13-0:08:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:08:13):**  scientific interest and an area of outstanding natural beauty which all flows to the River Wye.  And the River Wye is quite a famous river in the UK but it has some serious issues. No serious  issues are related to phosphate and the amount of phosphate entering that river is quite frankly  
**[0:08:30-0:08:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:08:30):**  a real problem. So what we started to look at is how do we prevent the movement of phosphate to the  river? Number one, why would I want to have a valuable asset that was phosphate and let it end  up in the river? So we start looking at reduction in tillage and the increase in organic matter,  
**[0:08:49-0:09:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:08:49):**  so whether it's compost or cover crops, that sort of thing to actually just hold on. Our  cation exchange capacity is pretty low. Our TEC is around seven, eight or was. We're building on  TECs with our carbon improvement. And the other huge issue in regenerative agriculture for my own  
**[0:09:07-0:09:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:09:07):**  farm and it was a conversation that I had with my wife, we were potato growers. No-till potatoes is  something of a problem and it's something I was very, very on the brink of giving up  growing potatoes. And it was only chatting to my wife who said, if you give up growing potatoes,  
**[0:09:24-0:09:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:09:24):**  how are we ever going to show that they can be grown? People are always going to want to eat  potatoes. How can we actually start to show that these can be grown in a way that doesn't totally  destroy the environment? The government over here is pushing a thing called the five a day fruit  
**[0:09:41-0:09:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:09:41):**  and veg. We should all be eating five fruit and veg a day. Unfortunately, most of the fruit and  veg production in the UK is some of the most destructive to soils and the environment. So what  I'm really focusing on right now and the great big challenge is regenerative potatoes. And I spent  
**[0:09:57-0:10:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:09:57):**  two years conjuring up regenerative potatoes in my head until somebody told me about Brendan  Roqui and said, listen, this bloke's doing exactly what you're talking about. And unbelievably,  I just about squared the circle of everything I needed to do and then realised somebody was  
**[0:10:15-0:10:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:10:15):**  already doing it. And it's just one of those things you think, oh my goodness, if only I'd have  only if I'd have found him. So I've got a lot of time for what he's doing over there. And we're  very much implementing huge amounts of that over here now with our own challenges.  
**[0:10:31-0:10:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:10:31):**  Yeah, making those connections and finding the others is something that is so important and has  become increasingly challenging in the mainstream social media networks that are out there, which is  one of the things that we're hoping to resolve with Kind Harvest. So you're there now. Thank you  
**[0:10:46-0:11:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:10:46):**  for joining. The conversations have been pretty incredible, haven't they? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, very  good. Yeah. So when we look at how, when you consider your personal journey and the changes  that you've made on your operation, our views evolve and our perspectives evolve. What is  
**[0:11:03-0:11:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:11:03):**  something today that you believe to be true about agriculture that is perhaps different from the  view of many others in the ag community? Right. I think that the focus of agriculture is the three  main inputs of agriculture, sunshine, or energy, precipitation, and CO2, which are all free.  
**[0:11:31-0:11:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:11:31):**  Unfortunately, there is no value to free. Yeah, we prefer to buy things we have to pay for,  currently. Quite. The interesting thing I have, and one of the opening conversations I have with  a lot of people is about the farming model, as far as I'm concerned, which is a very simple model. We  
**[0:11:48-0:12:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:11:48):**  take three free things, we put it through a catalyst, or our soil, and we make money. And  if you get too far away from that, then we that's generally where we end up with problems and debt.  Most people say, oh, that's very, very good. You know, I can't do anything about the sun,  
**[0:12:02-0:12:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:12:02):**  I can't do anything about the rain and the CO2 is rising. So you know, exactly what would you like  me to do? And I actually think you can do an awful lot with the sun, of capture, of taking that  energy, as essentially we harvest energy. So we've got to learn to harvest that energy far better.  
**[0:12:20-0:12:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:12:20):**  So I think that's really important precipitation, we happen to be on very degraded soils, mostly in  the UK now. Precipitation, we either have far too much at one stage or not enough when we need it.  And therefore the management of this precipitation through carbon through through organic matter  
**[0:12:36-0:12:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:12:36):**  retention, things like that, is awfully all, as far as I'm concerned, another really important  part of regenerative agriculture. CO2 is something that's rising. And if I can take some of that  rising CO2 and put it in my soil, I will help to capture the precipitation. So in actual fact,  
**[0:12:54-0:13:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:12:54):**  I think that for me, the biggest focus should be on those three, three things. And yeah, like you  say, I think most people focus on those minute input buying, and we spend hours and hours and  hours discussing micro macro nutrition and error and seeds and everything like that. And I can't  
**[0:13:11-0:13:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:13:11):**  remember the last conversation or anybody had on managing the free. I have got a big smile on my  face. I love this conversation. I love the perspective of the three free elements. And I  actually think over the last couple of years, I've started speaking about the systemic deficiency of  
**[0:13:28-0:13:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:13:28):**  carbon dioxide. And it really catches people by surprise when we talk about increasing  photosynthesis and photosynthetic efficiency past the threshold of what is considered to be common  or normal, which is very degraded. It's easy to manage the nutritional components of that.  
**[0:13:44-0:13:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:13:44):**  And almost immediately we run up against the bottleneck of inadequate carbon dioxide.  I know that this is something I've spoken about, but what are your perspectives on  carbon dioxide delivery? How can farmers improve their carbon dioxide supply?  
**[0:13:57-0:14:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:13:57):**  So I'm a big believer. And one problem I do have is my books, the amount I read, I get cross-wired  in terms of being able to reference people. I can recite many a passage, but unfortunately,  I can't often name the author that wrote it. And that's a fault of mine, but something I really  
**[0:14:14-0:14:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:14:14):**  believe in is the amount of carbon dioxide in the soil is something that actually we should focus an  awful lot more on. Respiration of soil microbes is something that is, and as far as I'm concerned,  the moon pays a massive influence on healthy soil and the way they breathe. And from what I recite  
**[0:14:37-0:14:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:14:37):**  is that as the moon phases, much like they do to tides, pull and push water, as they pull water up  through the soil profile in a healthy soil, all of the carbon dioxide that's accumulated in that soil  in that soil rhizosphere is expelled out of that soil onto the surface of the interface between  
**[0:14:58-0:15:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:14:58):**  the soil surface and the atmosphere. And that is what I believe and why I believe that the  stomata of most plants happen to be on the underside of a leaf, to capture that high  concentration of carbon dioxide. So essentially, and then as the moon phases change, that allows  
**[0:15:15-0:15:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:15:15):**  it to breathe and allows the oxygen to pass back into the soil, and there we have yet another  wonderful system. So if we're trying to increase carbon dioxide going into plants or the  availability, surely it's all about trying to get more and more soil microbial respiration to occur  
**[0:15:32-0:15:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:15:32):**  in order to provide more and more and more. So it comes back to taking these free things again,  using them correctly to become that cyclical pump of actually giving more and more carbon to the  plant. And as that solar panel grows a little bit larger, it can take some more energy from the sun,  
**[0:15:50-0:16:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:15:50):**  and that can pump more root exudates into the soil and it becomes yet another wonderful nature  circle. What you're describing is a shift in perspective from carbon sequestration to carbon  cycling. And I think this is sometimes lost in the conversation about the opportunity to capture  
**[0:16:10-0:16:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:16:10):**  carbon and mitigate climate change and global warming, etc. The reality is that from an  agricultural productivity and a soil fertility perspective, our desire should be to cycle large  volumes of carbon. The more we can sequester, the more we can release through microbial respiration  
**[0:16:30-0:16:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:16:30):**  for plants to absorb. That increases photosynthesis and we sequester even more. It's a self-perpetuating  cycle. And that perspective is commonly lost that we actually we want to lose a lot of organic  matter as carbon dioxide. But we want to lose it when there are green growing plants  
**[0:16:50-0:17:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:16:50):**  photosynthesizing capable of capturing it. So anything lost when we have bare soil is lost forever.  Absolutely. So like I said, here in the UK it's that focus very much on... we're pretty awful  here in the UK of the most energy hitting the earth comes obviously in July, August, September,  
**[0:17:11-0:17:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:17:11):**  which is generally the time where we have absolutely nothing growing because we've just taken  harvest. And therefore we lose probably about a third of the energy that comes in the whole year.  So this is why we're focusing on these understories and catch crops. But the weather's so  
**[0:17:28-0:17:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:17:28):**  variable with these catch crops. We grew various catch crops and try to mix up some C3s and C4s  and did all that this year. And then we got a real quite a cold end of August and our C4s barely grew  an inch tall and everyone thought they were fairly pathetic. In actual fact, if you dug the roots,  
**[0:17:47-0:18:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:17:47):**  you realize they were actually trying to do quite a lot of carbon building and feeding biology.  So that's why I love this clover understory of these low clovers that act as my herbicide mulch.  So I don't, you know, mother nature always always looks at covering her skin at any time.  
**[0:18:04-0:18:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:18:04):**  We call them weeds, she calls them cover. So I put my clover in there and I allowed that clover then  to release nitrogen to the plants I'm growing. And then as soon as we've taken that harvest,  all of a sudden I've got A, a great cover, B, a wonderful animal feed and more clover  
**[0:18:21-0:18:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:18:21):**  getting into the system and wonderful rooting of drainage and allowing all my soil biology  to really improve. Let's describe the context a little bit. Many of our listeners may not be  familiar with UK agriculture. How is your environment and ecosystems different and on  
**[0:18:39-0:18:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:18:39):**  what are kind of the status quo management practices for agriculture in the UK?  Okay, despite the size of the UK and from what I think a lot of people look at  tidal islands and assume there could only be one weather pattern and one soil type and pretty much  
**[0:18:55-0:19:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:18:55):**  one form of agriculture. In actual fact, we have some of the most varied climate, some of the most  varied soil types. And when I say varied soil types, we could have a 10 acre field with 12 soil types  running from 80% high magnesium clay at the bottom of a field to the top of the field  
**[0:19:12-0:19:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:19:12):**  literally 200 meters away, 200 yards away. And that could be blowaway sand and then everything  in between. It makes it a very hard thing when you're doing soil testing and things like that.  There is no average field. We haven't got these lovely, there are some over in the  
**[0:19:29-0:19:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:19:29):**  eastern part of the UK, but most of the UK has got huge diversity in soil types.  We've also got quite diversity in climate too. So that really does determine what's grown.  But essentially for an awful lot of time, it was plough based system across the whole of the UK  
**[0:19:50-0:20:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:19:50):**  and parts of it still very much are focused on ploughing. We very much focus on cereals,  various pulses, there's potato growing areas, there's sugar beet growing areas as well,  and there's veg production areas that are getting more constrained at the moment.  
**[0:20:04-0:20:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:20:04):**  Yes, essentially it was bashing the soil and when we were doing it with horse and plough, of course,  we were only ploughing at a depth that really didn't affect biology. And I use the example  of an awful lot of, we've got a lot of fence posts from stock fencing. And if you look where  
**[0:20:23-0:20:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:20:23):**  a fence post rots, it never rots at the tip. It only ever rots at about two to three inches  from the soil surface downwards where the soil microbial activity in life is. And of course,  the old fashioned ploughs used to plough no deeper than that. So we used to, they used to recycle  
**[0:20:38-0:20:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:20:38):**  an awful lot of that biology. But unfortunately, with the invention of tractors and larger tractors  and bigger tractors yet again, and wanting to do more, of course, the ploughs needed to cover more  acres. So in order to cover more acres, you end up with a wider plough furrow. The only way you can  
**[0:20:54-0:21:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:20:54):**  end up with a wider plough furrow is to plough deeper. That becomes this problem of people  ploughing eight, nine, 10 inches deep in order to throw a 20 inch furrow. And of course, you then,  then that's when the massive degrading soil problems that have come from. So we've carried  
**[0:21:11-0:21:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:21:11):**  on and we we started to do a really good job and we were good with high inputs, growing a lot of  cereals. So for instance, wheat in the UK, most wheat growers would be aiming for 10 tonne a  hectare or four tons to the acre of winter wheat. Many pushing 12 tonne a hectare, so you know,  
**[0:21:28-0:21:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:21:28):**  on an even 15. So getting up to five, six tonnes an acre winter wheat. That of course comes on the  back of huge amounts of inputs too. That becomes that very much the treadmill that is lots of  nitrogen, lots of disease, lots of disease, lots more nitrogen, fighting fungicides, fighting,  
**[0:21:45-0:21:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:21:45):**  fighting with insecticides and very much trying to put fires out constantly.  Coming back to your comment about the three free things in agriculture,  that would make an interesting phrase if you said it multiple times really fast,  
**[0:21:57-0:22:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:21:57):**  three free things. You talked about the yields that are being produced, but what about the  profitability of managing that ecosystem with those high input costs?  And this is pretty much another thing that started to frighten me. I, my father passed away and I was  
**[0:22:10-0:22:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:22:10):**  handed all these box files and things like that from when he was farming at the farm. And what I  noticed was that in 1994, we did four tons of the acre of winter wheat and our input costs were  about a fifth of what I took over from him and farm conventionally. And the price of diesel,  
**[0:22:29-0:22:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:22:29):**  the price of nitrogen, the price of all inputs, the very fact that a very small amount of herbicide,  a very small amount of fungicide was ever needed and things like that. And the reality struck that  in actual fact that the problem is not so much yield because our yields are plateaued. There's  
**[0:22:43-0:23:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:22:43):**  a few that are pushing better boundaries. But if I was going for 10 in 1994, I'm not growing,  I wasn't growing any more than that in the year 2010, that becomes a real problem. So the focus  for us is actually the huge input costs of just, I'm liking it very much the frog in the boiling  
**[0:23:02-0:23:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:23:02):**  water or the water analogy where I think we've all sat in this water that's slowly got warmer  and warmer and warmer and warmer to the point where we haven't jumped out. But in actual fact,  if somebody came to the UK right now and said, well, these are going to be your input costs,  
**[0:23:18-0:23:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:23:18):**  and this is your profitability, that would be a real problem. You'd be like, well, the profit  really doesn't square the investment. You know, there's a lot of farmers that are still profitable,  don't get me wrong and doing okay. But unfortunately, and it's very much the fringe  
**[0:23:34-0:23:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:23:34):**  of soil quality that we are seeing, those with more soil quality have got more ability to keep  going in the way they're doing. Those that are on slightly compromised soils have got to the stage  where they realise that in actual fact, we can't keep taking and putting very little back. And  
**[0:23:50-0:24:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:23:50):**  something really has to change and these spiralling costs are actually making businesses, many  businesses actually lose money. You know, that's where we bring the three free things back. Hang  on a minute, how far away have you got from that? And I guess for the main of the UK and one of the  
**[0:24:04-0:24:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:24:04):**  major penny drops, we got a weed called Blackgrass. We used to control it very easily with one  herbicide, then a bit of resistance came and we started using two, three, four, five, six, seven  herbicides, still getting very little control. It was only at that point that we realised that  
**[0:24:24-0:24:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:24:24):**  herbicides were totally failing. What were the other options? Well, of course, that's when you  start looking at cultural management. And all of a sudden you start thinking, well, my soil is in  such poor health, that we are self selecting an environment for this weed to become established.  
**[0:24:40-0:24:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:24:40):**  So in actual fact, if we can change the environment in which it's growing and improve  the soil conditions, the Blackgrass funny enough, disappears. And that's exactly what's happened.  So that's something that really has hit home to a lot of growers in the UK. And something that  
**[0:24:56-0:25:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:24:56):**  really has probably started the regenerative movement, because once you once you have that  seed, so I think people just want to open that a little bit more. So now today, in addition to  farming, you're also doing consulting for regenerative agriculture, you described the  
**[0:25:09-0:25:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:25:09):**  Blackgrass as being perhaps one motivator of that. But when you think about the business context,  the business environment, as you just described it with constantly squeezed profitability in the  mainstream system, has the profit motive and the desire to improve profitability gotten people to  
**[0:25:25-0:25:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:25:25):**  consider adopting more regenerative agriculture practices. What does the landscape look like in  the UK at the moment of transition to regenerative agriculture?  That's a pretty tricky question to interpret, because unfortunately,  
**[0:25:37-0:25:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:25:37):**  places like Twitter that I spend an awful lot of time on, as I'm sure you're aware,  but I find I surround myself with most regenerative growers in the UK. So you end up  with a quite a blinkered view of how you think the UK is in so much as, wow, everybody's on the  
**[0:25:53-0:26:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:25:53):**  journey. On the consultancy side of things as well, of course, I'm only being contacted by  people that are desperate to just have some help along the way, you know, how can I do this and  that sort of thing. And I'm really enjoying that. Of course, I don't really think that's the norm.  
**[0:26:10-0:26:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:26:10):**  Still in the UK, I do think there are people very much still in the bathtub with the frog.  Questions are being asked all the time, you know, new generations are coming through and saying,  you know, I pretty much like to have this farm in 25 years time, the way we're farming at the  
**[0:26:27-0:26:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:26:27):**  moment, I think we're going to be devoid of soil, if nothing else. So in actual fact, I think there  is definitely conversations being had on many farms about how the problem is in the UK, and  it's something and the reason why I'm writing a book, to be absolutely honest at the moment is,  
**[0:26:45-0:26:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:26:45):**  I think a lot of places would go, well, you know, it's great. It works with John Kemp in America,  and it works for all these people in Australia and Brazil and things. England, of course,  is very different, very different. We've got different, different soil, you know,  
**[0:26:58-0:27:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:26:58):**  we got a different club. We got, we haven't seen clay like this. And before you know it,  that's why I'm writing this book, which is called Moron. And it's about M-O-R-E-O-N, you know,  the addiction of British agriculture to inputs. You know, if you put a little bit on more,  
**[0:27:14-0:27:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:27:14):**  more must be better, and you put more on and more on and more on, and that's what we've got to.  And one of my titles of the chapter that I want to write at the moment, but unfortunately due to  Covid, I can't get around an awful lot of very, very good growers in the UK of regenerative.  
**[0:27:28-0:27:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:27:28):**  The title is entitled, It Won't Work Here. And I've just go around all these, all these traps  in the UK and prove that, you know, they're doing it and doing it well. So I think one of the  biggest barriers for me is proof. And that's what I think will be really useful about my book coming  
**[0:27:45-0:28:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:27:45):**  out that will hopefully. Human nature is the same in the world over. Everywhere you go, if people  want to avoid doing something, they will say it won't work here. Yeah. There are people who have  given us that line in probably every state in the US, and yet there are growers who are sometimes  
**[0:28:03-0:28:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:28:03):**  within very, very close to them proximity who are doing it successfully. So the principles work  successfully everywhere. I have a suggestion for you, though. I think you should change the title  of your chapter from it won't work here to it is working here. Yeah, yeah, quite. Absolutely. I  
**[0:28:22-0:28:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:28:22):**  think that it won't work here is more of a yes, yes, it really can. And it will. And it certainly  is. And it's working here. It's amazing when you start doing some talks and doing some things and  talking to clients and things, and especially the generations where they can remember their  
**[0:28:40-0:28:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:28:40):**  grandfathers doing various things. And they're like, we used to do that. And I was like, yeah,  you probably did. You probably did any wonder why we haven't. And that's why I think some of the  best books I've got, and their reference books are from the Ministry of Ag of the UK from from 1890s  
**[0:28:58-0:29:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:28:58):**  to about 1890s to about 1930s, pre development of our friends, Harbor Bosch, and everything that  came with that and some of the knowledge. The worry for me is the word science. And I really  don't like the word science because we all assume that a lot of people assume science was only  
**[0:29:16-0:29:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:29:16):**  developed in the last 50 years, really. And before that wasn't science, it just happened. But of  course, science has been happening forever. I mean, the very fact that natural selector was  artificial selection of all the plants we now grow. I mean, the science is phenomenal that went  
**[0:29:32-0:29:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:29:32):**  on. And therefore, you know, I really do feel that we should start learning about everything,  you know, and that's the book I've been buying up recently and just overwhelmed by what they  talk about. I'd like to go back to your extensive reading list. You have your own website, and  
**[0:29:51-0:30:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:29:51):**  you've published the reading list of all the books that you've read and how you have rated them.  Where can people find that? And what are the top books that you would recommend for people?  So the website is the easy bit. So that's www.regenben.com. And for those that can't  
**[0:30:06-0:30:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:30:06):**  actually understand my accent, I'm sure we can put it on a link after.  We will do that.  Top books. Now, funny enough, well, we had a brief conversation before we came on air,  
**[0:30:18-0:30:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:30:18):**  didn't we, about ranking books and ranking interest and that sort of thing and what would  suit some wouldn't suit others. And I just wonder whether I need to go back over my whole book  collection and actually start putting a traffic light system in for beginners, intermediate and  
**[0:30:34-0:30:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:30:34):**  almost experts of Regen Ag. Because I do think there needs to be a beginning or just wondering  the subject. You know, you can't go far wrong from Gabe Brown is a wonderful story and a wonderful  book to read. Nicole Masters For the Love of Soil is another great, great opening book into Regen  
**[0:30:54-0:31:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:30:54):**  Ag. I love John Stieker's book as well on Soil Handbook. Then I think if you're going to step  up a little bit from there on in, that's when books like your own, I think are very, very good.  I was just ready to say, you're not going to mention my book?  
**[0:31:10-0:31:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:31:10):**  Yeah.  My goodness.  That's a level well up over and above the beginners, so to speak. I think Matt Powers'  
**[0:31:17-0:31:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:31:17):**  book that he's just released is fantastic at illustrating some of the more complex parts  of the whole regenerative system. You know, I just find his energy just absolutely fantastic.  And it comes through on his book. And then the expert books would be things like The Fourth  
**[0:31:34-0:31:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:31:34):**  Phase of Water, one of my most favourite books. It absolutely, I've read it twice, probably going  to read it for the third time. Whilst I've ranked them all in order of sort of difficulty and  importance, I wouldn't want somebody thinking about Regen Ag to pick up The Fourth Phase of  
**[0:31:50-0:32:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:31:50):**  Water and probably be put off if I'm honest.  So as a personal question or recommendation for you, if you enjoy The Fourth Phase of Water and  you haven't read it yet, I highly recommend his earlier book that is titled Cells,  
**[0:32:04-0:32:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:32:04):**  Gels and the Engines of Life. Understanding that book and what its implications are,  what it describes, will completely revolutionise our perspective of how nutrients flow inside  plants. It completely destroys the foundation of plant physiology and rewrites it from the ground  
**[0:32:20-0:32:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:32:20):**  up in a very elegant, beautiful and simple manner, which is really delightful.  Absolutely.  Have you read any of Stephen Herrad Bühner's books?  
**[0:32:31-0:32:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:32:31):**  The Lost Age of Plants and The Secret Teachings of Plants and Plant Intelligence?  Yes, very good.  Those are some of my favourites as well.  
**[0:32:40-0:32:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:32:40):**  Yeah, no, I mean the problem is when you've read so many it's very hard to keep naming them.  I mean, I've got a huge bookcase here and another bookcase there and I look across and just,  you know, I look at them and I just think there's just some wonderful writings.  
**[0:32:59-0:33:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:32:59):**  Yeah, I think you and I could have many interesting conversations because I've,  I don't often speak to people who read quite as much as I do and so it'd be interesting to see  where we have not overlapped.  
**[0:33:10-0:33:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:33:10):**  Yes, perhaps we should exchange book reading lists.  Yeah. With the experiences that you've had, the phone calls that you're getting from growers  who desire to begin a transition to more regenerative agriculture practices,  
**[0:33:25-0:33:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:33:25):**  from your perspective, what would you say most limits farmers from achieving the potential  that they're really capable of on their farms?  In terms of what's stopping them becoming regenerative or what's stopping them achieving  
**[0:33:37-0:33:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:33:37):**  what they could achieve because they are on a journey and they haven't quite got there yet?  They haven't quite got there yet.  Well, I intended it as the latter, but you can answer either way.  
**[0:33:46-0:33:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:33:46):**  The easiest and obvious answer to most problems in UK agriculture,  I guess is the world over, is fear.  That really is the foundation of everything else, isn't it?  
**[0:33:56-0:34:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:33:56):**  I spend my life telling people, if you did everything opposite than what you're doing today,  right, your farm would be far more resilient than what it is.  And they're like, wow.  
**[0:34:08-0:34:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:34:08):**  And then you start explaining everything and turning everything upside down onto its head.  I think you have mindset and fear of doing stuff.  And that's certainly probably the most major worrying thing for me,  
**[0:34:22-0:34:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:34:22):**  is the farmers that are tenant farmers generally paying a rent, trying their hardest,  generally in a spiral of debt and trapped on this treadmill.  Because the leap of faith to get off it and say, I've got to do something different,  
**[0:34:43-0:35:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:34:43):**  is the worry that in actual fact, whilst they're not making any money now,  perhaps they'll lose even more if things were to go awry.  And that really concerns me as an advisor that, how do we get this whole debt-ridden society  
**[0:35:01-0:35:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:35:01):**  part of, or social part of agriculture into a place where in actual fact, they really start,  I mean, farming should be enjoyable.  You know, putting the fun back into farming is something that regenerative agriculture  
**[0:35:17-0:35:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:35:17):**  has done for everybody I speak to.  The worry and debt for people is the reason why agriculture at the moment is probably  one of the highest suicide rate in, certainly in the UK, I'm not sure all the world over.  
**[0:35:28-0:35:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:35:28):**  And that's generally because of spiraling debts and all kinds of other problems that come with it.  And what I found, and I know I had my mental health issues when my son was kicked.  And I know that this regenerative agriculture hasn't just regenerated my farm,  
**[0:35:45-0:35:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:35:45):**  it hasn't regenerated my mind, it's regenerated me, it's regenerated my family.  It's regenerated my whole outlook and my whole aspect on life and my friends and everything.  And that's something massive.  
**[0:35:59-0:36:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:35:59):**  When you start to become part of this journey, the way I wake up in the morning is full of  excitement and desire to either help somebody, because that's the day I'm doing it, or on my  own farm to actually implement some ideas, as wacky as they might be at times, and do that.  
**[0:36:15-0:36:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:36:15):**  So I think it's very much, yeah, the fear of change.  Once you can just lead somebody, I think that's when they can really start to just change and  adapt and do what they need to do.  
**[0:36:29-0:36:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:36:29):**  When you think about the business landscape of agriculture as it exists at the moment with the  compounding debt spiral that you described and the ever tightening profitability, and  kind of the mainstream that I think is, there's certainly local nuances in different regions and  
**[0:36:48-0:37:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:36:48):**  different nations around the world, but there is certainly major themes prevail across the board.  When you consider that business landscape and that environment, what would have to happen  for regenerative agriculture to speed up and to become mainstream more rapidly?  
**[0:37:10-0:37:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:37:10):**  I guess talking from the UK mainly, proof of concept.  It's very easy, and I'm spending an awful lot of time because it's just becoming  spring at the moment.  
**[0:37:18-0:37:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:37:18):**  It's very easy for me to stand in front of something and say, whilst on this regenerative  journey, you were applying nearly 300 kilos of nitrogen.  This year I want you to apply 20 kilos of stabilised N, and believe me, we'll have the  
**[0:37:34-0:37:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:37:34):**  same results.  Okay?  Yeah.  
**[0:37:39-0:37:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:37:39):**  And that doesn't compute.  Once it's been done and once it's been proven and once people have got quite excited about  it, it's then rolling out more and more.  
**[0:37:48-0:37:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:37:48):**  Very cynical is the farming community of the UK.  So even if you've done it on five neighbouring farms and you try and convince the sixth neighbouring  farm, yes, it will work for you.  
**[0:37:59-0:38:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:37:59):**  You'll say, ah, they've got different grain than me, different soil type.  Okay, another challenge.  So I think it's confidence in the system.  
**[0:38:09-0:38:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:38:09):**  I've observed you on Twitter and social media being a strong advocate and champion for SAP  analysis.  And in reality, this is where SAP analysis has been such a powerful tool for us because  
**[0:38:20-0:38:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:38:20):**  you pull a SAP analysis and all of a sudden the farmer has the data in front of his face  that says, oh my goodness, I don't need 300 units of nitrogen.  I only need 20.  
**[0:38:28-0:38:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:38:28):**  Yeah.  So I think it was yourself that introduced me to SAP analysis 18 months ago, was it?  Two years ago, probably.  
**[0:38:37-0:38:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:38:37):**  Yeah, something that I mean, we send all our samples off to an overcrop control over in  the Netherlands.  Interesting enough, we send them on a Friday, our results back on a Monday.  
**[0:38:46-0:38:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:38:46):**  If we do a tissue analysis in the UK to a UK lab, you send them off on a Friday, you're  chasing them up a fortnight, 14 days later.  They are very, very efficient.  
**[0:38:57-0:39:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:38:57):**  What I do enjoy about an overcrop control is that they are very professional in what  they do.  They don't try and give some sort of interpretation that is left to you as an agronomist or you  
**[0:39:08-0:39:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:39:08):**  as a specialist to actually interpret that information.  Because the trouble is with all these, a lot of places come back and say, well, this should  be this and this should be that.  
**[0:39:16-0:39:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:39:16):**  But in actual fact, as you know, as well as I know, the interaction of all the different  elements is often the reason why something is actually working very well or working not.  And it's very hard to come up with blueprint to actually interpret SAP analysis.  
**[0:39:32-0:39:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:39:32):**  I think our big revelation, similar to what you just described from our use of SAP analysis  was the inversion, a complete reversal of the mainstream agronomy paradigm, which is  that you pull a sample, such as a SAP sample, and you identify the desired level and you  
**[0:39:53-0:40:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:39:53):**  add whatever is low.  And what we observed quite quickly is that the reason five of the 20 different elements  are low might be because two of them are too high.  
**[0:40:05-0:40:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:40:05):**  And you reduce those two and the other five come up all on their own and you don't have  to apply any.  And I think here in the US, sometimes growers look at the price and the cost of taking the  
**[0:40:16-0:40:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:40:16):**  samples and sending them to the Netherlands.  It's quite a bit more expensive than what you have in the UK, about two or three times  as much, I think.  
**[0:40:23-0:40:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:40:23):**  It appears to be expensive, but I have yet to see a case where we didn't save tens of  thousands of dollars in wasted fertilizer bills and all of a sudden those SAP analysis  become really, really cheap.  
**[0:40:36-0:40:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:40:36):**  No, I absolutely agree.  And you're absolutely right.  I mean, we spent our lives on the laws of minimum.  
**[0:40:43-0:40:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:40:43):**  Of course, there are laws of maximum too.  Conveniently ignored by the people who sell fertilizer.  So the laws of maximum are as important as the laws of minimum.  
**[0:40:55-0:41:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:40:55):**  Like you say, opens doors.  Ben, what is something that you wish all farmers knew?  Nitrogen isn't the answer.  
**[0:41:02-0:41:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:41:02):**  I love it.  I love that answer.  You know, I have this fantasy.  
**[0:41:10-0:41:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:41:10):**  I have this fantasy of being able to tax nitrogen to the point of making it virtually unaffordable.  And I shouldn't say virtually unaffordable, but making it very expensive to apply too  much.  
**[0:41:21-0:41:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:41:21):**  That might be a better way of saying it.  Because if growers needed to grow their own nitrogen, which is very expensive, they would  be very realistically feasible and possible.  
**[0:41:33-0:41:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:41:33):**  That would change our entire agricultural landscape immediately.  All of a sudden we would have more diversified crop rotations.  We would care much more about soil biology.  
**[0:41:41-0:41:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:41:41):**  We would care more about growing cover crops and growing legumes.  It would have radical changes, would produce radical changes on the agricultural landscape  if we attempted to grow our own nitrogen or needed to grow our own nitrogen.  
**[0:41:53-0:42:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:41:53):**  Which is really bizarre considering that the air, you know, we have growers we work with  have evaluated their soils and reported that they have soils where the soil biology is  sequestering and fixing 300 units of nitrogen per acre per year.  
**[0:42:09-0:42:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:42:09):**  This is not with legumes.  This is without legumes.  Just biology by itself fixing nitrogen.  
**[0:42:16-0:42:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:42:16):**  All soils have this capacity.  And if they're developed and managed correctly, but we don't see that very commonly today  because we've adopted a model of agriculture that systemically destroys it.  
**[0:42:26-0:42:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:42:26):**  Interesting enough, a very good friend of mine, Ian Robertson, who does all my soil sampling  and runs a wonderful soil interpretation business.  One of the first times I ever met him, he took me to a field of winter wheat.  
**[0:42:38-0:42:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:42:38):**  And he said, the biomass of this winter wheat, let's measure the biomass, work out how much  nitrogen is in this crop.  And there was about 425 kilos of nitrogen stored in the crop.  
**[0:42:48-0:43:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:42:48):**  We'd applied 200 kilos of nitrogen.  And assuming the nitrogen use efficiency was 50%, we'd applied 100 kilos of nitrogen.  And he said to me, well, where's the other 300 come from then?  
**[0:43:02-0:43:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:43:02):**  Yep, exactly right.  Wow.  Question then is, of course, if you can get 300 kilos, well, why on earth  
**[0:43:10-0:43:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:43:10):**  why can't you get the rest?  It's really not that tricky.  And those are the pennies that drop and you think, yes, we've got the system, the broken  
**[0:43:18-0:43:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:43:18):**  system so terribly wrong.  Yeah.  Ben, I often find that people who have been on this pathway of asking questions and asking  
**[0:43:28-0:43:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:43:28):**  why, questioning the status quo, eventually develop a realization or a different sense  of what is and what really might be going on that they may not be comfortable, sometimes  aren't comfortable talking about because they sense that other people are not ready to hear  
**[0:43:43-0:43:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:43:43):**  that.  What might that be for you?  What is something you would really like to speak more about or for more people to understand  
**[0:43:49-0:43:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:43:49):**  or for people to know, but you often don't talk about it because you think it might make  people uncomfortable?  Probably energy.  
**[0:43:59-0:44:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:43:59):**  Energy is a little word that has many different meanings.  Energy is in terms of the biodynamic side of things.  That wonderful book you made me read the other day by Rupert Sheldrake of The Science Delusion,  
**[0:44:14-0:44:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:44:14):**  sent my head spinning in directions that just question my questions now.  Thank you.  And the whole sense of mind and spirit and that sort of thing, I just think there is  
**[0:44:30-0:44:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:44:30):**  so much more, and I'm not even sure I'm even qualified to talk about this sort of, there  is definitely things happen in the world and things and you as a person and your mind and  how that works and the power of positive thinking and all of that sort of thing that has huge  
**[0:44:52-0:45:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:44:52):**  influence not only on the people around you but on the environment around you as well.  I've read a bit, not as much as I'd like to about.  I do really think that these hidden energies that we can't quantify but certainly have  
**[0:45:06-0:45:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:45:06):**  far more, I'll use an example, when we were in the hospital with my son, okay, this is  something that will stick with me forever.  He was in intensive care at the time and it was a terrible time.  
**[0:45:16-0:45:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:45:16):**  A girl came in next door bed and unfortunately the news was pretty horrific and they were,  unfortunately there was no hope.  She hadn't been christened, she was only young and they decided to have her christened at  
**[0:45:32-0:45:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:45:32):**  the bedside and bearing in mind this is next door to us.  They had her christened at the bedside and pulled the curtains round and I can't describe  but what I can describe is what happened next which was the very fact that me and my wife  
**[0:45:45-0:46:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:45:45):**  went out to grab some lunch.  We came back in and his child was in a much better health of state and then two days later  was sat up in bed, four days later was moved to a ward, ten days later discharged from  
**[0:46:03-0:46:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:46:03):**  hospital.  Wow.  I believe there are guardian angels and that sort of thing, who knows what, there are energies  
**[0:46:09-0:46:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:46:09):**  in these places where you need energy and believe me we needed a lot of energy for our  boy and I believe it was the power of all of that that made our boy come home and I  might sound really really strange like that but I do think there is so much more in it  
**[0:46:25-0:46:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:46:25):**  than we give credit for.  Yeah, I'm completely with you on that and you're right that there are some people who  are uncomfortable having this conversation and yet I would suggest that the way to resolve  
**[0:46:37-0:46:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:46:37):**  our discomfort around these conversations is to have them more often and to become more  clear about what it is that we're speaking about and how we're speaking about it because  there are many things that earlier in our conversation you described the influence of  
**[0:46:52-0:47:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:46:52):**  lunar activity on the tides within the soil and gas exchange within the soil and what  I have experienced over and over is that when I start having this conversation with people  who have a close connection to life and living ecosystems and they pay close attention to  
**[0:47:15-0:47:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:47:15):**  what's happening and what's going on, they all share these common experiences, these  common themes of experiencing and observing things in natural ecosystems that aren't really  explainable by our current mechanistic scientific perspective and it's really interesting to  
**[0:47:34-0:47:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:47:34):**  me that almost universally farmers might have different theological and spiritual backgrounds  but almost universally they will acknowledge that there is more to agriculture and farming  and there is more to life than pure science and chemistry.  
**[0:47:52-0:48:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:47:52):**  No, I absolutely agree. I mean the very thing that makes us human, what we've been having  various conversations of late, you can take two soil samples of two fields next door to  each other. Those two fields, one is pretty much in a dreadful state and one could be  
**[0:48:08-0:48:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:48:08):**  in an absolute wonderful state and you send it through all the tests you can ever think  of and the results may very much come back, they're almost identical, you couldn't tell  them apart and yet as a human you could take two footsteps across each of those two fields  
**[0:48:24-0:48:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:48:24):**  and know that they are totally and utterly different. That makes us unique.  Yeah and we have the same with different types of soil amendments. We can look at limestone  from different quarries that from a chemistry perspective has the absolutely identical calcium  
**[0:48:39-0:48:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:48:39):**  content, magnesium carbonate, magnesium content and carbonate and bicarbonate content. You  can grind them down to the same particle size and distribute them on a field side by side  and to get two completely different results. So is it chemistry? Is it biophysics? What's  
**[0:48:54-0:49:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:48:54):**  going on? There's a lot more to that story. Well Ben, I want to say thank you very much  for sharing your knowledge and wisdom and your experiences. I've really enjoyed having  this conversation with you. I'm going to look forward to having more conversations with  
**[0:49:08-0:49:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:49:08):**  you about reading dozens of books and see where we don't overlap.  Yeah, no, that sounds good fun. Thank you very much. Cheers.  The team at AEA and I are dedicated to bringing this show to you because we believe that knowledge  
**[0:49:22-0:49:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:49:22):**  and information is the foundation of successful regenerative systems. At AEA we believe that  growing better quality food and making more money from your crops is possible and since  2006 we've worked with leading professional growers to help them do just that. At AEA  
**[0:49:40-0:49:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:49:40):**  we don't guess, we test, we analyze and we provide recommendations based on scientific  data, knowledge and experience. We've developed products that are uniquely positioned to help  growers make more money with regenerative agriculture. If you are a professional grower  
**[0:49:55-0:50:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/RAP_S4Ep2_Ben_Taylor_Davies_Final_Audio.mp3#t=0:49:55):**  who believes in testing instead of guessing, someone who believes in a better more regenerative  way to grow, visit advancingecoag.com and contact us to see if AEA is right for you.  Thank you for listening and we look forward to working with you.  