---
title: Erosion Soil Balance And Cover Crops With Steve Groff
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### Regenerative Agriculture Podcast  (2018-05-05)  
### Author(s): John Kempf  

**[0:00:00-0:00:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:00:00):**  Hi friends, I'm John Kempf, hosting this podcast. I am passionate about developing regenerative  agriculture systems that improve soil health, produce crops that are completely resistant to  diseases and insects, and produce fruit of such an exceptional quality that we can have a legitimate  
**[0:00:16-0:00:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:00:16):**  conversation about growing food as medicine. I've discovered that there are many people with  incredible knowledge and information about soil and plant systems and how to develop regenerative  agriculture systems. However, much of this knowledge and this information is scattered,  
**[0:00:33-0:00:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:00:33):**  it's found all over the place. Some of it has been published in peer-reviewed publications,  but there are many incredible stories and a lot of knowledge that has not been published,  and that hasn't been shared with many people. I started Advancing Eco-Agriculture in 2006 to  
**[0:00:49-0:00:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:00:49):**  bring this knowledge together in a more coherent fashion and incorporate it into products and  growing systems that growers can easily put into practice. It's my personal mission to have these  regenerative agricultural systems become adopted globally and become the mainstream, the status  
**[0:01:06-0:01:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:01:06):**  quo against which all other growing systems are compared. To help achieve this goal, I want to  share the knowledge that we have learned in the last decade and make it available to everyone.  While we have developed products at AEA that embody the principles of regenerative agriculture  
**[0:01:22-0:01:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:01:22):**  systems and make them easier for growers to apply, this knowledge and these principles can be applied  anywhere. And when they are applied properly, they will always increase farm profitability  and resilience to climate stress. If you have any questions, suggestions, comments, or ideas,  
**[0:01:40-0:01:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:01:40):**  topics that you would like for me to discuss, please connect on LinkedIn or on Twitter,  where my username is at visionbuilder7, or you can also email me at john at johnkempf.com.  I would very much like to hear from you and to hear your feedback. Be sure to subscribe to this  
**[0:01:58-0:02:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:01:58):**  podcast and thank you very much for listening. Enjoy the show. Greetings friends and welcome to  the Regenerative Agriculture podcast. On this podcast, we explore the science and practical  application of regenerative agriculture ecosystems, how to regenerate soil health, crop health,  
**[0:02:14-0:02:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:02:14):**  and quality, and very importantly, how to increase farm profitability. Our goal is to give you clear  and easy to understand actionable information that you could implement in your operation.  In this episode, I'm very excited to welcome Steve Gropp to our show. Steve has been one of the  
**[0:02:31-0:02:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:02:31):**  leaders in the no-till and the cover crop space for several decades and has shared his work with  many growers and many farmers all across the country and internationally. Welcome to the show,  Steve. We're happy to have you here. Hey, thanks a lot, John. I'm happy to be here. My pleasure,  
**[0:02:47-0:02:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:02:47):**  and I also appreciate everything you're doing for agriculture and glad to be a part of this  discussion. Thanks, Steve. Steve, you've had a very fascinating pathway that has brought you to  the various activities and projects that you're working on today. What are some of the memorable  
**[0:03:02-0:03:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:03:02):**  moments that led you to where you are today? Well, that goes back, I think, to the early 80s  when I started no-till. At that time, it was only for one reason. That was to stop soil erosion.  I had no concept of soil health or not much of cover crops or anything. I didn't think it was  
**[0:03:20-0:03:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:03:20):**  right that the soil was eroding off my fields. Every once in a while, I had to close the ditches  in order to be able to harvest my crops. That was my only motivation. It was just a nuisance.  Plus, I didn't think it was right. I think that part of, I guess you'd say, a feeling  
**[0:03:37-0:03:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:03:37):**  is valuable in knowing why I have continued to pursue what a lot of people call environmentally  friendly practices and so forth. A key moment was three years into no-till. I noticed that my soil  was beginning to mellow out. That surprised me. Nobody told me that was going to happen. I didn't  
**[0:03:56-0:04:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:03:56):**  expect it. Just standard thought is you don't till, the soil is going to get hard. If it's  addicted to tillage, it will. What we know today, we can transition from a till situation to a no-till  situation much faster than we could before. That was a key moment to actually see that occur here  
**[0:04:17-0:04:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:04:17):**  on my field. The other thing was back in 1995. I was speaking, that was when I first started  speaking. Dr. Ray Weil was in the audience. He was talking about cover crops. When I  followed him, I asked the question in my speech, do cover crops pay? He came up to me afterwards  
**[0:04:38-0:04:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:04:38):**  and said, I'd like to find out as well. Would you be willing to do some research on your farm?  That ended up to be 12 years of cover crop research on my farm from 1995 to 2007. On the  fourth year of that, we had a drought year. Where I'd used cover crops, I had 28 bushels more of corn  
**[0:04:58-0:05:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:04:58):**  that year. Now, it was preceding the previous three years. That was a key moment. Ever since  that, even though I still get the question today, do cover crops pay, I'm all in. I'd like to tell  people you can't pay me not to plant cover crops. I've seen the benefit. Then I'll just briefly say,  
**[0:05:15-0:05:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:05:15):**  finally here in this, John, that when the radishes came, Dr. Weil brought them to my farm.  I was able to take that concept and develop a variety and establish the tillage radies.  That really became a spark plug for cover crop interest across the country. That's going back  
**[0:05:34-0:05:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:05:34):**  now about 17 years. To see the effect of that and everything has been a surprise to me.  I have more of a gratefulness to discovering these things because everything I just told you about,  I wasn't really looking for. It developed right under my feet almost. To see that experience,  
**[0:05:58-0:06:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:05:58):**  live with it, and now really actively promote it and teach people, I consider it a privilege to  have this platform. Steve, I'd like to learn more about your experiences and observations with  erosion, both on your own farm as well as other farms that you've worked on. When we look at the  
**[0:06:18-0:06:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:06:18):**  USDA NRCS data for the state of Iowa, which is the one state that I'm intimately familiar with  the data for, the state of Iowa on average annually loses two pounds of topsoil for every  pound of corn produced. If you look just at the corn yield numbers across the entire state  
**[0:06:35-0:06:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:06:35):**  and the soil loss numbers, it's two pounds of corn for every pound of, excuse me, two pounds  of topsoil for every pound of grain. That is an incredible number. When you extrapolate that out  into feeding beef, that means that every quarter pound hamburger represents the equivalent of four  
**[0:06:52-0:06:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:06:52):**  pounds of topsoil. Wow. I've never heard it stated that way before. I'm usually amused at tons per  acre, but that's actually more compelling because it's more relatable to people. My comment to that,  and again with my journey involved in this, is why? Why? We have so much technology and  
**[0:07:11-0:07:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:07:11):**  information now. We put a person on the moon what 40, 50 years ago, and we've done so many  great things in technology, but we haven't solved this erosion problem yet. To me, it gets me a  little excited as you can tell because it's just not necessary. Just last week, there was more  
**[0:07:30-0:07:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:07:30):**  dust storms in Oklahoma, in Kansas, in Colorado, where they were concerned on the interstate  about traffic issues because of blowing dust. A month ago, it was the same problem. They shut  down I-70 from blowing dust. That's something you can physically see. What people don't see  
**[0:07:51-0:07:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:07:51):**  is when the soil is eroded with water. Yeah, we see dirty water, but it's kind of like hidden.  You don't really see it leaving. Last year, in the middle of May, there were two people killed  in Illinois with blowing dust where there's pile-ups on the roads. It just doesn't need to be.  
**[0:08:12-0:08:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:08:12):**  I just feel that with the use of cover crops, less tillage, no tillage, and judicious crop rotation,  all this could be all but solved. Not only that, erosion is just a symptom of a bigger problem,  not having a healthy soil. When you look at... We don't have so much of a runoff problem in  
**[0:08:32-0:08:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:08:32):**  this country. We have an infiltration problem. Basically, once we get to learn how to grow a  healthy soil, how to create a healthy soil, what are the steps involved? Cover crops are certainly  a big part of that. When we learn to do that, the soil is simply not going to blow. It's simply not  
**[0:08:51-0:08:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:08:51):**  going to wash away. Then we can start talking a little bit more technically of the soil aggregate  and glomalin that holds the aggregates together. All that stuff occurs in a healthy soil.  We won't have all these problems. It's just a big... One of those many things in our mindset  
**[0:09:11-0:09:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:09:11):**  that we're going to have to address. I guess you'd say encourage that with the... I'll call  it the regenerative agriculture movement that's emerging now. Some of this stuff is now being  looked at by mainstream agriculture. I don't want to get too far in my answer here, but I'm  
**[0:09:31-0:09:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:09:31):**  encouraged with what I'm seeing. In spite of where we're at, I'm encouraged with the awareness and  the direction we're headed here in the last couple of years. Do you believe that using cover crops  and these regenerative farming practices in developing... You mentioned a very key phrase  
**[0:09:51-0:09:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:09:51):**  that really caught my attention. We don't have a runoff problem. We have a water infiltration  problem. That rings really true because when you have good soil porosity, of course, that removes  both wind and water erosion to a very substantial degree. It definitely has a big impact. I guess  
**[0:10:08-0:10:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:10:08):**  the question that I'd have for you is, can we completely resolve erosion with the use of cover  crops? It's not just cover crops. There's a lot of other practices go in there. To answer your  question very directly, we can greatly, greatly reduce it. I don't want to say we can completely  
**[0:10:26-0:10:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:10:26):**  eliminate it because there are some events sometimes that are catastrophic that happen.  Some of that is what it is. The Grand Canyon was eroded. I doubt if it was the lack of cover crops.  That's an extreme example. Cover crops are a key component. Again, we're talking about  
**[0:10:48-0:10:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:10:48):**  a healthy system. Cover crops are just a part of the system because just using a cover crop  has got to go beyond that. Because really stepping back from the tools, which cover crop is a tool,  I guess that's what I'm trying to say. How you manage that tool is very important. I like to  
**[0:11:09-0:11:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:11:09):**  use the example of a hammer. You give me a hammer, I'm not the best guy to build a house because  that's not what I do. You give the hammer to a carpenter, they're going to build a beautiful house,  whatever they're building. Same with cover crops, same with no-till. Those are just tools.  
**[0:11:27-0:11:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:11:27):**  Just because you buy a bag of cover crop seeds doesn't make you a cover crop farmer. So we step  back and we look at the principles. Some of those principles directly include cover crops.  Having a living root in the soil as much as possible, I'm going to say year-round if possible.  
**[0:11:46-0:11:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:11:46):**  Having our soil covered, and that's going to occur if there's something growing there.  Having diversity of species, we can greatly enhance that with cover crops because we can  plant multiple species together or related to that is an intensive crop rotation. I get the fact that  
**[0:12:03-0:12:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:12:03):**  some areas of the country, it's a little less options as far as what kind of a cash crop that  they literally can grow and have a market for, although I think that's an excuse used by a lot  of people too often. So there's some limitations, but if you can sneak a cover crop in there and  
**[0:12:18-0:12:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:12:18):**  plant four, five, twelve different species together, you got that. And then the final part is less or  low, no soil disturbance. So those are part of the big principles. Cover crops are a part of that  big principles in the scenario there. You say that cover crops are a tool for farmers to use. What  
**[0:12:39-0:12:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:12:39):**  are some of the other important tools that farmers should consider incorporating into their systems?  Beyond cover crops, what comes to mind here is your fertility management. I think that plays a  huge role again in your soil health and some of the no-nos in my opinion, and then again,  
**[0:12:59-0:13:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:12:59):**  I know there's different people listening to this, but in hydrocemonia, you want to avoid that,  especially for the corn farmers out there, if at all possible. It just doesn't help your soil's  health. Some of the high salt fertilizers and so forth or other things that are just not good,  
**[0:13:18-0:13:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:13:18):**  fertility is a tool. And again, it's knowing how to manage what is out there, what's available.  But I would also mention while on that topic that once you get your soil functioning and allow the  microbes to come back in their diversity and all their, just the magnitude of opportunities there  
**[0:13:38-0:13:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:13:38):**  with the microbes, they can start in a kind of an indirect way and maybe direct way helping the  soil fertility, unlocking things that were locked up before, making different elements and minerals  more available. So sometimes we don't have a fertility problem, we have a microbial problem,  
**[0:13:58-0:14:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:13:58):**  and there's a definite relation to that. So again, fertility is a tool and tillage is a tool. Again,  I'm a no-till farmer. That's what I do on my farm. It works well for me, but I'm not saying  that the whole world should go to no-till. There's certainly exceptions could be argued for that,  
**[0:14:18-0:14:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:14:18):**  but I will strongly say that less tillage is the least tillage is possible. Tillage is a destructive  event. It can harm fungi, it can harm soil life. We all know earthworms are not really happy when  we ruin their homes and so forth. So again, tillage is a tool. Learning how to use it  
**[0:14:40-0:14:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:14:40):**  appropriately, or I could say not using it appropriately, is going to help us have a  better and healthier soil. So that's just a couple that come to mind there, John. I know there's more  tools out there that go on, but that's probably some of the key ones. Yeah, I certainly agree with  
**[0:14:58-0:15:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:14:58):**  you that tillage is, I believe that tillage is a very important tool and it needs to be used in the  right place at the right time for the right reasons. It can be a very powerful tool, but it can  also be very disruptive if mismanaged. Completely agree. Yeah. How important, you mentioned the  
**[0:15:14-0:15:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:15:14):**  value of having a diversity of crops and diversity in crop rotation, which has been a recurring theme  with the various guests that I've had on the podcast. How important do you believe it is to  have a diversity of cover crops? Yeah, well first of all, I have done literally thousands of research  
**[0:15:34-0:15:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:15:34):**  tests over the last 15 years here on my farm. And just so you know, some of them are very small,  10 by 10 type things. So just to give a little perspective there. That being said, is I would say  there is a time and a place sometimes for single species cover crops. The most notable is when it  
**[0:15:57-0:16:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:15:57):**  gets late in the fall, pretty much only cereal rye or maybe triticale can survive. So there's a,  it's pretty obvious in that situation. If you're maybe looking at a compaction issue that's fairly  substantial, at least using something like radishes or like an annual rye grass to help break  
**[0:16:19-0:16:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:16:19):**  up that compaction deep in the soil is an argument for just single species. Or I'll just say, while  we're talking about radishes, they're such an easy cover crop to establish, to get going, and they  usually winter kill in most areas that it gets leased to the mid-teens over the winter. So it's  
**[0:16:34-0:16:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:16:34):**  like a cover crop with training wheels, I like to say. And that's a nice way to get farmers started  because they can usually see a difference. Now as far as mixed species, I always plant mixed  species. And that becomes like a kind of like a science in itself. And I don't want to make it too  
**[0:16:52-0:16:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:16:52):**  complicated, but you have to start playing around with some stuff and see what works on your own  farm. Most farmers don't like when I say that because they want us to give them a prescription,  and this is the magic formula here. It just doesn't work that way. And through my experience  
**[0:17:10-0:17:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:17:10):**  over time, I have come to desire certain species in the mixes of my farm. I'll just say a couple  where I like to have a radish in whenever it's in its planting window. And something like the  cesalia, which is kind of a rare cover crop yet, but it's very popular in Europe. I really like  
**[0:17:30-0:17:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:17:30):**  to have a little bit of that mixed in. And then of course, some of the grains and some of the  summer annuals and winter annuals, sorghum, sedan grass, and sun hemp over summer. They're some of  the key, I call them the foundational ingredients of a cover crop mix. And then if there's nuances  
**[0:17:47-0:17:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:17:47):**  that you're trying to address, you can stick in some other ones. Or sometimes the seed cost is  inexpensive or expensive on certain species that you need to kind of ebb and flow from the  economic side of it. Now I get the question frequently, well how many species do you need?  
**[0:18:07-0:18:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:18:07):**  Because you hear of guys, 12 to 20 species, and I've done all that. But what I have found is once  you get beyond six to eight species, the advantages start to level off. Now if you have a reason to  use 12 species, 14, 18, whatever, that's fine. Just know what you're doing and mixing them together.  
**[0:18:30-0:18:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:18:30):**  And I will say for those who've never done this, mixed species doesn't necessarily mean higher  cost per acre. You do need to adjust rates and ratios. And that being said, with the synergistic  effects that happen because of mixed species, you can reduce your seeding rate to less than  
**[0:18:48-0:18:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:18:48):**  the division of the amount of seeds in your mix that you're planting if you're basing it on single  species planting rates of each of those species. So I like to say in cover crop mixes, one plus one  equals three. So you can really bring back the total amount in your mix. But I haven't seen a  
**[0:19:12-0:19:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:19:12):**  lot of benefits beyond six or so. So in my situation here on my farm, I want to have at least  five or six species if I can in the planting window. That's kind of where I have it pegged out  here, what my experience has been. And that has been looking at yields, subsequent yields of  
**[0:19:32-0:19:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:19:32):**  different species and so forth. And so that's just where I've found to work. I would say in a grazing  situation where you're going to use your cover crops to graze, which by the way is really the  best way to do it if you have animals. But there I could see an argument for upping your amount of  
**[0:19:49-0:19:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:19:49):**  species as well, just to diversify the diet and so forth of those that are the animals that are  eating it. So yeah, I'm thinking in the sixth range is the amount of species I like to see,  but if there's a reason to go higher, that's fine as well. Yeah. And just to add to your thoughts,  
**[0:20:08-0:20:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:20:08):**  I have, we have one other place or one other situation where I see a lot of value in using  single species. And that is where we particularly want to develop a disease suppressive soil very  quickly. So if we want to develop a disease suppressive soil for specific soil, more pathogens  
**[0:20:25-0:20:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:20:25):**  like the cerium or verticillium, a cover crop that is primarily or 100% oats or mustard or something  like that can have a major impact very, very quickly. I agree. What is something that you  have puzzled over for a long period of time? Well, what comes to mind, I'm probably going to bring  
**[0:20:41-0:20:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:20:41):**  this up a couple of times is, and I'm going to skip ahead here a little bit. I haven't been  talking about this much. I know you're involved in this, but the whole link to human health,  and I'll just say from the way we grow our plants that eventually get into the, to humans eating  
**[0:21:01-0:21:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:21:01):**  their plants, how we grow and the nutrients that are available in that plant or that food product.  The word nutrient density is being used quite frequently these days by kind of the, I'll just  call it yet the cutting edge of regenerative agriculture. And I'm trying to figure that out.  
**[0:21:21-0:21:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:21:21):**  I know that I have something with my cropping system here of long-term no-till and long-term  use of cover crops and a fairly diverse species on my farm. I've done a little bit of testing  with this, but that's what I'm active in now. So maybe the word is not puzzling. Maybe it's  
**[0:21:40-0:21:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:21:40):**  more curious, but at least it feels a little puzzling to me now because I hear different  things. I'm trying to figure out how can I do this and then also to help others with the knowledge I  have. So that's where I, that's where I, how to answer that question at the moment. That's what  
**[0:21:54-0:22:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:21:54):**  came to mind first. And where are you on your journey of discovery at this point? What have  you found that has been really intriguing? Well, I've taken some nutritional analysis of like my  butternut squash and the only thing we have to go on now as far as the standard is the average  
**[0:22:13-0:22:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:22:13):**  that the USDA publishes. And I dug into that a little bit and they don't really tell you,  or they won't tell you, I got to say it that way, when and where, and how do they establish  their average of a butternut squash? You know, how much of those nutrients are actually,  
**[0:22:35-0:22:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:22:35):**  you know, what was the background of all that? So I just have to assume they probably pull some off  the shelf at a couple of different places and run the numbers together. Now, when I've looked at  mine, I, my butternut squash is tested higher in everything but sodium. And I'm not sure if that  
**[0:22:54-0:23:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:22:54):**  might be a good thing if it wasn't higher in sodium. But I've not got into the complex  enzyme and vitamins and stuff yet, but it's encouraging what I'm seeing here. So since I  grow a lot of vegetables, squash and tomatoes, multiple types of squash, I am going to be  
**[0:23:16-0:23:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:23:16):**  looking into and I've set in motion creating some sort of a label and branding for that.  And I'm starting to work with some of the retailers that are actually interested in.  There aren't many yet that are seriously interested. Some of them say, yeah, yeah,  
**[0:23:33-0:23:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:23:33):**  they like that idea, but they don't even hardly know what they're talking about yet. So I see  that is the future of agriculture, where we can literally market our produce. And I will say  eventually the commodities on a nutritional basis, rather than yield. And as I'm understanding,  
**[0:23:56-0:24:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:23:56):**  we are within the year we will have a smartphone app that you'll be able to actually use to go up  in a store and be able to get a fairly basic readout of nutritional density of products and  stores. So if indeed that does occur and is consistent, I think that's going to help and drive  
**[0:24:16-0:24:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:24:16):**  this market because farmers, if they have an opportunity for marketing, they will figure it  out. That's the way farmers are. So I'm really optimistic about that. I think that's where the  future's gone. So that's kind of where I'm at now, trying to figure it out, trying to find my way.  
**[0:24:36-0:24:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:24:36):**  But I'm committed to learning more along those lines. Steve, this is a fascinating topic that I'm  personally very passionate about as well. So there's a number of thoughts that pop into  mind. Perhaps the first very simple one, one of my colleagues did some digging into the USDA data.  
**[0:24:57-0:25:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:24:57):**  This is going back half a dozen years or more and discovered that at least historically, perhaps  not so much recently, but historically much of that database might be composed of perhaps six or  eight samples for a given crop for an entire year across the entire US. That's nothing. That's an  
**[0:25:16-0:25:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:25:16):**  extremely small representative pool, but you're right. It really is nothing. So I personally,  going back to one of the comments that you made quite some time ago, I suspect that the reality  is that our crops are perhaps not as nutrient deficient as some people might expect when  
**[0:25:35-0:25:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:25:35):**  compared with historical standards, particularly in the area of the mineral profile, zinc,  manganese, copper, and so forth. I'm sure there have been some shifts and changes. Where I suspect  there possibly have been substantial changes is in the profile of the various secondary metabolites,  
**[0:25:52-0:25:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:25:52):**  phytoalexins, and so forth. I think those immune compounds or medicinal compounds and aroma and  flavor compounds probably have shifted substantially. There's many reasons for that.  So based on what you're describing, do you believe it's possible, you mentioned this,  
**[0:26:08-0:26:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:26:08):**  but I just wanted to go back to it again. Do you believe it's possible that farmers will actually  be compensated for growing quality? Well, maybe I'll answer it this way,  but I'll just generally answer yes. We have been paid on yield, and the repurbations of that are  
**[0:26:29-0:26:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:26:29):**  through every aspect of the whole food chain, and I'm specifically thinking back to plant breeders.  Plant breeders are breeding the plants that we farm for yield, and that's a problem because we  now have the majority of our genetics in our plant are made for yield. So it's going to take a while,  
**[0:26:54-0:27:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:26:54):**  I think, to get this right, decades probably, or probably even more because it's such a complex  issue. But again, I'm encouraged. I just found out recently there is indeed some plant breeders now  who are going to breed for flavor, nutrient density, and such aspects as simply basically  
**[0:27:19-0:27:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:27:19):**  human health aspects. And sure, we've got to have a decent yield coming out of it. I mean,  that's kind of understood. So I'm actively, I'm going to be a part of some of that. I'm actually  testing some seeds this year that are coming out of some preliminary breeding work that's being  
**[0:27:37-0:27:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:27:37):**  done, just to see where we're at on that. So I think the breeding aspect of it is a very important  component of this as well, one that sometimes people don't think about. So yeah, I do believe  that we're going to be able to make changes, and I believe that farmers will, it's going to happen  
**[0:28:00-0:28:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:28:00):**  two ways. Some will compensate them for it. I don't think farmers should be holding out for like  a 25% premium for a nutritionally dense food. I think that's the wrong way to think about it.  I think that you need to study and do your own research, collaborate with others to make it  
**[0:28:21-0:28:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:28:21):**  happen. And along the way, there will be markets that will develop that will pay you that 25%  extra, but you're going to have to prove it first. And I'm not sure how that's all going to filter  out. So in some aspects, you're going to have the first adopters on the retail side as saying,  
**[0:28:43-0:28:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:28:43):**  this is what we want, and then you will probably not be able to grow enough for them what they  want. So I think it's going to come two ways. It's going to come from demand, and also I think there  will be a price incentive or a compensation, I'm going to call it, involved in it, but I don't  
**[0:28:58-0:29:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:28:58):**  think to grow it for that. I think that's the wrong way to approach it. And that's, I'll just  say an example, and I'll just use the organic model. If you're growing organic food and organic  methods just to get a price premium, you probably are not the best caretaker of the soil. That's not  
**[0:29:20-0:29:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:29:20):**  saying that's exclusive, but in my experience in looking at what I'm going to call the good organic  farms are the ones who are doing it based on principle, not because they're getting a premium.  So I'll just make that analogy crossover what I think, let's just use the word regenerative  
**[0:29:38-0:29:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:29:38):**  agriculture here now, nutrient density. I believe that you, instead of doing it for a premium,  you need to do it because that's the future, that's what we're going to be doing. And yeah,  you'll have a market for it if you accomplish it. I have a few thoughts based on what you've said,  
**[0:29:53-0:30:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:29:53):**  Steve. One of them is that I think it's sometimes easy for us as farmers to disconnect from the fact  that the first priority for the crops that we're producing is to grow food. It's sometimes easy  for us to become disconnected from that. And so I think what I see evolving, that there's kind of  
**[0:30:12-0:30:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:30:12):**  two different macro trends, if you will. One of them is in the commodity crops, corn grains,  et cetera. I do see, I suspect that in the future, from what I'm observing, we will see an evolution  of the market where growers will be compensated directly for components, protein content,  
**[0:30:32-0:30:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:30:32):**  test weight, so forth, which is already beginning to happen in some regions and I think is going to  become even more pronounced. Sure. In the fruit and vegetable space, obviously that would also  be a possibility, but I think there is something else that is much more immediate and much more  
**[0:30:46-0:30:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:30:46):**  direct in the fruit and vegetable space than components. What fruit and vegetable buyers  care about is flavor and aroma. They care about flavor and aroma. And those components,  the compounds that produce flavor and components are of course the same compounds that are a result  
**[0:31:06-0:31:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:31:06):**  of nutrient density. So I think when we talk about measuring nutrient density on fruits and  vegetables and measuring nutritional profiles, it becomes a very complicated conversation very  just because there's so many compounds and there's so much that we don't know about them yet.  
**[0:31:22-0:31:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:31:22):**  Everybody understands flavor and aroma. Right. Well, I'll just take off on that a little bit.  You're exactly right. And flavor and aroma is what generates repeat customers, which that's a great  business model when you think about it. And the beauty of it is generally, and I think you pretty  
**[0:31:40-0:31:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:31:40):**  much just said this, when you have great flavor, when you have great aroma, you undoubtedly have  great nutritional density. So I think that will be a key driver in this. My, I guess you'd say caution  for some people is, is it is very complex sometimes to achieve this. I don't even know if I can  
**[0:32:01-0:32:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:32:01):**  achieve it the way I want to yet. I'm working on it. I'm getting somewhere. But it's as we say,  it's a journey and we're learning, but this is certainly the direction that we want to be headed  in. And there's nothing better. And I've already got these comments. There's nothing better than,  
**[0:32:20-0:32:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:32:20):**  you know, wow, your tomatoes are sweeter or your pumpkins are brighter orange, your gourds are  brighter, they're more brilliant. I've heard that several times. And, you know, that has to be traced  back to healthy or something, you know, minerals, whatever you want to say. And that has certainly  
**[0:32:39-0:32:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:32:39):**  solidified some of my markets because they like what they're seeing in that. And then the whole  taste is as well. And I will just reiterate again, taste, even aroma can also be partly traced back to  genetic in a plant and plant breeding. And so it's not just nutrition. And if you have a, if you,  
**[0:32:59-0:33:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:32:59):**  if you have a tomato that was used in the 1980s that was popular back then, that really didn't  taste good, or even now yet we have some that are just made for shipping, you know, you can maybe  help that tomato by good nutrition, but you're really trying to restore a shabby house  
**[0:33:16-0:33:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:33:16):**  when you're trying to do that. So building from the ground up, and that's why I think it goes back  to the genetics of some of the plants that are important here. It's a missing ingredient in some  of these discussions of nutritional density. And, you know, I know we all go back and talk about  
**[0:33:30-0:33:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:33:30):**  heirloom varieties and everything, but, you know, heirloom varieties are great in that, but there's  some other weaknesses they have and we can improve. So I like, that's what I like about 21st century  agriculture. It's a combination of biology and technology. So to bringing all these things  
**[0:33:46-0:33:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:33:46):**  together here now, going back and getting some of the things we forgot and then marrying them with  current technology and plant breeding and all that, I think we definitely have opportunity to  move forward with a better tasting product. And this, you know, we talk about, you know,  
**[0:34:04-0:34:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:34:04):**  vegetables, humans, consumption, everything, but the same applies to corn, soybeans that are fed  to pigs and cows and everything else. We'll be able to do that with less feed, more nutritious,  and even the meat will taste better. So, you know, everything we apply to our soil almost can be,  
**[0:34:23-0:34:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:34:23):**  you can almost take it so far as it's the same thing that applies to our gut. And I know that's  a big stretch for some people, but there is a connection there. And that's something, again,  you asked earlier about puzzling me. I'm still trying to connect the dots on that. I'm just a  
**[0:34:39-0:34:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:34:39):**  farmer, you know, but it still does interest me. I think I got to know a little bit so I can  understand how to best manage to make this happen. Well, I would certainly say that the  similarities between the microbiome in our digestive tract and the microbiome in a rhizosphere,  
**[0:34:55-0:35:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:34:55):**  the similarities are much greater than the differences for certain. And I completely agree  with you on the genetics piece. Genetics are a very important part. And what has been fascinating  for us is we've developed the use of plant sap analysis and have begun looking at nutritional  
**[0:35:11-0:35:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:35:11):**  profiles of different varieties. We found that there's actually a nutritional foundation for the  performance of different genetics. So, you can have three varieties of tomatoes grown in the  exact same soil with the exact same management, and they will have three completely different  
**[0:35:28-0:35:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:35:28):**  nutritional profiles based on their genetic capability of absorbing nutrients. So, genetics  are definitely a very important. Yeah, I believe that. And we see some of that work being done  in grains, for example, with some of the work that Charlie Brown is doing with corn seed, with  
**[0:35:43-0:35:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:35:43):**  Brown seed genetics, some very impressive work in increasing the quality of grain crops. Good.  Steve, what is something that has surprised you in the work that you've been doing? Well, if I answer  that question in the context of basically my, I'll just say last 30, 40 years of agriculture,  
**[0:36:03-0:36:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:36:03):**  and I alluded to this at the very beginning, what has surprised me is I had no idea what soil health  was, what cover crops could do, what less no tillage could do. So, that has totally surprised  me. If you would take me back to 1982, when I first started, that's the year I graduated from  
**[0:36:22-0:36:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:36:22):**  high school. When I first started farming the farm here with my dad, I took over more  responsibilities at that point. And you would have said, what I'm doing today, I would have said,  I just wouldn't believe you. So, I think that's probably the thing that sticks out to me,  
**[0:36:38-0:36:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:36:38):**  everything that soil health can do. And I think more recently here, in the last 10 years now,  and this is again, I'd never expected this, once you get this system working, you don't need as  much input, you don't need as much fertilizer, you don't need as much pesticides. And the degree of  
**[0:36:57-0:37:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:36:57):**  how you reduce all that is very inherent to your philosophy and everything. But it's exciting for  me to be able to have a healthier soil, it's actually more economical. That has surprised me.  I know this is kind of big picture type stuff here, but that's a pleasant surprise. I guess  
**[0:37:20-0:37:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:37:20):**  I'd have to say. And I want to continue that because I am now, I guess you'd say I'm old  enough to realize that I'm expecting to be surprised in the next 10 to 20 years as well.  And I'm just looking for those surprises. And that's why I like to be a farmer because  
**[0:37:39-0:37:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:37:39):**  we're not going to figure this out in my lifetime. And I can wake up every morning kind of wondering  what I may discover today. And I know a lot of farmers don't carry that kind of mindset,  but I think they should in a small way in order to make this happen. You have to be committed to it.  
**[0:37:57-0:38:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:37:57):**  What do you believe to be true about modern agriculture that many other people  might not believe to be true? Well, I might have just said one of them there. When I talk about  reducing inputs like fertilizer, the common reaction from some is, oh, you're going to mine  
**[0:38:16-0:38:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:38:16):**  out the soil. Yeah, that might work for a couple of years. But I'm getting into this far enough  now that that argument's becoming debunked because we're actually using less than ever  purchased fertilizer. And so right there, I think modern agriculture certainly is not doing that.  
**[0:38:34-0:38:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:38:34):**  The other thing I guess I would say is that it kind of goes along with that, just the use of  insecticides and fungicides and so forth can be decreased. And for instance, last two years,  I have not used any insecticides on my pumpkins. And I grow 48, 49 acres of pumpkins last year.  
**[0:38:52-0:38:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:38:52):**  So it's not like it's a garden plot. And when you talk about that with challenges of squash  bug and cucumber beetle and marmorated stink bug, that's a pretty big deal. Well, it's a big deal.  Well, it is. And I actually haven't advertised that very much because I'm still kind of almost  
**[0:39:11-0:39:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:39:11):**  a skeptic myself. And I will say this, John, that if there's a flare up, it's a pretty valuable crop.  And I need to do some kind of control. I'll do it. And hopefully the least impacting way they do.  They do have some better insecticides now that are more narrow spectrum, but I don't  
**[0:39:29-0:39:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:39:29):**  indiscriminately spray. I mean, I have heard of people who are throwing insecticide every  time they spray their pumpkins, and then they wonder why they have aphid problems.  So I also, I mean, there's more to the story. I plant pollinator plots around my woods to encourage  
**[0:39:46-0:39:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:39:46):**  and attract beneficial insects. Because of my long-term no-till here, some of my fields  haven't been tilled for 37 years, I got nice habitats of ground dwelling insects,  particularly the squash bee. I do not bring in extra beehives. I got plenty of bees. People talk  
**[0:40:03-0:40:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:40:03):**  about bees, low number of, I know they're mainly talking about honeybees, but I have the native  pollinators here. They're actually better than honeybees. And we've had Penn State in here and  USDA. And when you go out in my field in July in the morning in a pumpkin field, you can just hear  
**[0:40:20-0:40:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:40:20):**  the buzzing everywhere. So maybe I'll have a tangent there a little bit. But again, I did not  start going down this trail to try to accomplish this. But now that I'm seeing what's going on,  I'm now like, hey, how can I take this even further? So I think that for modern agriculture,  
**[0:40:40-0:40:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:40:40):**  they find that hard to believe that you can actually reduce. And I'm not going to say I've  eliminated yet. I've only done it two years. But again, I might never say that I eliminated,  because I always, I guess that's one reason why I'm not organic. Because if there is some years,  
**[0:40:58-0:41:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:40:58):**  for whatever reason, either my management screw up or whatever, I want the availability to,  I guess you say rescue the crop. But I have gone away from the routine application of an  insurance policy type on that. I heard someone say already, and this makes people think,  
**[0:41:17-0:41:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:41:17):**  would you take chemo to prevent cancer? So maybe a little bit of a pretty wide,  a wild analogy, but there's a point there. So anyway, but...  Yeah, there absolutely is a point with what we have learned about the impact of pesticides on  
**[0:41:35-0:41:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:41:35):**  plants from a protein synthesis perspective. There absolutely is a very credible point there.  That's right.  Yeah. Steve, what do you think is the biggest opportunity in agriculture today?  
**[0:41:43-0:41:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:41:43):**  Well, I think because in the context of general low commodity prices, and I'm just speaking here  of general agriculture, right now we're kind of in a, I guess you'd say a depressed ag economy,  especially the dairy. These cycles happen and it's not new, and there doesn't seem to be a  
**[0:42:04-0:42:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:42:04):**  promising end in sight, so to speak. But boy, this whole concept of regenerative agriculture  and being able to grow healthier crops with less inputs certainly should have an impact. Because  I have heard of several farmers who have backed into this whole philosophy because they simply  
**[0:42:27-0:42:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:42:27):**  could not afford to buy fertilizer or to buy input. And because of that, now they are very  successful farmers. And they have said that had that not occurred, they may not have ever got into  cover crops or got into no-till. So there's opportunity out there. I believe I'm also a  
**[0:42:48-0:42:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:42:48):**  farmer, I'm a realist, and if you're in dairy right now, you have a high investment in your  livestock and probably your buildings and everything else. You just can't just magically  snap your fingers and pull out of it. But just in thinking of the reality though of long-term,  
**[0:43:05-0:43:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:43:05):**  I think this way of growing things is a win-win-win. It's a win for the farmer, lower cost.  It's a win for providing better nutritious food. And then as a side benefit, the environment  is treated better. And farmers get defensive sometimes when you talk about the environment  
**[0:43:25-0:43:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:43:25):**  or environmentalism, and I get that. And I still react too to some environmental regulations that  are out there. But I live in the Chesapeake Bay region, and people ask me when I'm out of my  region, so what's it like to live in the Chesapeake Bay with all those regulations you have to put up  
**[0:43:44-0:43:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:43:44):**  with and everything? And I say it hasn't affected me at all. I've already been doing it. And I've  got awards for it, and I didn't do it for the awards. And you could say we're doing the right  thing. But my motivation is it is the right thing, but it's also economically attractive once you  
**[0:44:04-0:44:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:44:04):**  understand it. And this is where we're kind of at a junction here with, I'll just say, cover crops,  and use that example, that it's kind of the cool thing to do. You see it in every magazine that  comes out. But it's a very simple concept, but very complex to be able to achieve. And the example  
**[0:44:25-0:44:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:44:25):**  I like to give there, it's like going from being a nurse to a surgeon. There's a lot, lot more  involved to make that jump and that switch. And frankly, we haven't had the experience or the  knowledge here in the last 50, 60 years, especially using cover crops. And we have to reach back  
**[0:44:43-0:44:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:44:43):**  sometimes for that. But also in the context of modern technology, we're going to have to  sift some of this stuff out. So I believe that there's bright future ahead. And this is just,  just obviously I'm committed to it and trying to show others how to do the same.  
**[0:45:00-0:45:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:45:00):**  Steve, what is a book or resource that you recommend the most often to growers?  Well, oh, I got, I should look at my bookshelf here. And by the way, I read books. I think  that's part of my success to gain knowledge all the time. As far as recommendations go,  
**[0:45:20-0:45:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:45:20):**  one of the last ones I've read was by David Montgomery, Growing a Revolution. And that's just  to really give you a kind of a broad picture view of examples of case studies, if you will,  farmers who are actually doing this and making it work. Yeah, that's one of them right there that  
**[0:45:39-0:45:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:45:39):**  just came out that I recommend. I've been influenced over the years by some of Dan Skow's  books, Pigeon's another one, Gary Zimmer, the biological farmer. Way back in the beginning,  I would say for me, Carlos Criveto from the country of Chile was one of the world's leading  
**[0:46:00-0:46:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:46:00):**  no-till farmers and uses cover crops. He had a book called Double Over the Soil that was good.  Another book that would make people think is The One-Stroll Revolution. It's by Masanobuko  Fukuoka. Took me a while to learn how to say that, by the way. He's a Japanese guy. And that'll make  
**[0:46:21-0:46:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:46:21):**  you think. I mean, he did some things there in Japan. It's not new. That book is not new,  but it'll cause you to, you know, for some introspection there and how food is grown. So,  yeah, there's a lot of good materials out there. It depends a little bit on what your specific  
**[0:46:39-0:46:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:46:39):**  angle is, but that's just some of them that have impacted me. Yeah, I believe the other two,  one of them being The One-Stroll Revolution, and then also a second one titled Natural Farming,  and both of them are good. Yes. What technology or ideas are you excited about for the future  
**[0:46:54-0:47:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:46:54):**  of agriculture? We've talked a bit about cover crops and the development of genetics for crops  that have a greater degree of nutritional integrity. What other things do you see happening  in the future of agriculture that you're really excited about? Well, one of them now, and it does  
**[0:47:09-0:47:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:47:09):**  relate to cover crops, is the advancement on equipment needed to handle cover crops,  all the way from cover crop rollers to planter attachments to accommodate standing cover crops  or rolling down cover crops as you're planting. To see mainline companies now starting to see it to  
**[0:47:33-0:47:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:47:33):**  be worthwhile to produce some equipment like this, I just saw, for instance, Kinsey, which is probably  the number two corn planter company next to John Deere, I'm assuming. I don't know the numbers,  but they're really, really strong and popular. They just started making a cover crop feeding  
**[0:47:52-0:47:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:47:52):**  this so they can use, for instance, their 15-inch soybean planters to plant cover crops with  precision planters. That's a great signal to me that now I can say mainstream agriculture is  starting to acknowledge cover crops. Some of the big sprayers that were used to spray or to put on  
**[0:48:11-0:48:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:48:11):**  fertilizer are now being converted to apply cover crops in standing corn or corn anywhere from  knee-high to three weeks before harvest, high clearance vehicles that can get through.  Some of that technology out there, one of the things that I'm excited about that is on the  
**[0:48:30-0:48:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:48:30):**  horizon is there's a company in Canada that made a planter or seeder that can actually carry six  different types of feed as it is planting in the field. It's pretty much of a state-of-the-art  system where you can actually theoretically yet, but they're actually working on it. I've talked  
**[0:48:54-0:48:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:48:54):**  to the company. You can actually adjust your species, for instance, in cover crops here.  You can adjust the species to soil types. As you plant across the field, you can program in  different areas of the field for different cover crop mixes that you would want to plant.  
**[0:49:10-0:49:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:49:10):**  And that would be absolutely cool to see a field that was variable rate precision planted with mixed  species of cover crop after that cover crop comes up and just see how that looks. Again, if you  think ahead, that's going to take a lot of research. What are the best species for certain  
**[0:49:30-0:49:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:49:30):**  areas? One of the things that'll be easy in that is variable seeding rate where cover crops may go  the opposite of cash crops where you may want to up the seeding rate in poor areas and decrease the  seeding rate on good parts of the field. So there again, that's why I say it's this exciting times  
**[0:49:47-0:49:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:49:47):**  here, 21st century, marrying biology with modern technology where we can actually utilize something  like our cover crop tool here and maximize that across our field. So that's some things that come  to mind on what I see, what spikes me about coming up in the future. Steve, this has been a  
**[0:50:09-0:50:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:50:09):**  very intriguing conversation. I've got to ask you this question. Are you having fun? Oh, am I having  fun? Yes, I am having fun. No one ever asked me that before. That's great. Yeah, it's not just  fun. There's a sense of, yeah, how should I say this? A sense of, I don't know what the word is  
**[0:50:34-0:50:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:50:34):**  here, but when I travel and sometimes to other countries, international, when I'm coming home,  it's just like, it's just a good feeling of I'm able to help farmers, number one. And then for me,  just from my approach to life, number two is being a steward of God's earth and being able to be a  
**[0:50:57-0:51:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:50:57):**  part of that is humbling, but yet very, very satisfying. So that pretty much maybe would sum  up a little bit more of how I feel about what I do. I think perhaps the word you were looking for  is fulfillment. I know. Yeah, that's it. I believe you're right. Yeah, it is. It is. Yep. What is the  
**[0:51:16-0:51:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:51:16):**  one action that you would recommend that any farmer who is new and starting down this pathway  should take right away? Well, first of all, if we're talking about cover crops is to think about  what you want to accomplish. Going way back for me, it was simply soil erosion. What is it for you  
**[0:51:33-0:51:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:51:33):**  as a farmer? What are you trying to accomplish? And that's very important. It can be more than  one thing, but you might want to prioritize it, especially if you're new, because you want to be  very specific about trying to achieve whatever that goal is. And then you start asking the next  
**[0:51:49-0:51:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:51:49):**  questions, what time of the year is it that will determine the plant species that are planted?  And then you just can kind of go from there, but it's very, very fundamental. What are you trying  to accomplish? And then I would also caution farmers to only apply a new practice to the amount  
**[0:52:09-0:52:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:52:09):**  of acres that they can afford to either lose or afford to not have maybe quite the standards that  they're used to. And I have seen recently with the momentum of the cover crop movement, some farmers  all of a sudden say, yep, that's what I want to do. I want all these beneficial things. And they  
**[0:52:32-0:52:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:52:32):**  don't understand all the nuances. I mean, I've been doing this for like 25 years, very intensively in  cover crops, and I'm learning stuff every year. So learn all you can would be another advice I would  give. And that, you know, if there's meetings in your area, if there's local farms that are doing  
**[0:52:50-0:52:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:52:50):**  this, I think a local farmer that is accomplishing what you want to do is one of your best resources.  If that farmer is willing to talk with you, that would be ideal. Or I'd actually identify,  I'll just say a mentor or someone that you hear about that's doing what you want to accomplish.  
**[0:53:12-0:53:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:53:12):**  That's who you want to follow. Follow those who are doing what you want to accomplish,  not saying what you want, but are doing to have a track record. And that's not against people who  aren't happen to be farmers, but and are saying some good things, but I just, you should sift it  
**[0:53:27-0:53:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:53:27):**  through that. And that's a key right there. Now I have seen successful farmers, and I've talked  to a few who have said everything they learned about cover cropping was watching YouTube videos  on the internet. And I'm not saying that that is right or wrong, but I am saying you have to sift  
**[0:53:46-0:53:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:53:46):**  through what other people are saying from other areas, and what way work on their farm may not  apply to your farm. And sometimes even those of us who speak or those you watch a video, you just  can't say everything in that amount of time given to make or almost guarantee success. So yeah,  
**[0:54:05-0:54:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:54:05):**  there's a lot of options out there for farmers that are just starting out. But I would say  avoid going to, you know, you got to be prudent on how much a new practice you want to do. You  want to make your mistakes small and then build upon them and grow from there.  
**[0:54:22-0:54:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:54:22):**  Yeah, I think one of the most valuable things that I ever did was to develop a group of mentors that  kept me on the straight and narrow and got my learning process. It was absolutely invaluable.  Yeah.  
**[0:54:37-0:54:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:54:37):**  I owe those people a tremendous thanks. What is the question you wish I would have asked?  Oh my, well, we've covered pretty much everything. That is a good question, John.  You caught me off guard there a little bit. I think we didn't touch a whole lot on the economics,  
**[0:54:58-0:55:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:54:58):**  and maybe that comes to mind because that's a key question that farmers ask. So this all sounds  great, but how can I do this and survive or flourish even? So I do think that farmers need to  push the pencil, so to speak, on some of this. Some of these practices are extra, like cover  
**[0:55:24-0:55:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:55:24):**  crops. There's extra costs in seed and extra costs for driving through the field and planting.  And then trying to put numbers to the value that you get out of that. It's a little difficult to  assign those numbers sometimes. So I guess, yeah, how the economics work out, and I would just  
**[0:55:43-0:55:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:55:43):**  answer that, that it is something you cannot ignore. So they are very important. And there  are a few good stories out there on the economic value of cover crops. And so there's a couple  resources, not a lot, partly because it's tough to be able to distill down and get some good numbers,  
**[0:56:06-0:56:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:56:06):**  but because it's so subjective. So I guess that's what I'll have to settle on there, John.  The economic of this will work if done correctly. Yeah, so let's unravel that just a little bit,  if we can, from your personal experience. What has been the economic impact in general terms  
**[0:56:24-0:56:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:56:24):**  on your own operation over the last 20 years since you've been using cover crops? Well, I actually  went back, I didn't go back 20 years, but I went back, I believe it was five years,  because in the last five years, I have become comfortable to reduce input. So I don't keep track  
**[0:56:45-0:56:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:56:45):**  of every penny per acre. I'm just not quite that type of farmer. I don't have enough of accounting  in me, I guess. But I just looked at my schedule F, and I looked at my chemical costs and my  fertilizer costs, because they're a line item on a schedule F for the farmers. And I divided  
**[0:57:06-0:57:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:57:06):**  that by the amount of acres that I farmed those years, because it changes a little bit. I have  some rented ground and so forth. And when I looked back five years, my fertilizer went down a little  over 50%, and my chemicals went down, I think it was 37%. That made me feel good, because I know  
**[0:57:30-0:57:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:57:30):**  that I'm not done yet. So yeah, to me, that's real numbers. That's on the schedule F. That's what it  all comes down to. And I'll just say that I get a little annoyed by some proponents of cover crops,  where they will take either one year data of something, or they'll take a fantastic result  
**[0:57:49-0:57:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:57:49):**  and kind of promote it as this is what you can expect all the time. And sometimes farmers are  gullible for that. And sometimes they're like, it's almost not helpful when they're sitting there  thinking, well, that just can't be true all the time. So I feel, for me, that's reality. Schedule  
**[0:58:07-0:58:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:58:07):**  F, that shows pretty much what the difference has been. So Steve, if you don't mind sharing,  I'd like to just dig a little bit deeper into that, because we mentioned that you're growing  pumpkins, and I know that you're also growing some broadacre crops, and those numbers can vary quite  
**[0:58:23-0:58:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:58:23):**  dramatically. I have two follow-up questions. One of them is, what was the cost of achieving those  results? What was the cost in cover crop applications, feeding and so forth? And second  was, can you give us a general approximation or range when you talk about 50% reduction  
**[0:58:41-0:58:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:58:41):**  in fertilizer costs? If you're growing corn, that might be $40 an acre, and if you're growing  pumpkins, it might be $400 an acre. So I'm just trying to get a sense of approximately where that  was. Well, again, I'm going to, like I said, I was using those broad numbers there, and I did not  
**[0:58:56-0:59:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:58:56):**  look at my cover crop costs as far as on that side of the equation. And I'll just mention this.  It kind of is a part of this question here. I am now trying to grow as many cover crop seeds as I  can for my use. Some of them are difficult to grow here. So that's also a cost savings for me  
**[0:59:16-0:59:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:59:16):**  on the expense side of the ledger book. So just the fact of growing your own cover, which I would  encourage farmers to do if they can. And some are relatively easy to grow. But to your point,  what I found on corn, let's just use that. And again, I'm going to have to give you some general  
**[0:59:33-0:59:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:59:33):**  numbers here. I cannot give you exact numbers. As I said earlier, I'm not that good of an accountant  on my own farm. But I can grow corn sometimes when I have a really nice legume cover crop,  able to get it planted in time in the fall and let it grow long enough in the spring, where I can  
**[0:59:54-1:00:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=0:59:54):**  just use 60 to 80 pounds of nitrogen instead of 175, 180, or 200, which would be normal in my area  here. And my field, just so maybe everyone gets a context of that, I do live in Lancaster County,  Pennsylvania, but I'm in the River Hills section of it. So the River Hills. And my average corn  
**[1:00:19-1:00:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=1:00:19):**  yield is between 185 and 200. So not as good as some areas, that's for sure. So just to give you  a little perspective there. So there are times though, when I'm planting my corn into like a  cereal rye cover crop where I cannot reduce it that much because the cereal rye takes up more  
**[1:00:38-1:00:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=1:00:38):**  nitrogen. As far as pumpkins go, when I can grow a nice cover crop of Hairy Vets critical, I can  cut my nitrogen rate in half the pumpkins instead of 90 pounds per acre, I can go down to 45,  50 pounds per acre because the Hairy Vets is providing that. And as far as phosphorus goes,  
**[1:00:58-1:01:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=1:00:58):**  we talk about some of the nutrients, my soils are high in phosphorus, I never apply phosphorus.  I will sometimes put some potassium on in the pumpkin cycle because they can use that.  Although that's something I've been looking at a little bit more here recently. So I don't know  
**[1:01:18-1:01:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=1:01:18):**  if I'm answering your questions, I don't know if I have enough real good data to actually answer  specifically your questions on that as far as how I'm reducing fertilizer and or reducing costs  associated with this system of the added expense of using the cover crop and so forth. But that's  
**[1:01:38-1:01:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=1:01:38):**  just a little bit of a, I guess an overview. Great, well thank you for sharing that. Steve,  it's been a pleasure to have you here on the podcast and I'm sure that all of our listeners  are going to enjoy it very much. And thank you very much for being here. For all of our listeners,  
**[1:01:56-1:02:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=1:01:56):**  I would invite you to subscribe to the podcast. You can go to regenerativeagriculturopodcast.com  and put in your email address and we will send you an email, notify you whenever we have an update  and whenever every time we post a new episode. So thank you to all of you for listening. Thank you  
**[1:02:12-1:02:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=1:02:12):**  very much, Steve, for sharing your knowledge and wisdom and talking with you again. Thanks.  This podcast was brought to you by a great company that I work for, AEA, Advancing Eco-Agriculture,  the leader in regenerative agriculture since 2006. At AEA, we believe in challenging the status quo  
**[1:02:31-1:02:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=1:02:31):**  to find more profitable and regenerative ways to grow crops. We also believe that healthy plants  are resistant to pests and disease and that to grow healthy plants, we must first think  differently about agriculture, about empowering life instead of suppressing life, about regeneration  
**[1:02:48-1:02:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/erosion-soil-balance-and-cover-crops-with-steve-groff/#t=1:02:48):**  instead of degeneration. To achieve this, we formulate and sell products that help growers  produce higher quality yield with less risk of crop failure. In short, we help growers make more  money with less risk. Thank you for listening.  