### Regenerative Agriculture Podcast  (2020-32-02)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:00:00):**  Hi friends, this is Jon and this is the Regenerative Agriculture Podcast where we talk about the  agronomic science and the cultural management practices that regenerate plant health, soil  health and ultimately public health.  This podcast has a lot of listeners from the land down under, but we haven't yet had a  guest appear on the show from Australia.  
**[0:00:22-0:00:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:00:22):**  And today I am very pleased and honored to have Terry McOsker here.  Terry has a very intriguing story.  He is one of these wise elders of regenerative agriculture in the Australian landscape, has  had a tremendous influence and tremendous impact on the adoption of regenerative agriculture  across Australia.  
**[0:00:45-0:00:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:00:45):**  So Terry, I'm very excited to have you here and to get you to share some of your wisdom  with those of us here in the States.  I think there are many people in the regenerative agriculture space here in North America who  haven't heard your name, who are not familiar with your work.  And so I'd love to begin this conversation by hearing more about your story.  
**[0:01:07-0:01:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:01:07):**  Tell us about your pathway and what brought you here.  You've been in agriculture for a number of decades and have a lot of wisdom to share.  So what's the story that brought you here?  Thank you, Jon.  And thank you for having me on your podcast.  
**[0:01:22-0:01:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:01:22):**  I'm a great fan and there are many, many Australians now that are listening to your podcasts.  Myself and my children and many of our staff now are really great fans of yours.  So it's an honor to be on your podcast.  I think I arrived at regenerative agriculture partly by accident, but partly by design.  And I have been in the game now for five decades, but not necessarily.  
**[0:01:49-0:01:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:01:49):**  I think I spent my first two decades in conventional agriculture.  When I was a young person, I had an unbelievable opportunity to work for an American company  on an Australian cattle station.  And there was enormous problems and they were losing a lot of money.  And my job description was I wanted somebody who knew something about growing grass.  
**[0:02:15-0:02:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:02:15):**  And I thought I knew something about growing grass.  So anyway, I got a job and I found that all the management practices and science that  they'd been trying to implement on that particular property, and it was 800,000 acres and we  had 12,000 cows and four or five thousand horses and another four or five thousand buffalo.  And that scale was new to me.  
**[0:02:44-0:02:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:02:44):**  But when I went for the interview, it was a three-day interview and they said, well,  you've got the job.  And I said, well, I don't want it.  And they said, well, why not?  I said, well, I don't know anything.  
**[0:02:58-0:03:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:02:58):**  You know, I've never worked in this environment.  I don't know these trees.  I don't know these plants.  I don't know these soils.  I've never worked on anything of this scale.  
**[0:03:06-0:03:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:03:06):**  I don't think I can help you.  And they said something to me then that I have never forgotten.  And they said, no, we want somebody who has no preconceived ideas.  So on that basis, I took the job and I spent time looking at what was going wrong in the  business and particularly with the ecology.  
**[0:03:29-0:03:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:03:29):**  And there was a lot wrong.  And at the end of six months, I said to them, just sell up and get out of here because what  you're trying to do is not working.  And they said, well, we're not used to walking away from a problem.  Tell us what we need to do.  
**[0:03:44-0:03:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:03:44):**  And I was 28 at the time and I said to them, well, give me, you know, a million bucks in  three years and I'll sort it out for you.  So they said, well, you better do it.  Well, I sat back in my heels and I thought, whoa, what hole have I just dug myself into  here?  
**[0:04:02-0:04:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:04:02):**  So I put together a research project to solve the problems that I'd seen when I was driving  around.  And a funny thing happened.  I put this project together and then my intuition started playing up.  But my intuition kept saying to me, there's something wrong with this.  
**[0:04:20-0:04:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:04:20):**  And so I said to one of the guys I was working for, I said, look, there's something wrong  with what I've just put together to research.  And he said, what is it?  And I said, I don't know.  But I said, I need to go and talk to more people.  
**[0:04:32-0:04:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:04:32):**  So what I did was I went back to my roots in and I used to work for the Queensland Department  of Primary Industries and had good connections with a lot of scientists in CSIRO.  So I went back and met with a lot of those people and spent three to four weeks.  And what happened was every time I explained my situation, I actually learnt more about  what it was.  
**[0:04:57-0:05:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:04:57):**  And it wasn't necessarily what people said to me, but it was me having to repeat my story.  And every time I repeated it over about three to four weeks, it got clearer.  So I flew back to the station after that and I said to Cliff, well, Cliff, we've got to  go 180 degrees away from what we've just decided on.  And we sat down on our front lawn for two days and argued.  
**[0:05:22-0:05:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:05:22):**  And at the end of two days, I had him convinced that we needed to change 180 degrees.  And the guys, a few executives were coming out from New York a week later to approve  the first R&D project I'd put together.  So I sent them off at Tellex.  So this is back in the 80s and said, you know, I've changed my mind.  
**[0:05:42-0:05:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:05:42):**  We need to do something completely different.  So they came out and I gave them about a six page report on why we needed to do something  different.  They came to the station, grabbed that report, went straight back to town and stayed there  for about three to four days.  
**[0:05:59-0:06:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:05:59):**  And we found out later they were trying to sack, get rid of Cliff and myself because  we'd lost it.  And anyway, they couldn't replace us in three to four days.  So they came down to have it out.  And we spent another three days with a big whiteboard sitting in a shed arguing.  
**[0:06:18-0:06:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:06:18):**  And at the end of three days, I had them convinced that where I'd got to was right.  It's an unbelievable thing to get these very senior executives with a lot of wisdom and  age behind them and a 28 year old kid basically saying that everything you've been doing for  the last 12 or 13 years is wrong.  And so is all the science and let's start again.  
**[0:06:41-0:06:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:06:41):**  And I guess that was one of my real epiphanies.  And I knew then that I didn't know anything.  And so I had to work out everything from first principles.  What was the conclusion that you came to?  What was the pitch that you were presenting them that was so different from the mainstream?  
**[0:06:58-0:07:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:06:58):**  Well in the Northern Territory it was in those days, the common form of production.  It's very extensive and it was basically cattle hunting.  So there was no fences and no infrastructure.  And you would go out with a team of people and helicopters were just starting to come  in in those days.  
**[0:07:16-0:07:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:07:16):**  And you would go and find cattle and bring them in and anything that was big enough to  sell you would just put it on a truck.  And if the price was okay, you'd send it off to the abattoir.  And then you just let everything else go.  And if the price was right next year, you'd come back and do the same again.  
**[0:07:32-0:07:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:07:32):**  So there was absolutely no control.  There was no animal production.  And the production in that system was very, very low.  But so were the overheads.  And what they had done was moved into what I would call middle ground.  
**[0:07:49-0:07:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:07:49):**  So the option was we're running basically a beast to 100 acres and we were getting 44%  calving, 15% mortality in cows.  But in under that old system that was okay.  You didn't measure any of those things and it was cheap to do.  The alternative to that was go to a complete high input system where we develop pastures  
**[0:08:14-0:08:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:08:14):**  where we could run a beast to two acres and get improved animal performance and total  control over the system.  But where they were was in no man's land of sowing legumes into native pasture and putting  super phosphate on.  I remember the first year I was there, they'd ordered a thousand tonnes of super phosphate.  
**[0:08:32-0:08:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:08:32):**  And one of my first jobs was to go out with aircraft and spread that super phosphate over  thousands and thousands of acres.  And it was really a waste of time.  So the basic that I got back to was said, well, we're throwing phosphorus on the ground  to try and get it to an animal.  
**[0:08:49-0:08:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:08:49):**  We're planting legumes to try and get protein to an animal.  Why don't we just feed protein and phosphorus directly to the animals and then go and develop  replacement pastures at the high input end.  And where that ended up was still had low animal performance, but had built higher overheads  into the business.  
**[0:09:10-0:09:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:09:10):**  So they're actually in no man's land.  And so what I said was, we've got to go back to the two edges, get out of where you've  been and we have to develop the technology to feed animals and manage them extensively  and increase the reproduction rates and decrease the mortalities.  And then we have to develop pasture systems that are more intensive from scratch.  
**[0:09:33-0:09:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:09:33):**  And that's what we did.  So how did you approach regenerating, I suppose regeneration is not quite what you're describing  yet, but how did you approach implementing these changes on that type of scale?  And then what happened a few years after?  We did very extensive research and my breeder trial, my cow trial, for example, I had 1300  
**[0:09:57-0:10:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:09:57):**  cows on 30,000 acres with a number of treatments looking at reproduction, looking at nutrition,  a whole range of things.  And I took the stocking rate down to a base to 35 acres.  And then at the other end, we screened a whole lot of plants that I got from the scientists  and that had been brought in from all over the world.  
**[0:10:28-0:10:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:10:28):**  And so we found plants that were going to grow in that environment as a result of that.  Where we got to was we actually solved every problem we set out to solve.  We also found a lot of problems we didn't know were there on the way through.  And with the cow herd, for example, we took the mortality from 14% down to 2% and we took  the reproduction rate from 44% up to 72%.  
**[0:10:54-0:10:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:10:54):**  And increased the weight of calves taken off, etc.  So we'd significantly increased productivity.  But one of the things I noticed was that even when we shifted from a base to 100 acres to  base to 35 acres, our desirable perennial grasses were in decline.  And within a four year period, I was measuring a decline in those good quality grasses.  
**[0:11:22-0:11:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:11:22):**  And so I went looking for solutions to that.  And I bought a number of scientists in and I drive them around and say, look, this is  what's happening.  You can see these plants, you can see things going out here.  What's happening?  
**[0:11:35-0:11:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:11:35):**  And the response I got on every occasion was, oh, that's just normal.  And I tucked that away and I didn't want to accept that that was normal.  And it wasn't until five years after that, that I then met Dr. Stan Parsons, a Zimbabwean  who actually had introduced cell grazing to the US with Alan Savory.  I met him and once I started to understand what he was saying, then I had a solution  
**[0:12:04-0:12:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:12:04):**  to what I had seen in the territory.  By that stage, they sold the property and moved on.  But for me, one of my big learnings was I learned not to be a reductionist, but that  we were working with systems.  And I had access to people in all sorts of disciplines, experts from all over the world  
**[0:12:26-0:12:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:12:26):**  in any field that I needed it.  And so I had consultants and experts visited me on a regular basis and also did an enormous  amount of reading.  But what I found was that a lot of, you would get an expert would come along and with their  blinkers on each expert could solve 80% of your problems.  
**[0:12:47-0:12:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:12:47):**  And mathematically, you get 10 experts together and they're each solving 80% of your problems  that straight away that doesn't work.  So what I developed the skill to do was to pull out what would work and how that would  fit into an overall system that had a design and outcomes around it.  And I guess that was my first stage towards moving towards being holistic and was really  
**[0:13:15-0:13:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:13:15):**  developing that systems thinking and challenging everything that was going on around me.  I didn't accept after that conventional science and stuff that was published.  If it didn't fit and it didn't look like it was right, then it wasn't right.  I didn't accept it.  You were then very influential in bringing cell grazing and Stan Parsons work into Australia  
**[0:13:36-0:13:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:13:36):**  on a really significant scale following this.  Is that right?  That's correct.  So yeah, in 89 I first met Stan and immediately we decided to work together and bring stuff  to Australia.  
**[0:13:49-0:13:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:13:49):**  I was still quite skeptical about the cell grazing stuff, but everything else he was  saying made a lot of sense because it was holistic.  He was dealing with the people issues, the financial issues, the production issues, the  ecological issues, the grazing issues.  All of those things were fitting together into a neat package.  
**[0:14:09-0:14:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:14:09):**  And for a while I was actually quite skeptical thinking, well, nothing's that neat.  It can't be that neat.  Because I was coming from reductionist training and actually reductionist experience, it took  me a little while to accept holism, but not just holism, but accept that when you work  with Mother Nature, she actually works with you and it does work.  
**[0:14:33-0:14:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:14:33):**  It does fit together, provided you get out of the way and let nature do what she wants  to do.  Things are actually simpler and do fit very nicely.  So that's where we started.  I'm curious what this process looked like for you.  
**[0:14:50-0:14:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:14:50):**  You were approaching this from the perspective of a skeptic.  So how did you validate to yourself, or how did you become comfortable with the idea that  cell grazing and this holistic approach were the right approach?  So firstly, I was threatened by the very senior officer in the Department of Primary Industries  that said, look, I hear you're bringing Parsons to Australia.  
**[0:15:15-0:15:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:15:15):**  And I said, yep.  Well, we've got a pile of literature three inches deep showing how Parsons and Savory  have destroyed land all over the world, wherever they've been.  And we're going to run him out of the country.  And if you get mixed up with him, you're going to go down with him.  
**[0:15:29-0:15:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:15:29):**  And they tried very hard to put us out of business and very, very nearly succeeded.  And so I had to decide who was right.  Was all this literature right?  Or was Stan and Alan Savory right?  And I was very fortunate to get a Churchill Fellowship.  
**[0:15:45-0:15:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:15:45):**  And that Churchill Fellowship enables me to travel through the United States and through  Africa, through Zimbabwe, Namibia, Botswana, South Africa.  And I went everywhere where Parsons and Savory had been.  And I went right back to their roots.  And I visited places, people they'd trained, I visited people I'd worked with.  
**[0:16:06-0:16:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:16:06):**  And very, very quickly, it became very evident that the holistic approach and certainly the  water cell grazing approach to grazing was the answer to a lot of issues that we were  seeing in our ecosystems.  And so that trip very quickly confirmed to me that I was right, that they were right  rather.  
**[0:16:27-0:16:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:16:27):**  And then I had to decide, well, how am I going to handle the opposition?  Because every scientist, grassland and rangeland scientist in Australia was dead against what  we were saying.  And the opposition was, it was phenomenal.  And we tried to talk to them and tried to reason and ask them to come and see what we  
**[0:16:48-0:16:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:16:48):**  were talking about and what we were doing.  And that didn't work.  And I remember sitting in Harare and Zimbabwe for a few days waiting for an aircraft to  fly home, writing up my report.  And I had to decide how was I going to handle this opposition when I got home.  
**[0:17:06-0:17:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:17:06):**  And I decided there and then that I would never again try and convince people that did  not want to listen.  And I would only work with people who were ready to listen.  And that's what I did and the way we went.  And it's grown enormously from there.  
**[0:17:22-0:17:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:17:22):**  And that strategy has worked really, really well.  When you say it has grown enormously from there, I think that's a statement that needs  some clarification for our audience.  It's my understanding that you have worked with close to 10,000 farmers approaching 10%  of Australia's farmland that has been under your coaching over the last three decades.  
**[0:17:48-0:17:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:17:48):**  Yes, it is.  It does cover a little bit of landscape.  Not all of that, by the way, has been successful.  People make mistakes, don't actually get the principles or don't get the holistic approach  because we've all been raised in this reductionist approach to everything.  
**[0:18:06-0:18:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:18:06):**  And getting that headshift is quite significant.  Charles Massey, who wrote the book Call of the Read Warbler, his claim, and he did his  PhD on looking at regenerative agriculture.  And a big majority of the people that he interviewed were actually our clients.  And he came to the conclusion that I'd influenced more landscape positively in Australia than  
**[0:18:33-0:18:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:18:33):**  any other person.  So that was Charles's take on it.  It's not something that we claim, but I'll take it.  Yeah, it's a significant compliment.  What was that pathway like from those early days of learning about holistic management  
**[0:18:50-0:18:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:18:50):**  and Stan Parsons and Alan Savory's work, bringing that back to Australia?  What was the pathway from there to your organization of RCS as it exists today?  So RCS had actually existed for five years before we went down this track.  So we were a conventional sort of consulting firm, not making much money, not making any  headway.  
**[0:19:13-0:19:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:19:13):**  And then I met Stan and I realized then that what I had to do basically with the rest of  my life.  And so I committed, Pam and I, my wife and I committed to going down this holistic track  and introducing this stuff to agriculture in Australia.  And so initially it was Pam and I, and Stan would come out two to three times a year.  
**[0:19:37-0:19:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:19:37):**  And initially he would do the teaching and it took me about three years before he would  allow me to do any teaching.  And I was doing consulting and follow up in the background.  And we realized very early on that the numbers were building quite quickly and therefore  the ability for me to consult and follow up with all those people was very limited.  
**[0:19:58-0:20:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:19:58):**  So we started developing group work and one of the concepts and products we developed  was a process called Executive Link, which is a peer to peer learning and support process.  And it's probably one of the most powerful things that we've done.  And Executive Link, where we put businesses together in boards of six businesses and each  business then helps the other business.  
**[0:20:26-0:20:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:20:26):**  And so you end up with two very powerful things.  You end up with peer support for tough decisions and you end up with peer pressure when actions  are not happening.  And the combination of those two things creates massive change and gives people the confidence  for the sort of changes that need to be made.  
**[0:20:48-0:20:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:20:48):**  And so in the first three years of Executive Link, it was not very successful.  We had about a 50% attrition rate.  In other words, 50% of people were leaving within three years.  And so at the end of that first three year period, I sat down with one of the great guys  that was working with me at the time, Stuart McArthur.  
**[0:21:09-0:21:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:21:09):**  And we said, right, what's wrong with this and how do we fix it?  And we interviewed a lot of the people that left and we also worked out ourselves what  was wrong.  And one of the things that was wrong was there was no accountability in terms of economics.  So I then built, worked with a local university to build our own benchmarking and business  
**[0:21:33-0:21:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:21:33):**  analysis software.  And once we got that software into it and then everybody was benchmarking and analysing  their numbers in a very consistent way and those numbers were on the table, the honesty  levels changed and we had some real stuff to work with.  And that was one of the catalytic things that changed the way it operated.  
**[0:22:00-0:22:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:22:00):**  And we changed some of the just sort of processes and the way we were doing it.  And so that was about 94, 95.  We got that really starting to crank.  And in the last 25 years, it really hasn't changed much in format and it's still as powerful  as it ever was.  
**[0:22:21-0:22:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:22:21):**  And what happens in that process is that it takes a little time to build trust.  But as that trust builds, more and more stuff comes out.  And my experience indicates that the biggest holdup in every business is not economic and  it's not ecological.  It's people and it's people issues, it's communication, it's intergenerational communication and issues,  
**[0:22:48-0:22:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:22:48):**  it's gender communication and issues.  And once people are in a very, very safe environment and they can start to bring up those very,  very personal issues, it's then possible to shift some of those people issues.  And at the moment those things are out of the way, everything else then flourishes.  Getting a very clear vision and way forward that's agreed is a real key to going from  
**[0:23:19-0:23:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:23:19):**  there.  I've always been intrigued by the process of trying to understand what is the process  that we use to make decisions, that we as humans use to make decisions.  And it's interesting actually when you dig into the science a little bit to discover  that fundamentally not a single decision is ever a logical decision, but they're all emotional.  
**[0:23:47-0:23:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:23:47):**  And there's some really interesting science behind all of that.  I was intrigued a moment ago you mentioned Charles Massey's book, The Call of the Reed  Warbler, in which he described that of the people that he interviewed, 60% of the farmers  began adopting regenerative agriculture practices as a result of some personal crisis.  And whether that was a health crisis in the family or an economic crisis on the farm.  
**[0:24:18-0:24:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:24:18):**  But then it wasn't clear to me, or perhaps I missed it, it wasn't clear to me what about  the remaining 40%?  And has that 60%, 40% shift been true historically?  Is it beginning to shift now?  So I'd love to hear your perspective.  
**[0:24:32-0:24:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:24:32):**  Are more farmers, now that you have, if you have impacted personally and through your  organization, if you have impacted 10% of the agricultural landscape, is it approaching  the threshold where it is becoming normal and people adopt a different management practice  without the personal crisis?  What does the future...  
**[0:24:55-0:24:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:24:55):**  So there's kind of two questions here.  One is, what's the process that farmers go through to arrive at this decision?  And how do you see that changing and shifting in the future at all?  I believe it has shifted.  My biggest selling point is word of mouth.  
**[0:25:13-0:25:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:25:13):**  And so our clients tend to come from recommendations and that usually there's family and then there's  friends and then there's local people in the local district.  And so little groups and hubs start to develop.  What I find now is the thing that probably drives the change and drives people into the  education more than the crisis is funding.  
**[0:25:39-0:25:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:25:39):**  And when there's funding available for education, people will come and do it.  And it's a strange thing.  It means that people are not valuing knowledge as much as they should.  They don't value it as something that they should invest in.  But if the government comes along and is prepared to invest in their education and that education  
**[0:26:02-0:26:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:26:02):**  is the right education and it then turns them on to learning, then they're on a lifelong  learning journey from then on.  It's interesting that I think the schooling experience is, I believe, has actually turned  off a lot of people to be learners.  And once they have a really good experience with learning again, then they become much  
**[0:26:25-0:26:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:26:25):**  more interested in continuing to learn.  So I'm finding at the moment that probably 20% now of the people coming through our programs  are now second generation.  In other words, I've taught their parents and these are now people in their late teens  through to mid-20s or so that are now coming through.  
**[0:26:48-0:26:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:26:48):**  And I've been around long enough now to, I'm up to number nine of grandchildren.  So in other words, I taught the grandparents, the parents and now the grandchildren.  It's very rewarding to see the next generation that's grown up with some of these principles  coming through just as part of their education as a standard part of what they need to do.  We're also finding that the cohort that we're getting has changed age.  
**[0:27:16-0:27:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:27:16):**  When we first started and I would say for probably the first 15 years, there's a rough  rule of thumb, the majority of people that were coming to our programs were from 45 up.  Now the vast majority are from 45 down.  And for the first 15 or 20 years, one of the biggest obstacles we had to deal with continuously  was succession.  
**[0:27:41-0:27:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:27:41):**  And I found that the generation that's in the late 70s and into their 80s and 90s now  did not do succession well.  They held things to themselves.  They were poor communicators and they made it very, very hard for the next generation.  Right now we're finding that the baby boomers are starting to do succession.  
**[0:28:06-0:28:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:28:06):**  And as a general rule, I find that they're doing it earlier and they're doing it better.  And so I think that's a reason why we're getting a lot of younger people coming through.  So now, whereas 15 years ago we would have had an executive link, for example, we would  have had 70 to 80% of the people would have been dealing with a succession trauma.  Now it would be 20% or less and 80% have completed it and now have debt, have control and are  
**[0:28:40-0:28:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:28:40):**  coming to learn and change so that they can make a difference and have a really good business  and a really good life moving forward.  I think this is a really important issue because we are here in North America, or in the States  at least, we're at a moment in time right now where 50% of the farmland in the country  needs to go through succession in the next 10 to 15 years.  
**[0:29:08-0:29:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:29:08):**  And that's more farmland changing hands than has ever changed hands in such a condensed  period ever before in history here in the country.  What advice do you have for people on both ends of that succession process?  What have you observed that has made that, what has brought about to this shift from  the prior generation to the current generation facilitating succession much more smoothly?  
**[0:29:36-0:29:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:29:36):**  Firstly, it's being talked about a lot more.  There's field days and there's workshops and all sorts of things now where succession is  being encouraged and talked about.  I think that's the first thing.  In terms of supporting succession, in my mind, there's absolutely no doubt that the thing  
**[0:29:59-0:30:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:29:59):**  that makes it either smooth or bad is communication.  Part of that communication is respect.  And it's respect in both directions.  Younger generation must respect the ownership of the older and the knowledge of an older  generation and the older generation must respect the needs of a younger generation.  
**[0:30:20-0:30:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:30:20):**  The worst thing that I think families can do is go and talk to lawyers and accountants  to have them deal with succession.  Immediately, that just starts the thing down the track of dealing with function, dealing  with structure rather than with communication.  So my belief is that they need to do some training themselves in communication and learn  
**[0:30:46-0:30:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:30:46):**  how to communicate better, understand different personality types.  All of that makes a big difference.  So communication, firstly, the second point then is that once you're able to communicate,  honesty and putting things on the table, including goals and visions.  It's surprising how many times the older generation expects the younger generation wants to come  
**[0:31:11-0:31:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:31:11):**  home and take over the farm when the younger generation is only there or doing it because  they feel obliged to do it and it's not actually their real dream.  And I think one of the things that has to happen very early is everybody's goals, visions  and dreams need to be on the table.  And succession needs to be a process and a discussion that takes everybody towards their  
**[0:31:35-0:31:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:31:35):**  dreams and not just assume that that is a farm.  And I find in the older generation, there's many, many women that, particularly in remote  areas that have spent, given up their life to be on the land and in remote areas and  really want to spend the last 20 or so years of their life back in society and doing other  things.  
**[0:32:00-0:32:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:32:00):**  And so again, there needs to be a little bit of give and take even within generations as  to where we go.  But it's absolutely important that all of that's on the table and understood.  So communication, goals, visions, respect and then I think facilitation.  I think it's important for families to have external facilitators to help bring together  
**[0:32:27-0:32:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:32:27):**  and use a process to facilitate succession.  And those facilitators should not be the family accountant or the family lawyer.  They should be people with skills in facilitation because you're going to be dealing with tears,  you're going to be dealing with all sorts of emotions.  And this is an emotional process on both sides and we all need to understand that and it's  
**[0:32:53-0:32:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:32:53):**  not easy for any side.  So I think those are the sort of ways that we tend to try and help it.  I find I'm intrigued by the direction this conversation has gone rather than having a  conversation about agronomy and field management, as you mentioned early on, it is really about  people.  
**[0:33:12-0:33:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:33:12):**  And so the question that I have in your... you obviously have had a tremendous influence  and impact, which means that RCS as a consulting organization has been successful at guiding  and supporting and helping people rather than just focusing on the agronomy or regenerative  management or grazing or whatever the agronomic context might be.  So my question for you is, how have you done that?  
**[0:33:45-0:33:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:33:45):**  What has, what's the process look like of really supporting people?  Okay, there's two things that you're dealing with.  One is wants and the other is needs.  And the thing that most people will talk about is their wants.  If you start asking questions, you'll get the wants.  
**[0:34:02-0:34:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:34:02):**  You won't necessarily get to the needs.  And I think the key to our success is that we tend to market to wants and we start with  wants and wants are meeting people where they're at.  But over time, you've got to meet needs and needs are deeper and to get to needs and feelings,  you've got to have a level of trust, level of understanding.  
**[0:34:28-0:34:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:34:28):**  And we find that having common language.  So we use a process where we have a school upfront, which is seven days of very, very  intensive education.  And we don't expect people to remember more than 20% of it.  But it's a process that's designed to open people's minds and break down paradigms and  
**[0:34:55-0:34:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:34:55):**  create common language.  And when you've done those three things, you've got an open mind, you can challenge paradigms,  and you've got a common language and potentially a common bond, then it's easier and faster  to get to those needs and feelings.  But we will be dealing with the production and the business and so on on the way because  
**[0:35:23-0:35:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:35:23):**  the businesses have to be profitable and they have to be regenerating landscape and regenerating  business.  So for 25, 30 years, we've been talking about renewal, that there's four key things that  you've got to renew and that's the people and our attitudes and so on.  You've got to renew the business and our understanding of business.  
**[0:35:46-0:35:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:35:46):**  We have to renew the ecosystem and the productions and the landscape.  And we have to renew the production systems, whether that's in cropping or whether that's  in grazing.  So we work with those four key foundational elements and at the pace and in the direction  that people need at the time.  
**[0:36:08-0:36:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:36:08):**  And once you've built the rapport and the trust, then you will start moving into the  people stuff.  But often you build the trust by getting it right and giving the right sort of advice  or very useful advice on the production issues and business issues where people can save  money or make money fairly quickly.  
**[0:36:30-0:36:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:36:30):**  It changes from person to person, business to business, the order in which things happen  because we sort of have a floating process, if you like.  And all of our coaches and advisors, I think pretty well everyone that I employ today has  been taught by me and they're all ex-clients.  So they've come right through the process.  
**[0:36:55-0:37:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:36:55):**  Some of them are still on the land and still producing, but they want to give back.  And some of them are now retired and full of wisdom and experience.  And so they have the breadth of knowledge and experience to sit down at a kitchen table  with either a 20 year old or a 70 year old couple, for example, and deal with whatever  comes up.  
**[0:37:17-0:37:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:37:17):**  And I find that that is what's important.  And it's that ability to deal holistically with whatever the family is dealing with.  So I class myself as a specialist generalist.  And I don't think there are very many specialist generalists.  There's a lot of specialists, but generalists who specialize in being generalists, in other  
**[0:37:39-0:37:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:37:39):**  words, that can put the big picture together and understand all the bits.  That's rarer than specialists.  And I think our need is for more generalists who actually understand to a degree the specialties  as well.  When you use the terminology of holistic thinking, and this has really come out in our conversation  
**[0:38:04-0:38:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:38:04):**  so far already, how you integrate the people and the landscape and the ecology and all  of these different pieces, but how has your own thinking evolved over the decades that  you have been in this process?  How would you describe your own holistic thinking today compared to your thinking five decades  ago?  
**[0:38:26-0:38:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:38:26):**  Well, at one level, it hasn't actually changed.  I think the thing that was one of my biggest epiphanies was, and this was 30 odd years  ago, is that agriculture can and should be based on ecosystem health and not be extractive  in a sense that we're degrading landscape.  And that if we work with ecosystems and we understand how those ecosystems work and work  
**[0:38:57-0:39:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:38:57):**  with them and with a really simple set of principles, then life gets easier and a whole  lot of things get easier.  And I think that, and I think over in the 30 odd years that I've been teaching this  stuff, the one bit that always grabs the attention, the excitement and creates that first excitement  and that first glimmer of change with farmers is understanding they're working on an ecosystem  
**[0:39:29-0:39:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:39:29):**  and understanding that there's a few tools that they're using and they're using them  either to damage it or to improve it.  And none of them want to damage it and a lot of times have not understood.  I guess one way to put it is a client of mine once said that he thought he was a livestock  producer and then he came to one of our programs and went away thinking that he was a grass  
**[0:39:57-0:39:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:39:57):**  producer.  And then over time, as he's learned more and more, he now believes he's a soil manager.  And it's that change that, as you understand then that if you're a soil or an ecosystem  manager, the production will actually, and the economics will actually look after itself.  So that I don't think has changed.  
**[0:40:23-0:40:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:40:23):**  The thing that has changed for me is understanding more and more the energetics of what we're  doing, the importance of intention in what we're doing and the incredible power in what  we call subtle energy.  So we've been introducing subtle energy to our clients now for probably nearly 25 years.  We've been doing it more intensively for the last 10 years running a course called Quantum  
**[0:40:53-0:40:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:40:53):**  Agriculture.  And I've come to understand that the support that's available to us is only limited by  our imagination.  And I can give you many examples of that.  And I guess the more I've learned and the deeper I've come to understand that, the more  
**[0:41:16-0:41:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:41:16):**  I've started to understand that to be truly regenerative, a farmer needs to understand  that they are a part of the ecosystem, not apart from it.  And when you make that switch and then start working at an energetic level, the sky's the  limit.  It's amazing what you can do and what you can produce in landscapes.  
**[0:41:47-0:41:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:41:47):**  And in fact, talking to and working with landscape, working with soils, working with plants.  We had a  I'll give you an example of how landscape can react.  We was doing a carbon project with one of our clients a few years ago and we'd gone  around with a core and drilled about 300 holes on his property.  As we were finishing that, he had cattle in the yards.  
**[0:42:12-0:42:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:42:12):**  And the cattle got very unrestful and jumped out of the yards and sort of bolted.  And they've never done that before.  Now fortunately, he was switched on to what had actually happened.  And the landscape had reacted to the fact that we'd gone around and put these pinpricks  in it and not explain to it what we were doing or why we were doing it.  
**[0:42:36-0:42:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:42:36):**  We immediately explained to the landscape what we were doing and why we were doing it  and the whole thing settled down.  The animals settled down.  And in some of this work we find, for example, that farms don't know what their purpose is.  You might have something that's converted from a dairy farm and is now a vegetable farm,  
**[0:42:59-0:43:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:42:59):**  but that landscape can still think it's a dairy farm.  And until it knows it's a vegetable farm, it can't actually do the right thing with  you.  Until you can communicate and work with the nature spirits, for example, then they will  help.  
**[0:43:15-0:43:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:43:15):**  And in my experience in talking with the nature spirits is that they get so excited when a  human talks to them and asks for their help, they've been waiting for eons to be asked  for their help.  And so I think that's probably the level of understanding that's grown over the last 30  years around regeneration of landscapes and not just landscapes, but human health as well.  
**[0:43:45-0:43:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:43:45):**  I find it interesting that this energetic aspect of agriculture has, my perception is  that it has become very widely adopted in Australia.  Obviously, that's my perception from a distance.  I don't know that to be true for certain, but I know that here in the States, there  is the comments, the statements that you just raised, that you just spoke about would raise  
**[0:44:11-0:44:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:44:11):**  a lot of eyebrows and a lot of question marks.  There's still a strong desire for the kind of the scientific perspective.  How do you reconcile this energetic component with a scientific perspective that you have  come from historically?  That's a great question, John.  
**[0:44:31-0:44:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:44:31):**  And wasn't until I read a book called The Field, which explored consciousness, that  I started to realize that there was a lot of science behind this and that science is  in quantum physics.  And I've tried to read a couple of quantum physics books and the author of one of those  said, if you think you understand quantum physics, you don't understand quantum physics.  
**[0:44:55-0:45:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:44:55):**  I believe that the science for this is certainly in quantum physics and the understanding of  it is there and has been explained, if you can understand the language.  I tend to explain some of this in terms of quantum physics and in waves and in terms  of energy.  Don't get me wrong, there'll be a lot of people in Australia that will think I'm a nutcase  
**[0:45:24-0:45:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:45:24):**  as well by telling you what I've just told you.  But what I'm finding now is that if I had talked like that 20 years ago, and I don't  think I would have been capable of talking like that 20 years ago because I wouldn't  have had the experiences that I have now.  But had I, I think 90% of the people I'd have spoken to would have thought that I've lost  
**[0:45:46-0:45:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:45:46):**  it.  Now, I think that's down to 20 to 30%.  And I say that based on the fact that I now introduce these concepts right up front on  the second day that I'm working with people.  Not in a hard way, but in a sort of a light way.  
**[0:46:07-0:46:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:46:07):**  And I'm now finding that 70 to 80% of my audience is engaged and interested.  And 20% remain very skeptical in the thousands of people that I've taught individually.  The last course that I taught just before COVID hit, I had one person walk out because  of the language that I used.  That's the only time I've ever had that reaction just recently.  
**[0:46:37-0:46:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:46:37):**  But I don't apologise for the language and the way that I talk now because I do believe  that we have to be honest and we have to be upfront that there's more involved in this  than just plants and soils and bugs and so on.  Yeah, I think that's something that it's interesting actually.  And I've spoken about this before here on this podcast and other places that when we  
**[0:47:00-0:47:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:47:00):**  are speaking about livestock production, it is almost expected that good livestock managers  have a sense of connection to their livestock.  They intuitively know when one of them is off or when one isn't feeling well.  Even when there is nothing physical that they can point to.  It's just an intuitive sense that they know something is wrong.  
**[0:47:26-0:47:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:47:26):**  We think that that is normal or common or even to be expected of good livestock managers,  but we don't often transfer that same perspective to working with the landscape, working with  plants and soils and the landscape as a whole.  When in reality, what we have observed is that generally the farm managers who produce  the best results the most consistently are those farm managers who have developed that  
**[0:47:54-0:47:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:47:54):**  empathy with the landscape.  Yeah.  And I think probably one of the ways in which I get people engaged is actually give practical  examples because I don't think this is so scientific that it's not practical.  I'll give you a couple straight up.  
**[0:48:09-0:48:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:48:09):**  One is a guy who tested this with sheep and he was sending truckloads of sheep into a  large market.  So there's 10,000 sheep for sale most weeks at the sale.  And he would send truckloads and he did this four times in a row over two months.  And as those sheep were getting on the truck, he blessed them and intended for those sheep  
**[0:48:31-0:48:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:48:31):**  to top the sale in their class.  And then you get the sale records a few days later and you pour through those and four  times out of four his sheep topped the sale in their class.  And I think that's probably beyond coincidence.  We've seen and we work with water, for example, changing the quality of water in a well or  
**[0:48:57-0:49:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:48:57):**  a bore, changing the quality of water in a creek for livestock.  One example was on a property that had dams and bore water and the sheep and cattle would  not drink the bore water, but they always wanted to drink the dam water.  And so one of our mentors in this instance, a fellow called Dr. Patrick McManaway and  Patrick was leading a course.  
**[0:49:22-0:49:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:49:22):**  So they went out to this bore and Patrick got a glass of water out for every person  and just put that aside.  And then they did a little ceremony with five minutes and basically blessed the water and  asked it to do what they wanted it to do.  And then he got another glass of water straight out of that well, out of the pump immediately  
**[0:49:46-0:49:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:49:46):**  and got people to taste the water before and after.  And the quality of that water completely changed in that instance.  And what happened to the livestock behaviour then was those livestock would then run to  the troughs to get access to that water instead of using the dam water.  And that farmer then had to go and do some work on the dam water so that they would actually  
**[0:50:10-0:50:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:50:10):**  drink both after that.  It's extremely practical.  We've had people deal with insect problems in crops, deal with predator problems.  I have a snake problem.  We have a lot of venomous snakes where we are and I've got grandchildren.  
**[0:50:25-0:50:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:50:25):**  And so I communicate with the snakes and the venomous snakes.  We did a negotiation with them as to where they could come and where they couldn't and  what the consequences were if they broke those rules.  And I was in my veggie patch one morning very early on and there was a black snake, a venomous  snake, sitting six inches outside the boundary that I had set for it and just watched me  
**[0:50:55-0:50:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:50:55):**  for probably 10 minutes.  I was just moving around.  I'd go away and I'd come back and do some stuff in the garden.  And this black snake just sat there and watched.  And the interesting thing is I used to have a great fear of snakes.  
**[0:51:09-0:51:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:51:09):**  I was not fearful.  I turned my back on it.  I was not in the least bit worried about it and it wasn't worried about me.  And then after 10 minutes or so, it just turned and quietly went off in the opposite direction  and stayed in its own territory.  
**[0:51:24-0:51:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:51:24):**  So that's what's called a psychic boundary.  And we have people doing the same with wild dogs and we have dingo problems in Australia  where they kill calves and lambs and things like that.  And I did one in the States last year where I communicated with four packs of wolves to  stop them from killing cattle.  
**[0:51:45-0:51:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:51:45):**  And that was successful.  So I think there's a lot of things that if we open up our mind and our imagination, there's  a lot of practical stuff that we can actually do.  And I think farmers need to understand that this stuff is not woo woo.  It's not out there.  
**[0:52:00-0:52:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:52:00):**  It's actually there's some really good science behind it.  And it's very, very practical.  These are all areas that one of my mentors, Bruce Tainio, was very comfortable with and  very good with.  And I think it was a significant loss to agriculture here in North America when he passed away  
**[0:52:16-0:52:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:52:16):**  a number of years ago.  I'd like to change the conversation into a completely different area, but something that  I think is extremely important.  You live on a continent that is very drought prone.  And here in North America, we live on a continent that we are turning into a drought prone continent,  
**[0:52:41-0:52:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:52:41):**  even though we historically have one of the most agricultural richest landscapes on the  planet.  And you wrote an article a couple of years ago on how droughts are man-made and that  we are creating our own droughts.  I think this is something that you have a particularly important perspective on that  
**[0:53:02-0:53:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:53:02):**  I really would want to hear your thoughts about.  So how are we creating droughts?  How have you created droughts in Australia?  And how is that information transferable to our ecosystem here in North America?  There was an old comedy show in the UK back in the 50s.  
**[0:53:21-0:53:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:53:21):**  One of the old farmers, he had a role as an old farmer and whenever he was asked anything,  he would always say, well, I think the answer lies in the soil.  And I think that that's exactly the situation here.  The answer to our droughts lies in the soil and essentially the decarbonisation of our  soils.  
**[0:53:43-0:53:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:53:43):**  And I'll give you an example.  Last year I was teaching a course down in New South Wales and over lunch we had put  it into inches.  We had about half an inch of rain in half to three quarters of an hour and up to probably  three quarters of an inch.  
**[0:54:01-0:54:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:54:01):**  Then we were going on a field trip and we drove out of the town and through the landscape  and that half inch of rain was pouring off the landscape.  The water was gushing down the side of the road.  And then when we drove back four hours later on the flat landscape, the water was still  sitting there four hours later with only half an inch of rain.  
**[0:54:25-0:54:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:54:25):**  And I thought to myself, how will this landscape ever overcome a drought if rain can't do it,  if we can't get moisture into the soil?  It was a beautiful soil and beautiful landscape and it's been completely denuded.  And that's happened through overgrazing, overstocking, overplowing, all the old things that we know  about.  
**[0:54:54-0:54:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:54:54):**  We drove for an hour through that landscape before we got to one regenerative farmer.  And on that property we got to, the water was still rushing off the hills on the neighbouring  properties and coming onto their property.  And within 100 to 150 metres that water was just disappearing straight into the soil.  It was a great demonstration to everybody there about just the difference.  
**[0:55:22-0:55:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:55:22):**  And the only difference was that the people we'd been to had managed their livestock,  so they weren't overstocked.  They had maintained ground cover.  They were still in business when the people around them were feeding stock.  And then a woman wrote to me and she'd been driving through a long drive and she wrote  
**[0:55:40-0:55:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:55:40):**  and said, look, I'm seeing a decline in our landscape compared to 10 years ago.  That made me think about our social licence to continue agriculture.  And I think that if we don't start changing what's happening out there, we will lose that  social licence.  And I don't think we should overestimate how important that is to us.  
**[0:56:03-0:56:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:56:03):**  So we've got to get back and start managing soil.  So we've got to manage plants, we've got to manage soil, we've got to manage animals and  we've got to recarbonise, which means we've essentially got to manage biology.  And the basic approach that we take is the old Hippocratic oath is first do no harm.  And by do no harm, I mean do no harm to soil biology or to soils.  
**[0:56:28-0:56:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:56:28):**  And if we can just take that simple little mantra forward, I think we can reverse it  and stop the desertification of our landscape.  And that's what it is.  It's desertification.  I think living in the on the continent of Australia with a much more brittle environment,  
**[0:56:47-0:56:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:56:47):**  you are perhaps more used to thinking about weather and impacts on a landscape scale than  we are here in North America.  So I'd love to hear your perspective.  You use the words a moment ago of the small water cycle.  So what is the small water cycle?  
**[0:57:06-0:57:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:57:06):**  What is the what if there's a small one, I'm assuming there's a big one.  How do the two compare and how can our behaviour in agriculture influence them?  Right.  So the big one is mainly the one that operates over the oceans and the small water cycle  is recycling water within our landscape.  
**[0:57:24-0:57:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:57:24):**  There's a number of things that we've done there to change that.  So losing the carbon means that we've actually lost the storage, the water storage and water  holding capacity within our soils.  That carbons in the atmosphere and that moisture is in the atmosphere, both the carbon and  the moisture.  
**[0:57:44-0:57:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:57:44):**  And I personally believe that the moisture is probably contributing more to climate change  than the CO2 is.  But we can return that moisture to the landscape, which allows it to recycle on the landscape.  The second thing that we've done that has changed the small water cycle is we're maintaining  large areas of bare country.  
**[0:58:06-0:58:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:58:06):**  In Australia, we do what's called bare fallowing.  So we use glyphosate to spray out anything that grows when it rains so we can store moisture  to grow a crop.  It's something that's very, very inefficient.  We get to store somewhere about 20 to 25 per cent of the moisture that falls, but in the  
**[0:58:25-0:58:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:58:25):**  process we're actually stopping it from falling.  So we know from large scale where landscapes have been cleared on a large scale that when  you've got bare soil, the reflectance of energy from that soil changes and will actually drive  clouds away from raining in that area.  And a classic example of that, and I don't know whether this happens in the United States  
**[0:58:51-0:58:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:58:51):**  or not, but it certainly happens in Australia.  When we have our early storms at the break of a season, those storms will follow a pathway.  But all subsequent storms tend to follow that same pathway then.  The reason is that the first pathway they'll generally follow where the landscape is cooler  and then because that's had rain, that landscape is cooler again and subsequent storms will  
**[0:59:15-0:59:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:59:15):**  tend to follow the same pathway.  So bare land just affects radiant heat and therefore the weather clouds will hang around.  And the third influence of bare ground is not having the Pseudomonas syringae there  to seed clouds.  So on our plants we've got the biology, the Pseudomonas syringae floats up into the air  
**[0:59:42-0:59:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=0:59:42):**  and seeds clouds before any other particle.  In other words, they can colonise water vapour into particles at a higher temperature than  dust or pollution particles and then create rain and then down comes the rain, brings  them back down again, they get on our plants again and then back they go to the atmosphere  and you then have this cycle.  
**[1:00:05-1:00:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:00:05):**  So I believe that a landscape that is not hydrated is a landscape that drives rain away  and lowers rainfall in that landscape and that's the small water cycle.  So the small water cycle is transpiration and evaporation but obviously we want it to  be driven by transpiration rather than evaporation.  And that keeps it moving rather than evaporation and it's that cycling back into our crops  
**[1:00:34-1:00:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:00:34):**  and our plants that is what we need to maintain.  Earlier you mentioned that we have limited the capacity of the small water cycle because  we have decarbonised our soil.  We often think of the carbon content in our soil and its capacity to influence soil structures  that we have better water infiltration and better percolation which are two different  
**[1:01:00-1:01:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:01:00):**  things that I think are sometimes forgotten.  So it's common to think of carbon in terms of water storage capacity but how does carbon,  increased carbon levels in our soil actually influence the water cycle?  Can you finish connecting those dots for me?  Because when you've got more water stored in the soil you're able to grow more plants  
**[1:01:22-1:01:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:01:22):**  and therefore you transpire, in other words it's a cycle.  The water, it's more able to come from rainfall because you've got plants growing and you've  got the cloud seeding happening and then you've got storage of that water when it does hit  the ground which will then grow more plants which will create the transpiration which  will then move that cycle around and keep it rolling.  
**[1:01:47-1:01:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:01:47):**  If we don't have transpiration we have evaporation and then that is water that we have made no  use of and it's then lost to the atmosphere and we don't have the cloud seeding to go  with it and we can also, on bigger areas, we can also be changing the reflectance, the  heat reflectance at a ground level.  The carbon I think is essential to driving that cycle.  
**[1:02:11-1:02:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:02:11):**  The other part of it from my perspective is taking that water vapour out of the atmosphere  and putting it away in the soil.  I believe that that can have as bigger influence, if not a bigger influence on the climate change  than CO2 will have.  Certainly the impacts of water vapour on the heating envelope or the greenhouse envelope  
**[1:02:36-1:02:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:02:36):**  of the earth are really significant.  I did host Walter Yenny here on the podcast a number of months ago where he described  the impact of that for us very eloquently.  Yeah, Walter describes it very, very well.  So ultimately what you're describing and what Walter also described is that it comes back  
**[1:02:54-1:02:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:02:54):**  to managing soil carbon and improving soil carbon.  I know this is something that you are also very passionate about and have been seeking  to find a way to reward farmers for improving carbon sequestration and rebuilding soil.  What has your pathway been like in, I guess perhaps the first question to ask is what  do you see as the opportunity for carbon sequestration?  
**[1:03:23-1:03:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:03:23):**  What are the benefits to the grower of being paid to sequester carbon besides the obvious  immediate economic benefits of course?  My personal belief is that in a lot of Western societies, and I believe the US probably hasn't  starved since the 1930s, Australia probably hasn't starved.  We've got populations that have never really starved like parts of Europe has and therefore  
**[1:03:53-1:03:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:03:53):**  we don't value food.  Our populations generally go for the cheapest product, not the best product.  What that's forced farmers to do is mine our landscape.  To stay in business they've had to essentially mine the ecosystem to be able to produce food  at a price that people are prepared to pay for it.  
**[1:04:20-1:04:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:04:20):**  Now if people are not prepared to pay for the real cost of producing food because there's  a financial cost and there's an ecological cost in producing food, that ecological cost  has never been counted and it's only just starting to be thought about I think.  Now the way to reverse that is for society generally to be buying or funding carbon credits  through their electricity bill or through their fuel bills etc. or biodiversity credits  
**[1:04:54-1:05:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:04:54):**  so that that income then flows back to landscape managers in return for the job they're doing  in regenerating it.  To regenerate landscape means you've got to make changes, you've got to be uncomfortable,  you've probably got to do things that you haven't been doing before and there's risk  associated with that.  
**[1:05:16-1:05:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:05:16):**  And therefore I think there needs to be reward.  And also as we add carbon to the soil as you've said many times we're going to be improving  the quality of food and that food quality may or may not be paid for.  But I see particularly carbon as being the mechanism to get additional income back to  farmers who are actually doing the right thing.  
**[1:05:41-1:05:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:05:41):**  And because it's a credit and I think it's one that has to be measured then only those  that are doing the right thing and putting carbon away in soils will be rewarded for  it.  And if society generally is serious about reversing climate change and doing something  with CO2 the largest tool or place over which we have control globally is soil.  
**[1:06:07-1:06:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:06:07):**  And there's about just around 1600 gigatons of carbon stored in the top metre of soils  globally.  We emit about 10 gigatons of carbon per annum from basically burning fossil fuels and making  cement.  To me it's not a big ask to take 10 gigatons a year and put it away in a 1600 gigaton storage.  
**[1:06:33-1:06:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:06:33):**  And there's advantages in that for farmers in all the production areas that you're well  aware of and they're well aware of.  There's advantages to society in doing that by reducing that carbon load in the atmosphere.  There's advantages in being able to affect the climate because those soils are the only  place we can actually reduce that additional carbon load that's in the atmosphere.  
**[1:06:58-1:07:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:06:58):**  So if we took that up to 20 gigatons a year, put away in a 1600 gigaton storage, then we're  doing the right thing for agriculture, for food security, for water security and food  quality as well as for the atmosphere.  And I firmly believe that society should pay for that benefit.  And so I got involved in this about nearly 20 years ago, started thinking about it because  
**[1:07:25-1:07:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:07:25):**  we had clients that were obviously sequestering carbon and I thought, well, wouldn't it be  great if we could get our clients paid for that?  And if I knew then what I know now, I never would have started down the carbon journey.  It's been one of the most frustrating, difficult journeys that I've been on at this stage without  much reward, but I hope we're getting closer and closer to making things happen.  
**[1:07:51-1:07:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:07:51):**  I would love for you to clarify a bit more on the carbon sequestration numbers and the  carbon cycle that you were speaking about.  You mentioned sequestering 10 gigatons in 16 gigatons storage.  Does that 16 gigatons storage capacity renew every year?  Do we have a continually increasing storage capacity?  
**[1:08:12-1:08:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:08:12):**  Do we fill up that storage capacity once?  What do the overall dynamics of these numbers look like that you've been talking about?  And then the, well, let's start there.  Okay.  So let me answer that one first, because that's a very, very important question.  
**[1:08:28-1:08:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:08:28):**  Agronomically, we've been taught that soils will reach an equilibrium of carbon and we  can't put any more away.  I believe that's a false assumption, firstly, because we're measuring it as a percentage,  not as volume.  So the first thing, and most of our soils are measured in the top six inches.  
**[1:08:51-1:08:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:08:51):**  First thing that happens as we start sequestering carbon is it will start going down deeper.  In our process, we measure down at least a metre and a half where we can get down that  far and we're expecting to fill that space up with carbon.  When your surface reaches that equilibrium percentage, carbon will go one of two ways.  It will continue to push down or it will continue to grow up.  
**[1:09:17-1:09:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:09:17):**  So my belief is that there is absolutely no limit, no limit whatsoever to the amount of  carbon we can put away in soils, because it's carbon that builds soils.  So if we reach an equilibrium in the surface or even over one and a half metres, all that  will happen is we then continue to build soil.  And what can be wrong with that?  
**[1:09:40-1:09:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:09:40):**  And that's essentially how our soils got built, those beautiful soils that you talked about  earlier in the United States got built by that process and grasslands and grazing animals.  So there is absolutely no limit to what we can put away.  And I think we need to break that paradigm.  We think about it in terms of percentages.  
**[1:10:00-1:10:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:10:00):**  We've got to think about it in terms of tonnes.  In terms of sequestration rates, your soils there, I think have got potential of two and  three tonnes and more per hectare, potentially up to 10 tonnes of carbon per hectare per  year.  That's 10 tonnes of carbon per acre, roughly the same number.  
**[1:10:18-1:10:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:10:18):**  And so if you convert that then into monetary terms, I'll use 10 tonnes because it's a high  number but it's a round number as well.  What you're putting into soil is carbon, organic carbon is what we're measuring.  But what you get to sell is carbon dioxide.  And the multiplier from carbon to carbon dioxide is 3.67.  
**[1:10:45-1:10:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:10:45):**  So 10 tonnes of carbon added to your soil is 36.7 tonnes of carbon dioxide.  That's actually what you get to sell.  So if the price of carbon was $10 a tonne for CO2, and that's a low price at the moment  in California, it's nearly double that, would give you a gross income there of $360 per  hectare per annum.  
**[1:11:12-1:11:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:11:12):**  So a hectare is two and a half acres in a hectare, which is pretty nice little bit of  income on top of what you're already doing.  Now there are discounts on that because there's variability in the measurement and there's  some discounts that make that a safe thing to trade.  But that's essentially how it works.  
**[1:11:30-1:11:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:11:30):**  You add carbon, you multiply it by 3.67 and you sell CO2.  And it's that multiplier that makes it work.  And that's the only multiplier that I'm aware of that works in favour of farmers.  And it's a significant one as well.  So you're describing a fairly significant economic opportunity for farmers.  
**[1:11:55-1:12:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:11:55):**  What are the possibilities of this being realised sometime in the near future for growers in  Australia?  And I don't know if you're familiar with any North American work that is happening, but  how distant is this in the future?  In Australia, it's been possible since 2014.  
**[1:12:12-1:12:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:12:12):**  We actually got the legislation in 2011.  Then we got an improved methodology in 2018.  So we're currently doing it and we can sell credits from soil carbon in Australia.  So we've got one, our first farmer at the moment that we measured four years ago.  We've just re-measured him.  
**[1:12:31-1:12:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:12:31):**  He's got 20,000 tonnes of CO2 to sell off a 2,000 acre property.  And that was measured over three years and two of those three years were severe drought.  So that's pretty exciting for us to have the first sort of big chunk of carbon credits  from soils heading towards the market.  And that market will significantly improve.  
**[1:12:53-1:13:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:12:53):**  I think in terms of the soil carbon market globally, it is one of the most exciting spaces  around the world at the moment.  And there are methodologies being developed in the US and in Europe that will allow soil  carbon to be measured and sold.  What you need is the market to buy it.  
**[1:13:15-1:13:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:13:15):**  At the moment, you've essentially got the California market in the US.  So unless you're able to sell into that market, you've then got to look for large organisations  that want to offset their carbon.  The downside to soil carbon is that you've got to do a baseline measurement and then  you come back a few years later and re-measure it.  
**[1:13:35-1:13:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:13:35):**  What you get to sell is the change from your baseline to your re-measurement.  So you don't actually have anything to sell for a number of years.  But I think that there's a lot of interest in getting this going in the States and we've  got probably some of the best technology in the world now because we've been working on  the technology to measure this more accurately for about seven or eight years.  
**[1:13:58-1:14:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:13:58):**  We're in the final stages of R&D at the moment and we'll be rolling out some of that technology  in Australia next year.  And there's interest in taking that technology into the US as well now.  So I think you will see it within a few years.  I think your market will start to grow.  
**[1:14:15-1:14:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:14:15):**  There are traps for young players.  I think there's two ways that the carbon market will operate.  One is a modelled method.  So if you shift to no-till, for example, then it's deemed that you're going to sequester  so many carbon credits.  
**[1:14:29-1:14:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:14:29):**  The market does not like that stuff because it's not measured and they don't trust it.  Measured carbon then has a high value and also soil carbon credits come with a lot of  co-benefits.  So they come with those benefits of water or food quality or biodiversity.  There's a whole lot of co-benefits that come with it.  
**[1:14:49-1:14:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:14:49):**  So I think that over time you will see the soil carbon market develop into a massive  market.  Once the money starts to flow back to farmers, you will see a significant uptake by farmers.  The exciting thing for me is that you can only sequester carbon if you're doing regenerative  practices.  
**[1:15:10-1:15:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:15:10):**  So I think a price on carbon is going to drive regeneration and recarbonisation of our landscapes.  And I can't think of any better thing to have happening globally.  You've had a significant influence on the shift to regeneration in the Australian landscape,  but it's still a very small percentage, still a significant minority.  How do you anticipate seeing regenerative agriculture develop in the future?  
**[1:15:42-1:15:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:15:42):**  What is the timeframe until we get to, let's say, 100% adoption in Australia or to 80%  adoption in Australia?  There's two different industries to start with.  There's the grazing industries and the cropping industries.  In the grazing industries, the uptake of rotational grazing is significant.  
**[1:16:01-1:16:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:16:01):**  I would say we've probably gone from zero to 60% in 30 years.  The uptake of cell grazing, the more intensive stuff, we're probably still sitting around  three or four percent, but we have shifted the paradigm and that now is becoming the  norm.  In the cropping industries, I think we're at the very bottom now of a curve that's likely  
**[1:16:27-1:16:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:16:27):**  to start to accelerate.  There's a lot of interest in regenerative ag, but there's a lot of questions on the  transition from where we are to where we want to be.  That's an area where I would dearly like to be working with you, John, and your expertise  and we can bring some of that into this country.  
**[1:16:46-1:16:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:16:46):**  I think we can accelerate that.  What we're doing at the moment is I tend to work now as well at a political level and  have a bit of influence and we're now looking to pull together a large training project  funded by the federal government, putting $50 million over the next four to five years  into educating around holism and regeneration and then putting a lot of emphasis into that  
**[1:17:14-1:17:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:17:14):**  transitional phase.  Our focus is if we can get the next 10 percent within a five to 10-year period, and I think  with the focus we can put into it, perhaps within five years we can get the next 10 percent  of the cropping industry.  Once we've achieved over 18 to 20 percent of the industry in transition and starting  
**[1:17:41-1:17:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:17:41):**  to get carbon credits coming back into their businesses, I think it will start to normalize  after that and then we'll see a natural progression probably through to about 80 percent within  the following 20 years.  That's the sort of trajectory that I would see at the moment.  That's really encouraging and exciting to hear about the significant levels of change  
**[1:18:03-1:18:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:18:03):**  that have already occurred.  Terry, I want to say thank you, a very big thank you for all the work that you have done  over the decades.  Thank you for sharing your wisdom with us, with me and with our audience here.  I look forward to having more conversations with you in the future.  
**[1:18:20-1:18:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:18:20):**  Thank you, John, and I hope that my accent wasn't too hard for people in your part of  the world to understand.  The team at AEA and I are dedicated to bringing this show to you because we believe that knowledge  and information is the foundation of successful regenerative systems.  At AEA, we believe that growing better quality food and making more money from your crops  
**[1:18:43-1:18:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:18:43):**  is possible.  And since 2006, we've worked with leading professional growers to help them do just  that.  At AEA, we don't guess, we test, we analyze, and we provide recommendations based on scientific  data, knowledge and experience.  
**[1:18:59-1:19:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:18:59):**  We've developed products that are uniquely positioned to help growers make more money  with regenerative agriculture.  If you are a professional grower who believes in testing instead of guessing, someone who  believes in a better, more regenerative way to grow, visit advancingecoag.com and contact  us to see if AEA is right for you.  
**[1:19:18-1:19:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/REGEN_AG_PODCAST_TERRY_MCCOSKER_FINAL_AUDIO.mp3#t=1:19:18):**  Thank you for listening, and we look forward to working with you.  