### Regenerative Agriculture Podcast  (2020-52-28)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:00:00):**  Wheat producers get paid for quality based on protein content, test weight, and the sprouting  number.  Bakers care about the quality of protein, not just the content, and it is expensive  for them to overcome poor protein quality.  In this interview, Claudia Carter describes the wheat characteristics that are actually  
**[0:00:20-0:00:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:00:20):**  worth a premium to bakers.  Welcome back to the Reconitive Agriculture podcast.  I'm very delighted today to host Claudia Carter, who is the California Wheat Commissioner.  Claudia and I have had several very interesting conversations recently around grain quality.  Many of you know that I'm very passionate about producing healthy, high quality, nutritious  
**[0:00:42-0:00:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:00:42):**  food for people, and of course, we desire as producers to also be compensated for producing  a high quality product, and even for the quality of product that we produce today.  We've had several quite interesting conversations with Claudia around what defines quality,  how do we measure quality, what is the quality that is important to millers, to bakers, and  of course, what are the nutritional parameters that are important for us as consumers as  
**[0:01:07-0:01:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:01:07):**  well.  So, Claudia, welcome.  I've been looking forward to this conversation.  Thank you for being here.  Can you tell us a bit about the journey and the pathway that has brought you to your work  
**[0:01:17-0:01:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:01:17):**  as California Wheat Commissioner?  Hi, John.  Thank you for having me and the opportunity to discuss this important topic with your  audience.  So, yeah, I actually came to the United States.  
**[0:01:29-0:01:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:01:29):**  I'm from Ecuador, originally, and I went to study food science at North Dakota State University.  And after I graduated from, you know, with my undergraduate as a food scientist, I did  my master's degree in cereal science.  And that's where really I learned a lot.  I learned a lot more about grains.  
**[0:01:48-0:01:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:01:48):**  Specifically, I work with durum and understanding durum wheat and what makes high-quality durum  wheat for pasta manufacturers.  And that's where all my journey begins with understanding more about wheat quality and  what it takes to produce, you know, a high-quality crop that will make a good product.  Then California Wheat Commission as the lab director, and then I was promoted to be the  
**[0:02:14-0:02:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:02:14):**  executive director two years later once I joined here.  And since then, I have been working for producers in California.  What is the scope of the work that you're doing there at the Wheat Commission?  Yeah, so there are two, you know, major missions that we work on as part of the California  Wheat Commission.  
**[0:02:35-0:02:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:02:35):**  And so under the research, we have a partnership with the University of California Davis, where  we have our wheat breeder, Dr. Jorge Dukovsky, who's breeding to improve not only, you know,  the yields and also have this resistance added to the genetic background of the varieties,  but also to improve the quality.  And definitely working on bioportification of some of our wheat varieties.  
**[0:03:05-0:03:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:03:05):**  So that's what Dr. Dukovsky concentrates on.  And then we also fund as part of the research, Dr. Mark Lundy, who is our small grains specialist.  He's our agronomist who takes all the varieties and plants those across California to see  how they perform in different environments.  And then he will be testing yield performance, the skis, persistence.  
**[0:03:28-0:03:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:03:28):**  And then, you know, besides the research that we do is market development.  And market development, something unique on how we do it here in California is that among  all the 17 wheat commissions that United States have, California Wheat Commission is the only  one that has a wheat quality research lab on the side.  So we can process all those samples that we get from the research side from UC Davis and  
**[0:03:51-0:03:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:03:51):**  process them here for testing for quality, you know, for bread, tortillas, pastas, you  name it.  We can make any product here.  So you've mentioned a couple of words that, one word in particular that I don't hear very  often, the word biofortification.  
**[0:04:07-0:04:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:04:07):**  So in the agricultural community, particularly in the food and vegetable production community,  it's common to hear conversations around nutrient density.  And I think the idea of producing biofortified foods where we actually are breeding for a  specific nutritional profile is not something that is widely discussed.  Can you tell me a bit more about your efforts and what your objectives are in that area?  
**[0:04:33-0:04:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:04:33):**  Yes.  So I'll tell you what, you know, from Dr. Dukovsky's perspective, but also a little  bit from my perspective.  So Dr. Dukovsky, as part of this industry, is asked by many people in this case to say  the growers develop varieties that are, you know, are going to be resilient, but then  
**[0:04:55-0:05:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:04:55):**  also he's been asked things from the millers and from the bakers, hey, develop varieties  that have these quality parameters, right?  And one of the things that the millers have always asked, we want less mineral.  Because, you know, minerals going to affect the white flower performance for certain products.  So Dr. Dukovsky said to me one time, why do we want that?  
**[0:05:19-0:05:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:05:19):**  Because we want to keep high minerals, high nutritious wheat.  So with that being said, Dr. Dukovsky's efforts and became one of his, you know, project back,  you know, about 10 years ago, in half some wheat that is biofortified, meaning that has  higher stinks, or higher, in this case, a variety that we are currently developed or  I'm sorry, it will be commercially available.  
**[0:05:46-0:05:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:05:46):**  It's half that has high carotenoid pigments.  So that means, you know, you have high lutein, which at the end will help, you know, it will  be good for your eyes.  So it's something that it became some sort of a passion for Dr. Dukovsky to develop varieties  that are going to be better for you.  
**[0:06:04-0:06:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:06:04):**  You know, he knew that we need to have more of these in our food.  And why would I follow that?  And I think he was right.  You know, I think he's developing those varieties that in the long run, and as you see people  do not, you know, people asking for healthier products, I think we're on the right track.  
**[0:06:24-0:06:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:06:24):**  And anything that Dr. Dukovsky does, he does communicate with us.  And in a way, we say that that's along the mission and the things that we would like  to see being produced here in California.  I find it interesting in that the parameters that the millers are looking for, as in less  ash and a smaller mineral content, is in some ways in direct conflict with the quality that  
**[0:06:49-0:06:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:06:49):**  we should really value collectively as consumers and as society.  I wonder about other areas of possible conflict.  What are the differences in the protein value, gluten content?  What is the story behind gluten?  So protein content, how can I, okay, so we understand protein content and protein quality  
**[0:07:11-0:07:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:07:11):**  are completely different.  Okay.  Just because you have a high protein content, that doesn't mean that you have actually good  bread quality, protein quality.  And there is a research that came out from one of my professors from NDSU, Dr. Shimshik,  
**[0:07:29-0:07:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:07:29):**  that proves that varieties that were bred or having in our system for so many years  and the new varieties, the gluten structure hasn't changed.  So, and people think that the gluten that used to be in varieties that they will call  heritage wheat varieties.  So the right thing to say about gluten is that gluten is actually the protein in wheat  
**[0:07:54-0:07:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:07:54):**  is actually two proteins, that is glutensin and gliadin.  That when you have it in the grain, make that grain into produce it into flour and you add  water to it without even mixing, then gluten structure and matrix starts to form disulfide  bonds that come together.  And that's when we can tell and say, okay, a gluten structure or matrix has been formed.  
**[0:08:22-0:08:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:08:22):**  So when people are studying, if something has changed in the protein, in the gluten  structure, really what we're studying is the gliadin and the glutenin, which each of those  proteins provide a specific type of structure and quality to the bread that you're making.  So one will provide you, in this case, the glutensin will provide what we call an elasticity  type of component, which is resistance to expand.  
**[0:08:52-0:08:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:08:52):**  And then the gliadins are going to provide what we call extensibility to produce the  gluten structure that are going to help to maintain a nice local bread that will entrap  those gas bubbles through the presentation process.  So when we talk about gluten, that really is what it is.  It's a protein, it provides a structure to the bread.  
**[0:09:11-0:09:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:09:11):**  It also is going to provide that protein nutritious factor that we need to have.  So thinking about gluten versus gliadin from a growing, from an agronomic perspective,  what can growers and agronomists do to produce not just higher protein content, but also  a higher protein quality?  And I think actually there's another question that almost comes before that, which is what  
**[0:09:39-0:09:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:09:39):**  defines protein quality?  You said that protein quantity and quality are two very different things.  Are we looking for a balance between gluten and gliadin?  Correct.  So the protein that you have in the grain for wheat, 80%, which are glutensin and gliadin,  
**[0:09:55-0:10:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:09:55):**  and about 20% are what we call the non-gluten forming proteins, which are alumin, globulin,  and tritosins, right?  So you do have certain balance between the gliadins and the glutensins that it's part  of its genetic background.  So this is where genetics are very, very important in the wheat produce, which we have to make  
**[0:10:19-0:10:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:10:19):**  sure to understand that only 30% of the quality is explained by the genetic part.  And then 70% is everything else that we don't control, right?  Which is, or some could control, I guess, if you're in the desert producing a crop where  you can control how you manage your crop.  But most of the wheat that is grown is a dry land crop.  
**[0:10:40-0:10:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:10:40):**  And then, you know, you don't control that part of how much water you're going to get  or how much water you're not going to get.  Yet the part that the user can control, which is management.  And this is not my area of expertise.  However, I have heard and listened enough, Dr. Lundy, when he explains that management  
**[0:10:56-0:11:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:10:56):**  and nitrogen application, for example, and the timing of nitrogen application is so important  to produce not only that high protein content, but also the deposition of the protein that  is going to affect that protein quality.  So, and everything else that you have, you know, the sulfur, is it magnesium, is it all  those and you don't want to have a deficit of these key component elements that the crop  
**[0:11:24-0:11:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:11:24):**  is going to need to do that protein deposition.  But 30%, and this is something to me very important for the grower to understand, that  30% is explained by genetics.  So having a good genetic background that comes with that variety that you're planting is  key, you know, of course, as well as your management and then your environment that  
**[0:11:43-0:11:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:11:43):**  you're having.  How have genetics shifted and changed over the last few decades?  Are genetics really being optimized for the optimal protein quality instead of just protein  quantity?  I would say in general, most of the research, you know, the breeding research programs,  
**[0:12:03-0:12:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:12:03):**  they pay up the protein content.  However, yield potential continues being a very, very important part of the breeding  program.  Because at the end of the day, the grower gets paid on yield and the protein content,  they're trying to make it as good as possible, but they do want to see high yield.  
**[0:12:23-0:12:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:12:23):**  So protein quality in California in the breeding program, yes, I will say, you know, we have  been heavily investing in that.  And also the way I hear Dr. Dukovsky describe these is that they have tools now that they  can utilize and breed varieties in a much faster way than they used to be able to do  it, you know, in 20, 30 years ago.  
**[0:12:47-0:12:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:12:47):**  So it has changed, yes, because technology has advanced, so you can do things quicker,  faster.  There is a lot of things to understand about the wheat genome, because it's, you know,  it's just huge.  But we have done advancements to understand what are the areas in the blue penning part,  
**[0:13:04-0:13:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:13:04):**  for example, that are the high molecular weight that we might be able to concentrate on that  gives elasticity and how can we come to be breeding for quality, high quality, high elastic  breeds that are going to be stronger, for example.  And that's something that Dr. Dukovsky here at our breeding program has been doing and  developing.  
**[0:13:26-0:13:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:13:26):**  I find it very encouraging that protein quality is only 30% genetics and is 70% environment.  Obviously you could, we could perceive that as being a double-edged sword, but if 70%  of protein quality is determined by management and determined by the plant's environment,  that actually means that we have a significant influence over quality.  And I think in growers that we have worked with, we've certainly observed that timing  
**[0:13:53-0:13:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:13:53):**  of nitrogen application, as you mentioned, but also magnesium, sulfur, molybdenum, all  of the enzyme cofactors that are needed for protein synthesis and for the nitrate and  ammonia metabolism within the plant are very important.  And certainly from a plant health perspective, they give us much greater degrees of pest  resistance and overall plant vigor, and they generally translate to increased yield as  
**[0:14:18-0:14:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:14:18):**  well.  And I heard you mentioned some of those minerals and the way that they correspond to quality.  Is that also because of the protein synthesis and enzyme cofactor pathways?  You know, you're getting into an area that is not my expertise, but the way I hear our  agronomist speaking is that, you know, all those other, you know, elements that you are,  
**[0:14:41-0:14:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:14:41):**  you know, feeding your plants are going to definitely influence at the end of the day,  the overall quality you get from that crop.  And not just that, I mean, yield potential, right?  And what you just say, like certain times, you know, maybe the disease resistance and  that to be a healthy crop, right?  
**[0:14:58-0:15:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:14:58):**  That would be just what you just described.  Claudia, you have an interesting perspective in that you speak not only with growers and  agronomists, but also with the millers and the bakers.  One of the questions that I often wonder about is how are the interests of and the desires  of the millers and the growers aligned or misaligned?  
**[0:15:21-0:15:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:15:21):**  One of those areas, so I have seen a lack of communication and why I have become a pretty  big advocate of let's bring every single player to the table.  I have reached out to millers and say, we're here to help you come and tell us what do  you want?  What do you need?  
**[0:15:41-0:15:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:15:41):**  And the same thing, the farmer, the farmers say, I want a miller to come and see what  I do on my farm.  I want a baker to come and see what I do, you know, and the other way around is the  truth.  The miller wants to, you know, hopefully talk to the farmer and say, okay, let me learn.  
**[0:15:57-0:16:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:15:57):**  You know, the farmer is saying, I want to learn from you and why my quality affects  you.  So they want different things and that's the problem because the market, how it is  structured, you know, I say, what does the farmer care about in the weed market?  Well, they care about what crossing content they reach, the test way, for example, and  
**[0:16:18-0:16:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:16:18):**  then another factor that is right now being affected up in the Midwest, they're being  discounted on polling numbers, which basically is, you know, sprout damage because of the  rains that they have, they have in North Dakota, Montana.  So it's a factor then because of the issues, then they're being discounted.  So, and then the elevator is going to care pretty much the same three things, crossing  
**[0:16:41-0:16:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:16:41):**  content, test weight and polling number, but then the miller and the baker, oh my goodness,  they do have to care about a lot about the quality.  They do want a high stability, pre-initiative stability that is going to perform very well  in the mixer and they want, you know, some of them want flavor, the other ones want high  absorption.  
**[0:17:01-0:17:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:17:01):**  So you have a list that is, you know, so long for these other people on the supply chain  that doesn't really match with what the farmer's looking at and what the elevator's looking  at.  Yes, I always say, but you're demanding that from the farmer and yet you're discounting  a lot on the farm and when they do something right, you don't give them that incentive  
**[0:17:22-0:17:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:17:22):**  and that premium and that disconnect is really becoming a little bit more of a, of an issue  right now.  The baker wants to clean that label up, wants to have less ingredients and they cannot find  a good quality wheat.  So it's a major issue, I would say, in an industry as a whole.  
**[0:17:43-0:17:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:17:43):**  I'd love for you to expand on that last comment just a little bit because we, I think many  growers, many producers are beginning to, in their own personal life, really understand  the importance of personal health and buying food that you can actually understand all  the, pronounce all the ingredients on the label.  So when wheat is poor quality, our millers and bakers, they need to add more ingredients  
**[0:18:08-0:18:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:18:08):**  to the recipe and how does wheat quality change what goes into bread?  Oh yeah.  So if you are able to control what you're getting for wheat and you're able to hand  pick varieties and regions and areas where you want to get your wheat from to mill it,  to give it to a baker, you're going to be a leader in this industry.  
**[0:18:35-0:18:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:18:35):**  The current market doesn't really work much that way.  I mean, because they're segregating this from protein content, right?  So okay.  Let's say you have a lower quality, a much shorter mix time for a flour that the baker  is using.  
**[0:18:51-0:18:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:18:51):**  Okay.  And when you're putting that into a machine, because big bakeries, they're not hand making  the bread.  They have machines that pretty much it's all automatic.  They put the flour, the ingredients come, they get dumped, they get mixed, it goes through  
**[0:19:07-0:19:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:19:07):**  a pipe and goes through the next level.  So when you are working in such an automated type of system, you want to make sure that  you have a mix of dough that is not going to be sticking to your pipes or sticking to  your machine because then you have a big issue.  So what you have to add to that mix of ingredients are extra of that mix of the blend is extra  
**[0:19:34-0:19:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:19:34):**  ingredients that are willing to help you to keep things together.  And often to compensate for quality, what bakers have to add is an ingredient that's  called beta-weteutin.  So beta-weteutin is basically a protein isolate.  So it's a protein that gets extracted from the wheat and then that protein can be added  
**[0:19:57-0:20:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:19:57):**  to the blend so you can have a more consistent type of flour from batch to batch to batch.  So the problem is that that ingredient is expensive.  So I say, if you have a flour that you like and it's okay quality, you're paying about  17 cents a pound.  Well, then you need to pay about a dollar per pound for beta-weteutin.  
**[0:20:20-0:20:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:20:20):**  That's very expensive.  And if you have to add more of that ingredient rather than having a high quality flour that  perhaps you're paying a premium for, let's say you're paying a premium instead of 17  cents, you're paying 25 to 30 cents, you're still saving money because you are going to  have a much more even consistent flour quality than having to add those ingredients such  
**[0:20:42-0:20:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:20:42):**  as beta-weteutin.  It seems to me like it would be a really big deal for millers and for bakers to desire  to have, essentially, if I'm understanding you correctly, you're describing that when  you have really high quality wheat, you don't need to add the expensive ingredients and  of course produce higher quality wheat and be compensated for that.  
**[0:21:05-0:21:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:21:05):**  So from your perspective, you have a very strategic viewpoint.  Where is the disconnect coming from?  The supply chain and how our industry has been working for years and the resistance  to change.  Okay.  
**[0:21:20-0:21:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:21:20):**  Our system is not set up for the way I just described to you.  You know, however, the bakers want to have that, yet, you know, the people who go from  the farmer all the way to the baker just haven't figured out yet how to make that happen for  a customer who is demanding that.  So I will tell you the impediments that we have is how we deal from the crop, from its  
**[0:21:46-0:21:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:21:46):**  harvest to the point that it gets sent to the bakery.  Everybody in between hasn't changed and it's really difficult for them to change in a system  that is set up for many years.  It has been working, which is mainly getting paid by protein content and how big of your  kernels are and do you have any, you know, scratch damage and what I just told you.  
**[0:22:07-0:22:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:22:07):**  But let me give you an example of an industry.  I was in Spain two years ago and I went to visit a farmer there, a wheat farmer in Spain  and you know, they had a wheat field there and I asked, I'm always very curious how other  other growers or other parts of the world are growing and marketing their wheat.  So I asked this grower and I say, so how do you sell this wheat and what do you get from  
**[0:22:31-0:22:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:22:31):**  that wheat?  So he pulled out his cell phone and showed me and he goes, well, first I have to harvest  it.  After I harvest it, I have to send it to a wheat quality lab and as he pulled out his  phone, his cell phone, he showed me a spreadsheet where he has the data that he gets.  
**[0:22:50-0:22:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:22:50):**  He gets moisture content, protein content, very few people might know what it is, which  is an allograft data and that allograft data, what really tells you in short term is quality  of the wheat.  It gives you a W value, which is the overall work of that dough when it got into the machine  and the higher the W value, I mean more likely the better the quality.  
**[0:23:14-0:23:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:23:14):**  And he told me, he said, if my W value is higher than 200, I get paid a premium for  it.  And I was in shock.  I was like, I never really had a producer really telling me something like dough quality  and that they get paid a premium for that quality.  
**[0:23:33-0:23:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:23:33):**  So that doesn't happen in the US unfortunately, because you don't have the buyer telling the  producer I'm going to pay you on quality.  It seems to me though, from what you expressed earlier, that the buyers, I mean, it would  make sense that they would have a desire to do that.  It would be economically worthwhile.  
**[0:23:52-0:23:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:23:52):**  They would have an incentive to do that if the supply team were capable of delivering  that.  Absolutely.  Yeah.  We've touched on a number of different subjects that all connect together, but I think before  
**[0:24:04-0:24:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:24:04):**  we unravel them further, there is something that I know many people would like me to ask.  And that is when we consider protein quality, gluten versus gliadin and these various compounds,  there's a lot of discussion.  And I would almost say bordering on a fad around gluten sensitivity.  Some of it certainly is real.  
**[0:24:26-0:24:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:24:26):**  Some of it is questionable whether it's real.  But from your perspective, you mentioned earlier the differences between heritage grains and  the more modern grain varieties.  If I'm understanding correctly, then essentially you're saying that gluten is present even  in the heritage grains, but there are differences in quality.  
**[0:24:46-0:24:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:24:46):**  What's really going on?  So the structure or the genetic part of the structure of those two gliadins and glutenins  and the genetic makeup of those lines are different.  This is what I read.  This is what I hear.  
**[0:25:02-0:25:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:25:02):**  And so let's go back to what I told you before, which is very important as explained here.  Tannins provide elasticity.  And if you talk about elasticity, to put it in a way that everybody will understand what  I mean, it's a resistance to the formation.  So if you take a rubber band that is very strong and you stretch it and you let it go,  
**[0:25:22-0:25:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:25:22):**  it's going back to its original place, well, that's elasticity.  Now tannins that provides that component.  The gliadins provide what we call extensibility.  And it's basically the ability of something to stretch.  So when you see the quality differences between the heritage grains, you are going to have  
**[0:25:44-0:25:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:25:44):**  a much higher influence of the gliadins, which are the ones that have that extensibility.  So they're going to be stickier.  Okay, they're not going to have that springing back that the elasticity glutenins provide.  This is just talking from quality perspective and the way I see it, or we see it in the  lab.  
**[0:26:04-0:26:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:26:04):**  But in contrast with the newer varieties that have been bred for having that stronger, much  more elastic type of strength, then the glutenins are going to dominate and certain parts of  the glutenins because we're providing and allowing it to fit as part of that.  Again, this is part of the genetic, the 70% comes from other things about management,  we talk about that.  
**[0:26:29-0:26:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:26:29):**  So if we talk about the quality per se of the differences between those two, you have  the heritage grains that are a bit stickier and a bit more soft, rather than the newer  ones that became to be higher elasticity.  But also keep in mind that these newer varieties, modern varieties are also being bred to be  harder.  
**[0:26:53-0:27:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:26:53):**  So you not only have a stronger quality, but also you have a harder kernel that when you  break it, it's going to be harder to break.  And that we call a harness value.  Whereas the other ones, the heritage are much on the softer side, which it really is what  a lot of these heritage means have been, or are like one of the ones that many people  
**[0:27:15-0:27:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:27:15):**  understand and know.  Yet people have used it for bread baking and that's the scenario we have been in California  and it came from Mexico and was produced here a long, long time ago.  We still produce it, but that's the differences in what we see from the quality perspective,  from the heritage and the modern wheat.  
**[0:27:34-0:27:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:27:34):**  When growers want to test their wheat quality, similar to the farmer that you met in Spain,  where can farmers in North America send their wheat to get tested and to be analyzed for  quality, as you're describing?  So we have, I mean, the California Wheat Commission has a feed for service lab.  So we have some producers from California that take their wheat here and then we test  
**[0:28:00-0:28:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:28:00):**  it for quality here.  And they are the ones, very progressive growers that we have working directly with us who  are working with customers directly.  And they're the ones looking at quality data, right?  The other labs that I know is the Wheat Marketing Center up in Portland.  
**[0:28:18-0:28:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:28:18):**  You have the Great Plains Lab in Kansas and then you have the one up in North Dakota that's  called the Northern Crops Institute.  So those are the main labs that I know that test wheat quality and that producers can  send their samples to.  And are there different types of parameters that can be measured?  
**[0:28:38-0:28:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:28:38):**  Are there any specific requests that growers should ask for or just a simple wheat quality  assay will give them the type of information that you're talking about?  Yeah, you can have basic quality data.  One of the most widely known quality tests that anybody will ask you is the Pharynograph.  The Pharynograph will give you stability and absorption.  
**[0:29:01-0:29:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:29:01):**  And stability, what that means is how long can I mix my dough before it starts breaking  down and becoming sticky?  The longer the stability is, the stronger that wheat is.  So it's like very good.  And the shorter, the weaker that is.  
**[0:29:13-0:29:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:29:13):**  So it's a pretty straightforward test.  Another component that that test gives you is absorption.  And absorption, as we all know, is important for a baker because higher absorption means  that the baker can push a little bit that hydration, add more water.  Well, you know, adding water for the baker is a plus because water is cheap.  
**[0:29:32-0:29:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:29:32):**  So then they will be able to understand like how much more water I can add to this product.  So I would say Pharynograph is the quality testing that I will encourage growers to go  for and of course, protein content just to have an idea of protein content.  It will be also good to have.  One of the questions that's circulating in my mind, we work with a number of growers  
**[0:29:54-0:29:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:29:54):**  in Kansas and in the Northwest who are very passionate about the work that they're doing.  They desire to produce healthier, higher quality grains.  What can they do to help resolve the pipeline challenges, the supply chain challenges?  Is it possible in today's world to connect directly with bakers and shepherd your grain  throughout the entire process?  
**[0:30:17-0:30:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:30:17):**  What can growers begin thinking about or begin doing differently to really be compensated  for quality that they're producing?  So I would say the way that we have been working with here in California, and I think it will  work until we get up to the point is that the producers themselves have a good connection  with a miller slash baker that we directly to.  
**[0:30:45-0:30:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:30:45):**  And honestly, it's more like setting that new business model for grain buying and selling,  setting that model as almost like a case study.  You know, I have been doing it with this mill and this baker and it's working.  Sometimes when you start developing programs like that, they start very small, which is  what we're seeing here in California.  
**[0:31:09-0:31:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:31:09):**  We're starting very small where we have a producer who said here in Sacramento area,  one of my producers at Chills from Chills Farm said, hey, you know, I want to be able  to market my old grain.  So what did he do?  And he set up his own cleaning facility, grain cleaning facility, packaging and storage.  
**[0:31:28-0:31:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:31:28):**  So now he has had a great success story where he is selling directly to a manufacturer.  Then he's also selling it directly to a mill in LA who is buying directly his Tricky Kelly,  for example.  So having those additional component of his processing for the farmer, it's a key part  of moving that needle into the right direction.  
**[0:31:54-0:31:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:31:54):**  Also growers, what they can do is if they have a storage ability, they can also start  testing their quality and then storing the weed by quality.  But of course, they need to know, so where am I going to sell these?  So where am I going to, so that's the part that we're missing.  Like how can we connect that grower with somebody who wants that?  
**[0:32:12-0:32:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:32:12):**  So it's a difficult situation for many growers, but there are some growers who are already  starting to make those changes at the farm level, as well as making the connection going  to trade shows, talking to investors and being in front of the line saying, I'm producing  these, do you want it?  Do you need it?  
**[0:32:34-0:32:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:32:34):**  Because I don't want to go and deal with anybody else or my elevator.  I want to deal directly with you.  So being out there learning directly from their customers and what they need and starting  to make those connections are very, very critical.  That's what I will say that they can start doing and what I have seen.  
**[0:32:51-0:32:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:32:51):**  The other thing that I've seen growers here in California and other places is setting  up their own mill.  So I have currently two growers who have set their own cleaning facility and also they're  going to put a mill.  They're going to start milling in smaller batches, but they're going to be selling their  
**[0:33:07-0:33:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:33:07):**  own flour very soon.  I think this, what you're describing really speaks to one of the foundational challenges  that we need growers.  And this is certainly true of wheat as well as the other crops have really become commodity  producers.  
**[0:33:21-0:33:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:33:21):**  They're producing commodities and they are allowing others to add value and to extract  a lot of the value from the commodity that they're producing.  And so bringing back those roles that have been delegated to people referred to as middlemen  and adding that additional value can be one way of adding a lot of value to a farming  enterprise as a whole.  
**[0:33:42-0:33:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:33:42):**  Yes, absolutely.  Yep.  And some of those producers are starting to realize that I have to do it myself because  they have told me I have gone knocking the doors and zero response.  So then I had to invest on my own milling facility.  
**[0:34:01-0:34:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:34:01):**  I want to be able to tell a story, why am I doing this?  And the other component of the story of grains is let's produce healthy products, which to  me is whole grain products.  I don't want to tell you not to eat gluten, but I want to tell you why you should be eating  whole grain bread products because they're so good for you and for your health.  
**[0:34:22-0:34:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:34:22):**  When you ask me about that question and the people who are avoiding gluten, it's fine.  Everybody can have their own choices.  I have my own choices, but I will tell them, I say, try to have a good whole grain bread,  a good whole grain cracker.  You're going to fall in love again with grains and with gluten because they add flavor, they  
**[0:34:43-0:34:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:34:43):**  add nutrition, and you are not going to walk away from those.  Unfortunately, those products, there are some in the market, but not widely, I would say,  developed or produced in the US.  You can find outstanding whole grain, 100% whole grain products in Germany, in Italy,  in France.  
**[0:35:02-0:35:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:35:02):**  They are good quality products, but yet I think we're lacking here in the US to have  more 100% whole grain products.  Let's talk about whole grain just a little bit because I think this is also an important  conversation.  It's a very familiar one for me because I grew up in a family where we made our own  
**[0:35:18-0:35:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:35:18):**  bread and we actually milled our own grain.  It was 100% whole grain.  What's the relative nutritional value of bran versus white flour that has had the bran removed  from it?  Okay, let's talk about what does the wheat have.  
**[0:35:36-0:35:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:35:36):**  The wheat have bran, germ, and then the endosperm.  Endosperm is mainly basically the starch and then the gluten-forming protein.  Then the bran, you have the insoluble fiber and vitamins and minerals, very, very important  for mainly the fat, but also some other important vitamins.  When you are eating 100% whole grain as part of the whole thing, yes, you're adding that  
**[0:36:03-0:36:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:36:03):**  portion, one of the key portions I would say, which is fiber.  You want to eat more whole grains because of that insoluble fiber that we should be  eating more in our diet, but also those vitamins and minerals that come with it.  I was at a meeting recently and I heard from some of the experts in nutrition in the whole  grains that yes, whole grains will provide you all that, yet we should have still, even  
**[0:36:29-0:36:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:36:29):**  whole grain flour, should still be fortified with these other vitamins, fortified because  it will be very important to continue having that as part of a healthy program that the  US is encouraging.  Yes, you're adding a lot more nutrition with whole grain than white flour, but still there  is some sort of a unique perspective that we still should be fortifying that whole grain  
**[0:36:58-0:37:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:36:58):**  flour in the US, which we do for the white flour because you're stripping really literally  all those nutrients that it's getting out from the bran and the white flour is purely  starch with some of that protein that is the gluten.  Then they have to fortify it and start fortifying it, which was a big major advantage in our  health in the US when they started doing that.  
**[0:37:24-0:37:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:37:24):**  There are advantages today to fortifying grain as you described and to an earlier part of  our conversation where you describe how historically, if I understood it correctly, breeding efforts  historically and even today are attempting to produce a low ash, low mineral content  grain.  One of the questions that I think would arise from that is how does the nutrient level and  
**[0:37:50-0:37:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:37:50):**  mineral and vitamin level of more modern varieties compare with those that were not particularly  bred for a low ash content?  In general, what we have seen in the lab, heritage varieties, older varieties tend to  have a higher mineral ash content than some of them, not all of them, but some of the  newer varieties.  
**[0:38:14-0:38:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:38:14):**  When we are even talking about the whole grain, so there is more, I would say, I guess, mineral  content concentrated and just speaking as a hypothesis, not that I have done any research  on it, but by fact, we have done that testing and we know that there are differences in  mineral content.  Keep in mind that the varieties that are bred today are bred for mainly for the milling  
**[0:38:36-0:38:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:38:36):**  and baking industry that exists, which is mainly white flour.  What really we have come to try to do is try to be able to do as efficient as possible  in the roller milling system to detach, to take away, to rip off the bran.  By doing so, we are making sure that there is zero contamination from the bran, which  has most of that mineral content and the ash content that came mainly from the bran, that  
**[0:39:05-0:39:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:39:05):**  it basically doesn't contaminate the endosperm, which is what we're using for making the white  flour.  That has also been the case that we're able, in the modern wheat, you're able to mill it  to have a much more efficient milling capacity so you have higher flour yield without having  too much of that contamination from the bran.  
**[0:39:27-0:39:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:39:27):**  That really is what I would say the difference is that you cannot perhaps accomplish well  with your heritage varieties that are smaller kernels, more pinch kernels, so through the  milling process, efficiency is not as good.  But as I said, if our goal and our goal should be to feed and have more whole grain flours,  at the end of the day, you do want to have those varieties that contain that higher mineral  
**[0:39:51-0:39:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:39:51):**  that are good for you.  Wonderful.  Claudia, what are some resources that you would recommend if growers, producers, agronomists  want to follow up and to learn more about quality and how to connect directly with bakers?  Are there any resources that you would recommend for them to look at?  
**[0:40:09-0:40:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:40:09):**  We put some things in our website so I can recommend them to go to our website, which  is the californiaweed.org website.  So there is also resources from the universities.  I would say the Washington State University has a wonderful resources on quality that  they put into their website, North Dakota State University and Kansas State University.  
**[0:40:31-0:40:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:40:31):**  So those would be the other places where they will have information about quality.  And I would say there is also the wheat food council or the whole grain, I went blank on  that name, but it's a whole grain council, I think it is called too, where they can find  information about wheat and wheat quality and nutrition information as well.  Very good.  
**[0:40:56-0:41:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:40:56):**  Are there any other things that growers should be thinking about?  What is the question that I should have been asking?  You know, I would say are they, I mean growers are doing, and this I know by fact, they're  doing the best they can to produce, you know, in the area how they can produce it.  So the question will be, should we adjust and change the ways that we're farming today?  
**[0:41:22-0:41:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:41:22):**  And this is a difficult one that might give me an advantage in a way to continue protecting  the soil.  I mean, I have heard some of our growers who are changing, let's say to no-till here in  our area and they're changing to other things like cover crops.  So I would say encourage the growers to ask the questions and I don't want to, you know,  
**[0:41:48-0:41:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:41:48):**  as I say, I don't tell them what to do, but yet I want to have them and challenge them  to ask the questions.  Is it what we're doing?  Is it what we should be continuing doing or are there other ways that we can keep producing  a high quality, high nutritious crop that will provide me an advantage, an advantage  
**[0:42:06-0:42:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:42:06):**  to the soil and to the way I'm farming?  Yeah, I think that's certainly the agronomic focus is one that we speak about primarily  here on the podcast and on our webinars is how do we develop agricultural systems and  soil and crop management systems that enhance biology and that produce healthier and higher  quality crops and more nutritious food.  
**[0:42:27-0:42:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:42:27):**  That of course ranges from using cover crops to using biological inoculants and a completely  different set of management practices in many different cases.  Yeah, and also do I have to be looking for new partners?  I think, you know, just finding that status quo, keep looking for other outlets.  There are companies out there that are looking for farmers who are going to be partnering  
**[0:42:50-0:42:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:42:50):**  with them.  And this is what I say.  I say, look at your farmer as your partner and the farmer will look at that industry  and that person working for that industry also as a partner.  We got to help each other.  
**[0:43:02-0:43:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:43:02):**  I think collaboration is going to continue to be very, very important.  But also I tell them knowledge sharing, let's share the knowledge.  And that's something the producers do very good.  They share knowledge with their fellow growers.  They tell them what they're doing.  
**[0:43:14-0:43:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:43:14):**  Yet in other areas of the supply chain, we lack.  We don't want to share what we know.  And that shouldn't be that way.  Yeah, I've certainly observed that as well.  Very clearly.  
**[0:43:24-0:43:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:43:24):**  Claudia, this has been a wonderful conversation.  I'm sure that our listeners will enjoy it very much as well.  Thank you for being here.  And I look forward to having more discussions in the future.  Thank you, John.  
**[0:43:35-0:43:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:43:35):**  I appreciate it.  Thank you for the opportunity.  The team at AEA and I are dedicated to bringing this show to you because we believe that knowledge  and information is the foundation of successful regenerative systems.  At AEA, we believe that growing better quality food and making more money from your crops  
**[0:43:54-0:43:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:43:54):**  is possible.  And since 2006, we've worked with leading professional growers to help them do just  that.  At AEA, we don't guess.  We test.  
**[0:44:04-0:44:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:44:04):**  We analyze.  And we provide recommendations based on scientific data, knowledge and experience.  We've developed products that are uniquely positioned to help growers make more money  with regenerative agriculture.  If you are a professional grower who believes in testing instead of guessing, someone who  
**[0:44:20-0:44:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/high-quality-wheat-production-with-claudia-carter/#t=0:44:20):**  believes in a better, more regenerative way to grow, visit advancingecoag.com and contact  us to see if AEA is right for you.  Thank you for listening and we look forward to working with you.  