### Regenerative Agriculture Podcast  (2020-10-15)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:00:00):**  Hi friends, this is John and this is the Regenerative Agriculture podcast.  This interview is a must listen for anyone interested in biological agriculture.  James White describes how plants farm the soil microbes much in the same way that we  farm livestock.  Plants absorb microbes whole and extract nutrients from their cells, while the same microbes  
**[0:00:24-0:00:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:00:24):**  change the behavior of potential pathogens to become beneficials.  The science described in this conversation is going to revolutionize our understanding  of how plants absorb nutrients from living soils.  Hi friends, welcome back to the Regenerative Agriculture podcast.  Today, I'm delighted to be here with Dr. James White from Rutgers University, plant pathologist  
**[0:00:48-0:00:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:00:48):**  and a researcher whose work is going to give us a very different perspective on plant pathology,  susceptibility to soil-borne pathogens, and to plant absorption of nutrients.  James, I'm very happy to have you here and to be able to have this conversation.  I was first exposed to your work when some colleagues pointed me to some of the white  papers and the work that you've done on endophytes and seed vector endophytes.  
**[0:01:11-0:01:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:01:11):**  What are the impacts of endophytes on plant health and performance?  Thank you John, I'm very happy to be here.  Endophytes are really in all plants and we haven't recognized until very recently and  many people still don't, but the traditional view has been that if you have a microbe of  bacterium or fungus associated with a plant, it's usually a pathogen.  
**[0:01:37-0:01:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:01:37):**  But in fact, healthy plants contain bacterial endophytes in the tissues of the roots especially,  but also going into the leaves and the shoots and also fungal endophytes in all of those  tissues as well.  It just so happens that bacterial endophytes are much more common in plants than fungal  endophytes.  
**[0:01:56-0:02:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:01:56):**  And they actually are a feature of a healthy plant.  If plants lose their endophytes, they no longer will grow properly, seed germination rates  will go down and the seedlings will be susceptible to disease and stress and all kinds of other  problems and nutrient deficiencies as well.  So healthy plants need their endophytes.  
**[0:02:22-0:02:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:02:22):**  So you're describing that endophytes also play a role in nutrient absorption, but I  guess perhaps before we go there, what exactly is an endophyte?  Okay, an endophyte is any microbe that will enter into tissues of plants and in some cases  those microbes, well, in many cases they'll be soil microbes, but they'll go into the  plant tissues and they will not cause any type of disease or any outward symptoms.  
**[0:02:53-0:02:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:02:53):**  Plants may in fact appear healthier when those endophytes are there and they'll be healthier  when the endophytes are there.  So the important thing about an endophyte is that it does not cause disease.  So essentially, endophytes are organisms that have a symbiotic relationship with a plant  that live inside plant vascular tissue.  
**[0:03:11-0:03:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:03:11):**  I think many of us as growers and agronomists, we perhaps the extent of us thinking about  endophytes is in the context of producing endophyte-free fescue.  Do all plants have these endophytes?  All plants have endophytes and it's not just the fescue grasses and the rye grasses and  so forth.  
**[0:03:28-0:03:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:03:28):**  All plants have endophytes and it's not just the vascular tissues.  It really is all of the tissues of the plant can get endophytes, can have endophytes in  them, even to the extent that they go inside the plant cells.  So there's all kinds of endophytes and they tend to be distributed all over the plant  tissues.  
**[0:03:48-0:03:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:03:48):**  Where did they originally come from?  How does the plant first attract these symbiotic organisms and how did they develop their symbiosis  with the plant over the course of a growing season?  Okay, that's a good question.  For example, if you consider the fungal endophytes of grasses, they actually will, at least many  
**[0:04:05-0:04:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:04:05):**  of them, will come with the seed.  They're already in the seed, they come from the mother maternal plant and then they'll  colonize the plant and grow into the aerial parts of the plant in the fungus well.  These endophytes are called epichloroendophytes.  It used to be neotyphodium but they will grow in between the cells and the aerial parts  
**[0:04:24-0:04:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:04:24):**  and the leaves and the combs and into the seeds with those seeds developed from ovaries.  But all plants will have bacterial endophytes and in some cases yeast endophytes that will  come from the soil and they will colonize with a seed germinate.  In some cases they're actually seed transmitted so they go in the seed and at the same time  these seedlings, once they germinate, they'll have the ones that are seed transmitted then  
**[0:04:50-0:04:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:04:50):**  they'll attract some others from the soil.  And then they'll cultivate, the plants actually will cultivate those microbes at the root  tip meristem.  Right around that meristem there is a zone in which the plant is secreting exudates and  these are carbohydrates, mostly carbohydrates but also organic acids and some other amino  
**[0:05:11-0:05:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:05:11):**  acids in some cases right in that exudate zone.  So they'll cultivate those microbes there, attracting some from the soil and then they  will actually internalize the microbes at the root tip meristem.  And what I'm describing is the rhizo-phagy cycle and rhizo-phagy root, rhizo for root  phagy for eating, root eating so these plants actually will internalize those microbes into  
**[0:05:36-0:05:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:05:36):**  the root cells just underneath that exudate zone at the root tip.  And then those microbes being internalized will actually convert into protoplast stages,  naked protoplasts, they'll lose their cell walls and that actually is in response to  the root cell secreting superoxide or reactive oxygen onto those microbes and that, we know  that causes them to lose their cell walls because we can actually paralyze the rhizo-phagy  
**[0:06:08-0:06:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:06:08):**  cycle by suppressing superoxide formation using carbon dioxide and then those bacteria  that are internalizing the cells don't convert into protoplasts.  So but once they convert into protoplasts they are actually circulating around those  root cells around the periphery and what they, they don't go into the cytoplasm but instead  they go into what's called the paroplasm that is the space between the cell wall and the  
**[0:06:33-0:06:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:06:33):**  root cell plasma membrane so they're really outside, technically outside the cell but  their membrane, the plasma membrane of the microbe and the plasma membrane of the root  cell are but up against each other, you know next to each other and we think that that  is an important element in establishing the ability for nutrients to flow between the  microbe and the plant and the plant and the microbe and what happens is we think of cells,  
**[0:07:02-0:07:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:07:02):**  root cells as somewhat static but actually they undergo a lot of what's called cyclosis,  cyclosis and this is streaming and that is the cytoplasm circulates around and that causes  the microbes actually to circulate around the cell so the plant cell is moving those  microbes at a certain set rate as it obtains nutrients from the microbes but the plant  also propagates those microbes, a few microbe cells enter but then they make a lot, many  
**[0:07:36-0:07:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:07:36):**  more cells in the process and what happens then is the microbe will trigger root hair  development and as those root hairs elongate the microbe protoplasts will be ejected out  into the soil again where they'll reform their cell walls and go out and acquire soil nutrients  and then be attracted back again to the root tip meristem and then enter again so that's  why we call it the rhizophage cycle because there's a cycle between the soil and the plant  
**[0:08:09-0:08:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:08:09):**  and we think that's important for nutrient transfer to the plant.  Wow, James you've just said so much that needs to be unwrapped.  One of the topics that I'm really passionate about is seeking to understand how plants  absorb microbial metabolites and how they absorb nutrients because I'm persuaded from  a lot of field experience that the historical model of plants simply absorbing primarily  
**[0:08:39-0:08:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:08:39):**  simple ions is at the very least incomplete if not largely incorrect.  So what you're describing is that plants are actually absorbing entire microbes into the  roots how does how do they absorb the entire microbe cell at once?  So that's a that's a good question there are a couple hypotheses we don't really know the  actual explanation we haven't proven either but this process was actually discovered by  
**[0:09:06-0:09:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:09:06):**  Australian group Queensland Australian group of investigators and they they actually gave  it the name rhizophage the rooting name but they proposed that what's happening is that  the plant cells themselves are engulfing the microbes and bringing them in.  We posed an alternate hypothesis but again which is not neither of which are proved but  that the plants are actually manipulating the bacteria causing the bacteria to degrade  
**[0:09:36-0:09:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:09:36):**  their way into the cell in other words to use their cellulases or glucanases or other  enzymes to eat through the wall and then once the microbes get through the wall then they're  susceptible to the plant superoxide and then the plant supports superoxide on them which  causes the looser cell wall but also is a way in which the microbe can be controlled  by the plant so that the plant can't I mean the microbe cannot cause any damage to the  
**[0:10:09-0:10:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:10:09):**  plant cell itself or the root cell.  The next important question becomes once plants have absorbed these microbes and you now have  this entire microbe inside the cell it's lost its cell membrane because of exposure to superoxide  how do those nutrients contain within those naked cells or those membraneless cells then  move into the plant cells themselves?  
**[0:10:35-0:10:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:10:35):**  Well it's we have a model for what's going on and it is it is diffusion of those nutrients  into the to the root cell in other words the movement of the microbes around the periphery  of the root cell circulating those microbes around will actually break down concentration  gradients of nutrient concentration gradient so that those nutrients can flow more readily  and flow faster into the plant cell so we we think it's diffusion across those two membranes  
**[0:11:05-0:11:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:11:05):**  but you know they're also likely or is some active transport we know for example that  when we put the microbes into plants one thing that we that we see is that nitrate transporters  get upregulated and the nitrate transporters nitrate transporters in the in the plant cell  in the root they're actively through the expense of ATP energy they're actively transporting  nitrate into the cell so it's a combination of diffusion and an active transport mechanisms.  
**[0:11:40-0:11:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:11:40):**  In an earlier podcast interview I hosted Jerry Pollack from Washington University who's done  some fascinating work on the types of water formation that are formed inside cells and  what he defined as the fourth phase of water and I believe his there's some significant  overlap between in his work he described or his foundational research describes a possible  mechanism and a means for cellular absorption of macromolecules which I think is something  
**[0:12:08-0:12:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:12:08):**  that would be worth digging into and trying to understand a bit better and I don't fully  understand all of Jerry's work myself so I'm not really able to describe it as well as  I would wish but I think important question to be asked here is what proportion of a plant's  total nutritional requirements can be supplied through this process of rhizophagy if plants  have the capacity to absorb entire microbes and then utilize their nutrients how much  
**[0:12:33-0:12:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:12:33):**  nutrition can be supplied to a plant by this mechanism?  It's a really good question we know that plants can absorb nutrients straight out of solubilized  nutrients and soil water for example but there are plants that actually grow without soil  and they those plants for example one of them is resurrection fern for example that would  grow on the surface of bark and so there's no soil there so whatever nutrient and those  
**[0:13:02-0:13:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:13:02):**  resurrection ferns have roots that are just loaded with these bacteria so presumably most  of the nutrients from the resurrection fern it's actually getting with the help of the  bacteria that are undergoing rhizophagy cycle in the roots of the resurrection fern.  There are also we did some studies on some sedges that grow in the island of Bonaire  the Dutch Antilles and these sedges will actually grow into the little rock crevices little  
**[0:13:34-0:13:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:13:34):**  craters in the rock where the with the sedge will grow and so there's no soil there so  whatever these sedges are consuming they're not getting from a fertile soil environment  they're living off the surface of the rocks and these sedges are again loaded with rhizophagy  microbes so the microbes themselves have to be aiding and of course we know other plants  a lot of wild non-cultivated plants do perfectly well with no fertilizer of any sort they survive  
**[0:14:07-0:14:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:14:07):**  so presumably they're surviving on whatever is solubilized in the soil but also through  the rhizophagy cycle and the plant cultivation of these microbes and extraction of nutrients  from the microbes so there's some you know kind of anecdotal then evidence that some  plants can rely very very heavily on obtaining nutrients from their microbes but we don't  have detailed measurements and comparisons I could indicate that in experiments that  
**[0:14:37-0:14:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:14:37):**  we've done where we grew grasses on a substrate that contains isotopic nitrogen 15N nitrogen  when we have the microbes there the plants can obtain about 30% more of the nitrogen  than when the microbes are not present so potentially the rhizophagy cycle at least  in some plants is 30% of their nutrients in general or at least nitrogen and in other  plants it may be nearly 100% of nutrients so there's it could be quite variable.  
**[0:15:15-0:15:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:15:15):**  The example of the sedges that you provided reminded me of a phenomena that I've observed  a number of times when I'm out hiking in the woods and we see trees and large plants growing  out of a bare rock face out of a cliff and I've always wondered about that phenomena  what sustains those trees and how are they able to derive nutrition in the almost complete  absence of soil in fact I think you could say the complete absence of soil in some of  
**[0:15:42-0:15:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:15:42):**  these environments so.  Yeah no just to comment on that John the plants like willows or poplars Sharon Dotty has done  work where she looks at they've studied poplars and willows and growing in those types of  habitats and their conclusion and the evidence they've gotten is just nitrogen fixation occurring  with microbes that are going into the tissues of the plant.  
**[0:16:08-0:16:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:16:08):**  So just to make sure I understood that correctly are there is there actually nitrogen fixation  happening from endophytes or epiphytes on the leaf surface?  Yeah they're endophytes they're endophytes.  Is this process happening inside the plant tissue where the plant is absorbing N2 gas  from the air?  
**[0:16:25-0:16:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:16:25):**  That's the proposal there is there is good evidence that that is happening you know besides  having in the rhizophagy cycle besides having nutrients that are mobilized from the soil  going into the plant you also may in some plants have some nitrogen fixing microbes  that are entering into the tissues and perhaps the cells themselves of the plants and are  able to fix nitrogen and transfer that nitrogen to the plant.  
**[0:16:56-0:17:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:16:56):**  We don't know exactly how that's happening you know there are some ideas about it we're  working on that ourselves but there's nothing firm to really describe the mechanism at this  point.  So what are the implications of this research for agriculture and crop production in the  future?  
**[0:17:14-0:17:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:17:14):**  Well I think the main point is that these microbes are present in all plants they're  important in the plants.  We need to conduct agriculture to manage soils and to manage plant seeds for example so that  we maintain those microbes in the soil and also in the plant.  So in the past we thought well it's not so critical you know we can just keep trimming  
**[0:17:44-0:17:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:17:44):**  of the soil and that's where some nitrogen fertilizer on it and that's what it takes  to grow a plant.  But in fact what happens when we do that is we destroy soil communities and also by removing  the opportunity for the plants to actually cultivate microbes to get nutrients we also  weaken the plant because what happens the plants will when they internalize the microbe  
**[0:18:11-0:18:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:18:11):**  they will also use the oxidative interaction they will interact those superoxide onto the  microbe and that causes the plant itself to upregulate antioxidants and to become more  oxidatively stress tolerant you know oxidative tolerance to stresses and so the plants that  are cultivating microbes are more stress tolerant than plants that where we're squirting nitrogen  and other fertilizers on them.  
**[0:18:39-0:18:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:18:39):**  You know they've got to get their own nutrients they're hardier than if we just give them  you know liquid fertilizer.  So an example of we've got to be mindful of what we're doing to the plants is for example  cotton.  With cotton we plant cotton typically by removing we prepare the seed by removing the hairs  
**[0:19:04-0:19:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:19:04):**  on the seed or the cotton fibers on the seed by dipping this cotton and acid so it's called  acid dilinting and the acid actually will destroy all the fibers off the cotton seed  and it so happens that many of the of the microbial endophytes are actually vectored  in those cotton fibers and on those cotton fibers and on the surface and crevices on  the surface so when we put acid there we're killing all those microbes and then when you  
**[0:19:30-0:19:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:19:30):**  when we germinate the cotton seed what we get is a seedling that is weak it doesn't  have its microbiome doesn't have its defensive microbiome no microbes are on the surface  and then they're susceptible the seedlings are susceptible to disease and so with cotton  what we have to do in its cultivation is put lots of pesticides and fungicides and nutrients  to grow that cotton so it's been considered a it's considered a dirty crop because of  
**[0:20:03-0:20:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:20:03):**  everything that we need to put on it in order to cultivate it which is contaminating the  environment.  So you know if we if we change the way we grow cotton which would be for example to  consider the microbes then we may instead of removing all the fibers with acid we might  use some other process that's less destructive of the microbiome and that should provide  
**[0:20:27-0:20:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:20:27):**  a healthier cotton crop that requires fewer fertilizers and protective pesticides and  so forth to grow it.  Same thing with some certain seeds are some grass seeds for example bermudagrass the way  it's treated is the husk is removed off the bermudagrass seed and then the husk actually  cover carries all the microbes carries most of the microbes on the seed so it's removed  
**[0:20:59-0:21:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:20:59):**  and then they coat the seed with fungicides and other kinds of you know some fertilizers  in some cases in order to protect the seed from disease and the reason all that disease  protection is necessary is because we've removed the protective microbes and the protective  microbiome from the surface of the seed.  James you you raise so many questions in different directions I'd like to take this conversation  
**[0:21:27-0:21:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:21:27):**  in but I guess perhaps a starting and opening question is you described the implications  of the seed vectored endophytes for cotton what other crops suffer from the challenge  of having their endophytes being destroyed you mentioned bermudagrass immediately my  thoughts go to our small grains where we also have the husk removed from the seeds that  we're planting as well are there any similar implications for small grains?  
**[0:21:51-0:21:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:21:51):**  Believe it or not for for example like wheat and rice the microbes are the vector on the  seeds are pretty hardy like for example with wheat the seed actually has some vagination  in it and those microbes can get in there and and resist they can survive in there so  they're they're really with wheat it's a really it's hard to get rid of the surface microbes  but you know if if there is this tendency now to put coatings on fertilizer coatings  
**[0:22:25-0:22:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:22:25):**  and fungicide coatings on seeds and those coatings may be and in many cases are impacting  the the native microbiome that's probably not probably not good for the micro for the  seed vectored microbiome and it may not be good for the soil microbes either the especially  if they're inhibitors of microbes those seedlings actually need to recruit some microbes in  the environment and if there's inhibitors on this on the seed itself they may restrict  
**[0:22:59-0:23:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:22:59):**  those microbes to colonizing the seedling so any kind of a seed treatment needs to be  examined closely to make sure it's not inhibiting microbes and in fact it may be better to be  adding microbes to the to seeds in order to improve that microbial association with the  seedling and improve attraction of new microbes to the to the seedling yeah even even without  fully knowing and being aware of the impacts of these endophytes just in the conversation  
**[0:23:34-0:23:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:23:34):**  mycorrhizal fungi inoculation has become quite popular recently and i never it never did  seem to make much sense to consider adding a mycorrhizal fungi and at the same time to  add a fungicide that just seemed rather oxymoronic and what you're describing is that it's even  more important or equally as important with the endophytes what are the impacts of non-fungicidal  treatments such as soaking seeds with the hot water to try to remove bacterial pathogens  
**[0:24:05-0:24:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:24:05):**  such as bacterial spec on some of the vegetable crops well that's a good that's a good question  hot water depends on how extensive of an exposure it is it's probably not significant the many  of these endophytes that i'm talking about on the seed are are pretty resistant and so  they're in a they're in a dormant condition in the seed and they you can actually hit  them with you know chlorox treatments that you would think would sterilize them and many  
**[0:24:36-0:24:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:24:36):**  of them some of them at least can survive so hot water i think is not it is not going  to be that problematic i think i i wouldn't i wouldn't worry about that it would be some  inhibit some more potent inhibitors that might inhibit the microbes from becoming vegetative  once the seed begins to germinate that's that's i would worry about more the washing or even  using hot water that's not too you know that's not such a sterile you know if it works it  
**[0:25:09-0:25:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:25:09):**  depends on how how long it is you can actually do heat treatments that for example if you  put seeds in a 50 degree centigrade oven and you left them for a couple of days the embryo  wheat seeds for example the embryos will survive but you will kill some of the microbes and  so that would that would actually that that considerably weakens your seedling but hot  water washes for brief periods of time that should be okay there's been this growing trend  
**[0:25:35-0:25:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:25:35):**  in the just very recent in the last year or two or more and more growers are considering  planting what they term as planting seeds naked without any seed treatments at all and  observing very nice responses rather than treating them with fungicides it seems to  me that what you're describing is an explanation or a mechanism for why they might be getting  a crop response without treating with fungicides yes i i actually think that is that's probably  
**[0:26:00-0:26:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:26:00):**  what's going on there the what we see with many of these microbes is that the microbes  themselves will actually besides going into the seedling and stimulating seedling growth  and stress tolerance providing nutrients go into the soil and going back to the ceiling  when they go to the soil one of the things that these bacteria will do for example pseudomonas  or bacillus will actually go out into the soil and colonize fungi there potential pathogens  
**[0:26:33-0:26:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:26:33):**  like fusarium for example damping off a diseased fungus they'll colonize them and cause them  to have reduced virulence okay so they'll take some of the nutrients from those fungi  and then they'll they'll the fungus will not be virulent and it won't cause disease so  they don't kill the fungus but instead they will colonize the fungus and weaken the fungus  reduce its virulence so that it cannot cause disease or doesn't cause disease and in fact  
**[0:27:02-0:27:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:27:02):**  in some cases those soil fungi will actually become endophytic fungi in the plant things  like fusarium oxysporum for example that once it's colonized by the by the bacteria it grows  slower and it will grow onto the plant and so long as the bacteria are there there's  no disease caused by the by the fusarium you know so you have this this disease protection  phenomenon that happens with the with the bacteria so if you have a healthy plant microbiome  
**[0:27:33-0:27:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:27:33):**  seed seed microbiomes seedling microbiome and you pair that with a healthy soil then  you should have much reduced disease in those in those seedlings much reduced damping off  and so forth you know so the healthy the microbiome itself is protected if you remove that microbiome  if we take the seeds and we sterilize them to remove the surface microbes then the fusarium  will just eat up the seedling the they're highly susceptible without their without their  
**[0:28:07-0:28:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:28:07):**  microbes on so it's very important in terms of disease protection.  Wow this is this is really incredible one of the another topic here that I'm really  passionate about and interested in learning more is this development of disease suppressive  soils and what you just described is seems like a fundamental of disease suppression  is it possible for these organisms to develop resistance to the process that you're describing?  
**[0:28:33-0:28:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:28:33):**  You know I don't think so and the reason why is it's not like a fungicide it's not  like you put the fungicide on and that will that actually will kill the bacteria but with  these I mean not the bacteria but the fungus the fungal pathogens that will kill the pathogen  and then any pathogen that isn't killed it will then begin to grow and then you have  the development of resistance to your fungicide but with these microbes they don't they don't  
**[0:29:03-0:29:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:29:03):**  kill the fungus instead what they do is they'll colonize the fungus and they will use actually  in some cases like for example bacillus will use lipopeptides and produce secondary metabolites  that will then like lipopeptide will go into the fungus membrane and it will cause nutrient  leakage out of that out of those fungal hyphae through the lipopeptide pores through the  pores that the lipopeptide forms in the membranes of the of the fungus and then the bacterium  
**[0:29:36-0:29:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:29:36):**  can get those nutrients and and then actually take the nutrients and take them back to the  plant where they could provide bacillus can provide it to the plant but you don't have  this killing phenomenon where the microbe is forced to the fungus is forced to develop  resistance so you don't have that resistance instead you just have a essentially now a  fungus that has reduced virulence and it doesn't cause disease it becomes essentially part  
**[0:30:03-0:30:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:30:03):**  of this oil microbial community that benefits the plant itself so you don't you should not  have resistance to bacteria that are not killing the fungi themselves.  James this is this is really incredible my understanding in the past had been that when  you have this beneficial soil microbiome you can prevent infection of fusarium let's say  for example and it will change the fusarium from being a potential pathogen to being a  
**[0:30:34-0:30:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:30:34):**  saprophyte a possible decomposer but what you're describing is actually it's not a saprophyte  but it's changing the behavior to actually be a beneficial and to be an endophyte and  enhance the plant so you're saying that these quote-unquote pathogens given the right microbial  environment can actually support and benefit plants.  Yes no doubt about it.  
**[0:30:56-0:30:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:30:56):**  That's incredible.  No doubt about it yeah no we see that in experiments in laboratory experiments you know they're  much less complicated than soil.  With soil you have you know huge diversity of microbes out there interacting but in simpler  experiments more controlled experiments where we have say a fungus and we have one or two  
**[0:31:18-0:31:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:31:18):**  bacteria we see what exactly what we see is that rather than being pathogenic having the  fungus there increases the benefit to the plant.  What we think is going on is that the fungus that would be pathogenic is then acquiring  from the soil perhaps like you said through saprophytic activity some nutrients that then  the bacterium can get and carry back to the fungus I mean carry back to the plant.  
**[0:31:48-0:31:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:31:48):**  But at the same time we have that fungus that would have been a pathogen instead it's not  and some of the mycelium will actually go into the tissues of the plant but not cause  disease and so that establishes a situation where nutrients can flow into the plant more  readily and so the plant does benefit.  So that healthy microbiome in the soil but also in the seed and the seedling will improve  
**[0:32:15-0:32:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:32:15):**  the performance the ability of the plant itself to grow develop survive become hardy and healthy.  And I want to you know I didn't mention one thing I want to mention now and that is that  the microbes actually are necessary for the seedling to develop properly.  In other words if we take all the microbes away from a seed for example and grass seed  or any kind of crop plant and then we germinate that seed what we see is that the seedlings  
**[0:32:51-0:32:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:32:51):**  don't develop properly.  What frequently what we see is that the roots no longer show a gravotropic response where  the roots normally go down into the soil instead the roots will stay on the surface of the  soil or stay on the surface if we do agar these in media agar agar media or agarose  media where the roots will just stay on the surface.  
**[0:33:12-0:33:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:33:12):**  And the other thing we see is roots don't form root hairs without these bacteria in  them.  In other words to form a root hair those microbes need to be inside those root cells.  If they're not there you have no hairs you have hairless roots.  So that what we think is going on is that the microbes themselves are actually participating  
**[0:33:36-0:33:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:33:36):**  in the process of root development.  And what we think is going on is that the microbes are secreting we think it's nitric  oxide which is one of the signaling molecules the plant responds to but the other possibility  is it's ethylene and we're trying to determine right now if what exactly the microbes are  secreting that cause that root hair elongation.  
**[0:34:00-0:34:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:34:00):**  So we're leaning towards nitric oxide because that's also an antioxidant that the microbes  because they're inside the cells and they're getting bombarded with superoxide that they  may be secreting nitric oxide as an antioxidant to degrade the or to react with to neutralize  the superoxide produced by the plant.  But the plant perceives that superoxide or it could be ethylene we don't know we're still  
**[0:34:24-0:34:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:34:24):**  trying to determine the plant perceives it as a signal to elongate for the hair elongation.  So we think that the microbes are secreting the signal that causes root hairs to elongate.  So we remove all the microbes we get no root hair elongation.  This raises a question about the impact of these symbiotic microbes and these endophytes  on the development of the overall root system architecture and structure and strength.  
**[0:34:51-0:34:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:34:51):**  There's been a recurring conversation about the differences between I'll just generic  referred to them as older varieties or even older hybrids and more modern genetics.  And this has been a conversation in fruit and vegetable production as well as in grain  production and the general dialogue is something along the lines of that older varieties used  to have much larger more robust root systems.  
**[0:35:16-0:35:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:35:16):**  They appear to observe absorb more nutrients.  The fruit itself appeared to have a higher nutritional content.  The plants appeared to be better at absorbing some of these trace minerals such as cobalt  and nickel etc.  Then many of the more modern varieties and more modern hybrids and I understand that  
**[0:35:32-0:35:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:35:32):**  I'm making some very broad generalizations here.  But what are the what do you think would be the impacts are the impacts of these endophytic  organisms in developing the structure of the overall root system and also the overall nutritional  absorption capacity of the crop itself?  Yeah that's a good question.  
**[0:35:51-0:35:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:35:51):**  I would of course you know from my perspective because I study endophytes have for 40 years  now proposed that endophytes are being lost in many of our crops due to the way we're  managing those crops and managing seeds and storing seeds and not managing to maintain  the microbes.  What I add to that that the way we use our fertilizers if for example if we're cultivating  
**[0:36:21-0:36:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:36:21):**  a plant cultivating plants using constant fertilizer applications we make it so that  the plant no longer needs these microbes and in fact it's entirely possible that some of  these microbes are being lost and over time in this process and that as they're lost we  lose some of the functionality in terms of these micronutrient absorption capacity and  content in plants.  
**[0:36:51-0:36:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:36:51):**  So that's one factor.  There actually was an experiment published just a couple years ago in the national the  proceedings of the National Academy of Science where some investigators cultivated a wild  they went out and they collected a wild tobacco plant and then they brought it into cultivation  and it was an annual tobacco so every year they would cultivate it and then store the  
**[0:37:17-0:37:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:37:17):**  seed in the winter and then go back and cultivate it the next year and so forth.  So what they found was that after about seven years the wild tobacco started seeing a disease  serious actually wilt disease caused by some fungi that they didn't see in the wild populations  and so what they did was they went back to the wild populations of that tobacco and then  they started isolating microbes out and they isolated some bacteria out there a number  
**[0:37:45-0:37:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:37:45):**  of things and then they started treating their plants their seed that they've been in cultivating  cultivation for several years and they found that when they treated them with their bacteria  put their bacteria back in that their disease disappeared and so what could what could happen  in what apparently happened in their process of cultivation is they lost these beneficial  microbes in the seeds and that led to the disease that they were getting.  
**[0:38:19-0:38:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:38:19):**  So the same thing could be happening in our cultivation of some of our crops.  The older varieties may have been more efficient because they had have those microbes there  and using our modern cultivation methods we may have lost many of those microbes.  Of course you know for any given situation one would want to go in and do some experiments  to see if that hypothesis that idea holds up and that is that they're losing microbes  
**[0:38:46-0:38:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:38:46):**  you know but you know that's a study for some other time.  Have we lost any of our microbes and any of the endophytes to some of the more modern  breeding techniques?  Is it possible that some of our more modern hybrids don't have the same?  Yeah that's a good that's a good question.  
**[0:39:05-0:39:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:39:05):**  When you consider for example some of our modern corn we know that some of our modern  varieties of corn tend to be very dependent on nitrogen applications nitrogen fertilizer  and other fertilizers and part of the way that those hybrids those modern hybrids were  developed is they have gone through tissue culture protocols that are very that sterilize  the microbes and of course they're cultivated using fertilizer applications and so the microbes  
**[0:39:34-0:39:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:39:34):**  aren't really needed on the plant in order to in order to acquire nutrients and so when  we've examined some of our modern corn varieties we see that the few microbes in those corn  seedlings coming from modern corn whereas we look at Indian corn and tropical corn certain  kinds of tropical corn we see that they're loaded with these microbes and we can also  see that there's a certain amount of nitrogen fixation that's occurring in association with  
**[0:40:03-0:40:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:40:03):**  the corn the corn seedlings itself and probably the mature corn plant.  We are actually actively collaborating with Walter Goldstein at the Mandamin Institute  in Wisconsin where he actually is trying to put back into corn into tropical corn other  corn varieties by breeding the natural nitrogen use efficiency nutrient use efficiency and  nitrogen fixation back into these wild or these corn varieties so that they no longer  
**[0:40:37-0:40:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:40:37):**  will be so dependent on liquid fertilizer applications.  Yes, I know Walter and the work that they've been doing at the Mandamin Institute some  really incredible work on producing higher lysine higher carotene and my fine in addition  to corn varieties that require less nitrogen applications so I would encourage anyone who's  interested in in that area any of our listeners to connect with Walter and see how you may  
**[0:41:02-0:41:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:41:02):**  be able to help and contribute to his efforts in breeding and developing some of those traits  into our corn varieties.  In reference to what you just said James about the modern varieties and seed produced by  cell culture propagation not vectoring these endophytes if the endophytes are not on the  seed you mentioned earlier that they can also recruit some from the soil are there different  
**[0:41:25-0:41:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:41:25):**  species in the soil versus what is vectored on the seed what impact does that have on  the seedlings vigor and emergence and overall health over the course of the plants entire  life?  Yes, so this we know that seeds vector microbes and most of many of these microbes are we  can actually cultivate them things like bacillus and pseudomonas methylobacter and some pantoia  
**[0:41:53-0:41:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:41:53):**  for example some other species and in some cases yeast seed saccharomyces can actually  be vectored on seeds and be internalized into the roots most of those microbes that are  vectored on the seed at least the ones that are tightly held on the seed are actually  participate in the rhizobiology cycle so they go between the soil and they go between the  internal spaces of the root the cells internal in the root and that periplasmic space between  
**[0:42:19-0:42:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:42:19):**  the plasma membrane of the root cell and the cell wall so they'll actually go there and  then cycle between the soil so and of course the soil things like bacillus and pseudomonas  they're on the plant but they're also out in the soil and they can cycle between the  two probably at the root tips there continuously but as the roots mature you know other kinds  of microbes will colonize the surface of the groups but you won't you don't tend to have  
**[0:42:50-0:42:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:42:50):**  then the microbes going into the root cells that happens only at the root tips themselves  but you do have microbes on the in the in the intercellular spaces of the of the roots  and also in the leaves and the shoot the upper the aerial parts of the plant you have the  microbes colonizing the shoot tissue and being internalized into the shoots and the leaves  themselves and we know that for one reason because when the because we can isolate them  
**[0:43:24-0:43:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:43:24):**  from shoots and because we can visualize them in some cases in some plants in the shoot  tissues but when the seed is formed in the ovule we can find them in those ovules and  on those seeds as they develop so essentially these microbes are being vectored throughout  the plant they may not be doing exactly the same thing in different parts of the plant  you don't have for example you don't have rhizophagy happening in the shoot tissue that  
**[0:43:50-0:43:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:43:50):**  only happens in the root tissue but those microbes go into those tissues and so they're  definitely affecting those aerial shoot tissues as well so the plants are really fully colonized  all parts of the plant by the mic by certain microbes methylobacter is one you see in almost  all plants you described the mechanisms by which these organisms can change potential  pathogens to endophytes in the rhizosphere do you have any insights into whether this  
**[0:44:19-0:44:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:44:19):**  might also be a possible disease resistance mechanism on the leaf surface or in the upper  aerial parts of the plant that's a that's a good question yes if fusarium goes up for  example into the into the shoot tissues and we know that for example the grass fusarium  is everywhere the microbes the bacteria are there with them and in many cases we can see  the bacteria there in association with the with the fusarium in the in the plant tissues  
**[0:44:49-0:44:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:44:49):**  it is not as significant in the in at least the mature leaves for example as it is in  the growing tissues you would have most of your microbes down in the roots you would  have a subset of microbes that are active up in the shoot tissues going into growing  and part of that is because that's where the nutrients are but as those tissues mature  the nutrients become greatly reduced and those microbes if for example it's bacillus what  
**[0:45:24-0:45:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:45:24):**  they'll do in the older tissues is they will turn into they will form as the nutrients  diminish they'll form endospores and they'll become dormant in those tissues we actually  see that in vanilla orchids and vanilla orchids the orchid will actually cultivate it's a  vine vanilla orchid and it'll cultivate bacteria down in the meristem shoot the growing shoot  of the plant it is almost like a base like structure and it'll grow a little biofilm  
**[0:45:56-0:46:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:45:56):**  that will contain some bacteria multiple species one of them is bacillus and it'll grow in  that little biofilm and as those leaves form in from the shoot the bacillus will grow into  the tissues and actually go in the cells in the shoot and they will then grow there as  those tissues mature and as the tissues as the leaves mature the bacteria will convert  from the vegetative phase where there's lots of nutrients in the growing shoot to the endospore  
**[0:46:28-0:46:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:46:28):**  phase down in the older leaves and you can actually just look with a microscope and you  can see these endospores forming as those leaves mature and it so happens that it actually  is part of the biology of the vanilla vine because what happens with vanilla vine is  that vine may form some lateral shoots and as those lateral shoots form from buds the  endospores will then wake up in those shoots and then that tissue will then contain the  
**[0:47:00-0:47:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:47:00):**  growing meristem shoot meristem will then contain the bacillus again in it so that it  is protected from disease and developments of the shoot is benefited by presence of the  bacteria.  This reminds me of a question that I should have asked when you were describing your tobacco  example what was it about the efforts of collecting and saving seeds and propagating them, farming  
**[0:47:28-0:47:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:47:28):**  them over seven generations that resulted in the loss of the beneficial organisms and  the endophytes on the seed itself?  Do we need to begin thinking differently about saving seeds?  How can we prevent that from happening with our modern seed varieties?  Well that's a really good question.  
**[0:47:44-0:47:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:47:44):**  It must, we don't know obviously at this point, but it must be due to the way the seeds are  stored over the winter period or since they were produced.  What normally happens with seeds in nature is there's no dry storage.  Instead seeds will usually fall to the ground where they will be exposed to soil moisture  and air moisture and when we take all seeds, collect them and cultivate them, typically  
**[0:48:16-0:48:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:48:16):**  what we do is we take those seeds and we put them in a dry, cool environment.  We maintain the moisture as minimal and what happens in those situations is your bacteria  that are present on seeds are really not able to multiply and there also is no additional  recruitment of microbes to the seed surface from, for example, the soil.  So what that means is that we may have some microbes there but we don't have nearly the  
**[0:48:53-0:49:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:48:53):**  community that we would have if those seeds were let to mature in the normal ecology,  which typically is on soil or maybe for tobacco, I don't know, maybe hanging on the scape,  on the stalk through the wintertime.  So these, and we do know that from experiments that we've done in my lab that if seeds, for  example, turf seeds are produced in very, very dry environments, those turf seeds don't  
**[0:49:28-0:49:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:49:28):**  develop the microbiomes that they do when it's a moisture environment.  So the development of that microbial community on a seed is important and so we alter it  when we bring it into cultivation and then put it under controlled moisture conditions.  That doesn't mean that we need to drastically change how we treat the seeds but it may mean  what we want to do with some seeds is to put microbes, put a healthy microbiome back onto  
**[0:50:01-0:50:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:50:01):**  those seeds before we plant them.  So these microbial seed treatments are a way that we might be able to counteract problems  that develop from cultivation and the way we're treating seeds before we plant them.  I know that one of our most popular products within advancing eco-agriculture has been  our BioCoat Gold seed treatment, which is a combination of bacteria and fungus.  
**[0:50:24-0:50:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:50:24):**  And it's certainly, I mean, the number of different organisms that we're describing  vary from species to species.  So it's, I'm not sure if we have enough knowledge or information yet, at least I know that I  don't, to even consider putting together a product that would be appropriate for all  species.  
**[0:50:40-0:50:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:50:40):**  Eventually, we may get to a point of sophistication where we have something that is crop specific  or plant specific because I expect that will probably be where we need to be to get the  greatest crop responses.  I realized in listening and thinking about our conversation, Jim, that we've, you've  alluded to several times the impact of these endophytes on root hair formation and that  
**[0:51:01-0:51:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:51:01):**  being a result of nitric oxide or ethylene signaling.  But we haven't really spoken about the direct impact and we haven't really set the stage  for that.  I'd love for you to expand a little bit on what is the impact that these endophytes really  have on root hair development?  
**[0:51:17-0:51:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:51:17):**  What's the role that they play?  How does it really work?  Well, they, without the, without the microbes, you don't get hairs at all.  And of course that means a direct effect would mean you have reduced absorption of nutrients  from the, from the soil itself.  
**[0:51:32-0:51:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:51:32):**  What we actually see when we do experiments where we remove microbes from the seeds and  then we take those microbes and put them back on the seeds and then compare the two situations,  what we actually see is that seedlings or the seedlings where we have the microbes there  will show increases in, big increases in potassium and sulfur, nitrogen, you know, moderate increases  in nitrogen, sulfur, zinc, magnesium, macro and micro nutrients.  
**[0:52:06-0:52:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:52:06):**  So the microbes appear to be, seems like our evidence suggests at this point that potassium  is really important for the rhizobatin cycle with the microbes there.  And we have two lines of evidence that suggest that.  One is the experiment that I described where we put, take, remove the bacteria and then  we put the bacteria back on and then measure nutrients.  
**[0:52:29-0:52:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:52:29):**  The other is when we will use carbon dioxide, the carbon dioxide in the environment, in  the air actually, in the atmosphere.  If we elevate that carbon dioxide into the, grow plants in chambers with elevated carbon  dioxide, what we actually see is that we will inhibit the rhizobatin cycle and that's because  the carbon dioxide will inhibit superoxide formation.  
**[0:52:54-0:52:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:52:54):**  And when you don't have superoxide formation, the bacteria go into the root cells but they  don't form protoplasts.  They just form, and that means they don't replicate very rapidly but there also is no  nutrient transfer to the plant if there's no superoxide.  And in those situations what we see is that potassium, where we have elevated carbon dioxide,  
**[0:53:16-0:53:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:53:16):**  potassium collapses and nutrients like sulfur, zinc and calcium for example are also reduced.  So we see nutrient reductions but potassium is really impacted when we do that.  So those two lines of evidence suggest that potassium collapses without the rhizobatin  cycle and without those microbes and that's significant because potassium is really what's  considered by some to be the quality nutrient and that you have better plants, healthier  
**[0:53:50-0:53:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:53:50):**  plants, less disease, plants that grow a little bit better when that potassium is there.  So you, you know from the nutrient point of view, the rhizobatin cycle is really contributing  to that, to the quality of the crop.  Did that answer your question John?  Yes I think so.  
**[0:54:10-0:54:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:54:10):**  I'm interested in learning more about the experiments where you elevated carbon dioxide  levels.  We work with many greenhouses where it's a common management practice to increase CO2  levels up to 1100 parts per million and we see a significant growth and yield response  but you're indicating that that would have the potential for an impact on nutrient absorption  
**[0:54:30-0:54:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:54:30):**  and this entire endophytic relationship.  Yeah that's exactly right.  Okay I'll tell you first thing, we elevate the CO2 likely much higher than the 1100 parts  per million that you're talking about.  1100 parts per million is actually in a normal soil CO2 level.  
**[0:54:50-0:54:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:54:50):**  We get that in experiments in which we grow plants down in the soil, the CO2 will sometimes  go pretty high and normal atmospheres like 450 parts per million, something along those  lines or 410 parts per million, something like that currently but if you elevate it  significantly then it will begin to inhibit and it'll be notable inhibition and I'll give  you an example, right now there's some work being done over the past 10 years or so on  
**[0:55:22-0:55:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:55:22):**  elevated CO2 levels in crops.  What they do is they essentially will have an enclosure and grow crops there and then  they will squirt carbon dioxide out into the area, into the enclosure area where the crops  are growing and then they will grow it through the season and then they'll harvest the crops  and what they have found is that in that kind of under those experimental conditions they  
**[0:55:47-0:55:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:55:47):**  see reducing nutrients into crops.  What's happening is you are seeing this growth spurt typically happening which the plants  seem to be doing more photosynthesis and producing more fruit but what's happening with those  fruits is they're actually losing nutrients like iron and magnesium and zinc and the possibility  for that, that's got a lot of people worried that as the environmental CO2 goes up, carbon  
**[0:56:18-0:56:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:56:18):**  dioxide goes up, atmospheric CO2, that crops will become less nutritious because of that.  What we think is happening in those situations is that the CO2 is becoming very high in the  soil because CO2 is heavier than the air and will just settle down and go into the crevices  of the soil so the CO2 in the soil becomes elevated, likely becoming more elevated than  your 1100 parts per million that you're putting in the greenhouse to improve growth production  
**[0:56:56-0:57:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:56:56):**  and under those circumstances the rhizome phage cycle is being impacted.  In other words the CO2 is inhibiting superoxide in those roots and then that's inhibiting  the preventing nutrient extraction from the microbes that go into the roots.  That's the model.  That's what we think could be happening in those experiments.  
**[0:57:16-0:57:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:57:16):**  With the 1100 parts per million that may not be so high and the way you apply it is I think  it's with a good mixture in the air and I guess I'm not sure how you put it but I suppose  there's a CO2 generator there and you're mixing it well in the greenhouse so it doesn't accumulate  in the soil in the greenhouse so it doesn't become inhibitory.  Although it might be necessary to check those plants to make sure that they're not reduced  
**[0:57:46-0:57:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:57:46):**  in nutrient content.  Well we are measuring nutrient content biweekly with a SAP analysis and we haven't noticed  any significant differences between those and outdoor field grown tomatoes although  we have slightly different varieties and that can contribute to differences as well.  I think one of the pieces you mentioned earlier is worth understanding better.  
**[0:58:08-0:58:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:58:08):**  You described how plants that do have this end of fight relationship are more resilient  to oxidative stress and I personally have been working to learn a lot more about redox  signaling in the environment, in the atmosphere and trying to understand better how plants  and overall ecosystems can be more reduced and have a higher antioxidant level.  Can you describe for us a bit about the impacts that it will have when plants are more resistant  
**[0:58:35-0:58:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:58:35):**  to oxidative stress and what that means?  Yes, so if a plant is resistant to oxidative stress that means it's essentially more stress  tolerant because most stresses are actually oxidative in nature.  After heat stress for example, that actually the heat stress causes oxidation in the tissues  and that would do damage if the plant is not resistant to that oxidation to occur.  
**[0:59:06-0:59:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:59:06):**  Same with heavy metals or salt for example, salt is the same way or any heavy metals they  actually will induce reactive oxygen in the tissues and that will do damage to the tissues  unless the plant is resistant to that oxidative stress.  What the endophytes do, the bacterial endophytes, because they go into the tissues and the cells  and then they cause the plant to secrete reactive oxygen onto the microbe, the plant has to  
**[0:59:37-0:59:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=0:59:37):**  up regulate its own antioxidants and its own stress mechanism, oxidative stress mechanisms  in order to be resistant to the reactive oxygen that it is producing itself and putting onto  the microbes.  So that's kind of a side effect of having the endophytes there is this up regulation  of oxidative stress mechanisms, antioxidants and so forth.  
**[1:00:05-1:00:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=1:00:05):**  This brings me back thinking about the root system and root system development.  In your publications on the rhizophage cycle you described how some bacteria survive the  superoxide production in the root system and then initiate the production of root hairs.  What happens with them after that?  Where do they go and what is their relationship with the plant for those organisms?  
**[1:00:29-1:00:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=1:00:29):**  Those microbes that actually survive the cycle inside the root cells, they are as protoplasts,  all this bacteria or yeast, they are actually ejected back out into the soil through little  pores that form into the tips of the root hairs.  And then just kind of what happens is as the cell grows, the root hair grows, it will almost  like a syringe squirt those microbes out through those pores into the soil.  
**[1:01:03-1:01:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=1:01:03):**  And then once they are in the soil, once they are outside the tip of the root hair, outside  the wall, the root hair will continue to put nutrients out through that tip and around  those hairs that will actually fuel the bacteria, provide carbohydrate at least for the bacteria  to then rebuild their cell walls and then become soil competent microbes again.  Of course they are hungry microbes now because many of their nutrients have been extracted  
**[1:01:37-1:01:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=1:01:37):**  optimatively, go back and acquire new nutrients and of course the plant is actually manipulating  these microbes.  And so what the plant is doing is at the growing tip again, it's secreting these exudates.  So these microbes will then be reattracted to the tip, hopefully fully charged with nutrients  and one function we think of root hair has actually is besides absorbing nutrients, it's  
**[1:02:05-1:02:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=1:02:05):**  to squirt those microbes out into the rhizosphere where more nutrients occur.  So that's the elongation out into the rhizosphere.  We know that when there's more microbes in the root hair, the root hairs become longer  and they'll grow further and further out into the rhizosphere as they eject those  nutrients, those microbes can then acquire more nutrients and then be attracted back  
**[1:02:29-1:02:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=1:02:29):**  to the root tip meristem where those exudates are, where the microbes are being cultivated.  So we think the whole rhizophagy cycle process really is a case in which plants are farming  microbes, soil microbes in order to acquire nutrients from them.  Wow, plants farming microbes and then consuming them, which means that plants are not vegetarians.  Yeah, apparently not, right?  
**[1:02:57-1:03:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=1:02:57):**  It's really incredible that plants are farming these organisms in much the same way that  we farm livestock.  Yes.  Jim, if people want to learn more about your work and the rhizophagy cycle and the various  topics that we've discussed, do you have any resources or references that you would refer  
**[1:03:14-1:03:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=1:03:14):**  people to?  Well, in 2018 we published a paper in microorganisms, MDPI microorganisms journal on rhizophagy  cycle and they can easily find that just by googling rhizophagy cycle and microorganisms  and it should pop up.  And so yeah, I suggest they read that.  
**[1:03:39-1:03:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=1:03:39):**  We also published something more recently, 2019 review article in Pest Management Science  on actually application of endophytes in horticultural crops.  That might also be worth looking at.  That's more of a general case in which we do discuss the rhizophagy cycle.  Thank you for those and for our listeners, we'll link both of the articles that James  
**[1:04:06-1:04:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=1:04:06):**  has mentioned to this podcast episode so you'll be able to find it directly in the show notes  as well.  James, what is something that we haven't yet spoken about that is important?  Well, I would like to summarize that all plants are doing this.  All plants that have root hairs are internalizing microbes into their root cells and that we  
**[1:04:30-1:04:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=1:04:30):**  really are just beginning to understand the significance of that.  This is really just in the past three, four, five years have we started developing an understanding  of what's going on.  Potentially it's very significant and it may, could easily alter how we do agriculture.  In the future, we may be much more cognizant of what we're doing to the soil microbiome  
**[1:04:57-1:05:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=1:04:57):**  and what we're doing to the plant microbiome in the process of cultivating plants.  It could revolutionize how agriculture is conducted in the future, but we're at the  beginning of it.  It is really exciting for me as well because it gives us a framework to really understand  how plants can absorb microbial metabolites and microbes and not only absorb nutrients  
**[1:05:21-1:05:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=1:05:21):**  from simple ions.  James, thank you so much for sharing your insights and your work and I look forward  to having more conversations with you here in the podcast in the future.  Thank you, John.  I enjoyed it very much.  
**[1:05:34-1:05:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=1:05:34):**  The team at AEA and I are dedicated to bringing this show to you because we believe that knowledge  and information is the foundation of successful regenerative systems.  At AEA, we believe that growing better quality food and making more money from your crops  is possible.  And since 2006, we've worked with leading professional growers to help them do just  
**[1:05:55-1:05:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=1:05:55):**  that.  At AEA, we don't guess, we test, we analyze, and we provide recommendations based on scientific  data, knowledge, and experience.  We've developed products that are uniquely positioned to help growers make more money  with regenerative agriculture.  
**[1:06:10-1:06:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-plants-absorb-living-microbes-and-convert-soil-pathogens-into-beneficials-with-james-white/#t=1:06:10):**  If you are a professional grower who believes in testing instead of guessing, someone who  believes in a better, more regenerative way to grow, visit advancingecoag.com and contact  us to see if AEA is right for you.  Thank you for listening, and we look forward to working with you.  