---
title: How Insect Pests Identify Unhealthy Plants with Tom Dykstra
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.

---

### Regenerative Agriculture Podcast  (2018-04-17)  
### Author(s): John Kempf  

**[0:00:00-0:00:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:00:00):**  Hi friends, I'm John Kempf, hosting this podcast. I am passionate about developing regenerative  agriculture systems that improve soil health, produce crops that are completely resistant to  diseases and insects, and produce fruit of such an exceptional quality that we can have a legitimate  
**[0:00:16-0:00:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:00:16):**  conversation about growing food as medicine. I've discovered that there are many people with  incredible knowledge and information about soil and plant systems and how to develop regenerative  agriculture systems. However, much of this knowledge and this information is scattered,  
**[0:00:33-0:00:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:00:33):**  it's found all over the place. Some of it has been published in peer-reviewed publications,  but there are many incredible stories and a lot of knowledge that has not been published,  and that hasn't been shared with many people. I started Advancing Eco-Agriculture in 2006 to  
**[0:00:49-0:00:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:00:49):**  bring this knowledge together in a more coherent fashion and incorporate it into products and  growing systems that growers can easily put into practice. It's my personal mission to have these  regenerative agricultural systems become adopted globally and become the mainstream, the status  
**[0:01:06-0:01:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:01:06):**  quo against which all other growing systems are compared. To help achieve this goal, I want to  share the knowledge that we have learned in the last decade and make it available to everyone.  While we have developed products at AEA that embody the principles of regenerative agriculture  
**[0:01:22-0:01:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:01:22):**  systems and make them easier for growers to apply, this knowledge and these principles can be applied  anywhere. And when they are applied properly, they will always increase farm profitability  and resilience to climate stress. If you have any questions, suggestions, comments, or ideas,  
**[0:01:40-0:01:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:01:40):**  topics that you would like for me to discuss, please connect on LinkedIn or on Twitter,  where my username is at visionbuilder7, or you can also email me at john at johnkempf.com. I would  very much like to hear from you and to hear your feedback. Be sure to subscribe to this podcast,  
**[0:01:59-0:02:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:01:59):**  and thank you very much for listening. Enjoy the show. Greetings, friends, and welcome to the  Regenerative Agriculture podcast. On this podcast, we explore the science and the practical  application of regenerative agriculture ecosystems, how to regenerate soil health,  
**[0:02:12-0:02:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:02:12):**  crop health and quality, and increase farm profitability. Our goal is to give you clear,  easy to understand, and actionable information that you can implement on your operation right  away. On this episode, I'm very excited to welcome Tom Dykstra to our show. Tom is a good friend of  
**[0:02:27-0:02:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:02:27):**  mine and has done some extraordinary work in the area of entomology and plant insect communication  systems that I'm very excited to discuss and to also hear your thoughts and feedback on. Tom,  welcome to the show. We're very excited to have you here. Happy to be here, John. Ready to divulge  
**[0:02:45-0:02:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:02:45):**  and talk, and thank you so much for the invitation, and I hope that this is productive for you and for  the listeners as well. Tom, you've done some fascinating research over the years, both of  your own and also some with your mentor, Philip Callahan. What are some of your most memorable  
**[0:03:00-0:03:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:03:00):**  moments that led you to where you are today? Some of the most memorable moments for me were probably  getting fired at the University of Florida, which led me to study under Phil Callahan. So,  that would probably rank near the top. Had that not happened, I certainly would not have been on  
**[0:03:17-0:03:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:03:17):**  the path that I am right now. So, once that path began and I was looking at the time with  flea larvae, I was playing with them, a seemingly uninteresting insect or so I thought at the time  that led into my PhD project and allowed me to explore world of insect bioelectromagnetics,  
**[0:03:35-0:03:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:03:35):**  which then opened up a whole new world to me that I had never been exposed to, either in academia  or very little in the literature and even less in books. So, this has been an exciting journey for  me. The reason why is because it's a new field and the only ones I know who are even remotely  
**[0:03:55-0:04:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:03:55):**  in the field are in the military. So, therefore, from academia, it's kind of quiet on this front,  but I do enjoy what I'm doing here and I'm happy that I had a chance to explore this fascinating  area of insect bioelectromagnetics. Insect bioelectromagnetics sounds fascinating. Can  
**[0:04:13-0:04:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:04:13):**  you describe for us what that is? What are you actually working on? Not a clue. I couldn't tell  you anything. I'm just making up the word. The word has to do with the electromagnetic waves and  how they are influenced by organisms, thus the name bio. So, electromagnetic simply be involved  
**[0:04:29-0:04:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:04:29):**  in the pure waves and bioelectromagnetics would be how these waves influence life. Now,  these waves could be external to the organism, let's say environmental, or they could be internal  so that you would have communication going on within the organism as to what information needs  
**[0:04:46-0:04:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:04:46):**  to pass from one organ to another or simply one part of the body to another, or in some cases,  to actually amplify the message to make it more easily discernible to an insect or even any other  animal. So, the bioelectromagnetic field is relatively large because, I mean, they have a  
**[0:05:05-0:05:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:05:05):**  journal out and there are many journal articles you can find, but the field specifically of  insect bioelectromagnetics is not. That is a much, much, much smaller field. So, for those  who are involved in the insect side of it, you can see that they are few and far between. But  
**[0:05:21-0:05:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:05:21):**  the field itself is relatively small, which I guess gives me a certain amount of anonymity,  which is required because I do run a research laboratory and we are not allowed to publish.  And so, all of the research that we do, most of the research that we do is kind of kept under  
**[0:05:37-0:05:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:05:37):**  wraps and we have had some absolutely wonderful discoveries that I really hope that someday I  will be able to divulge to the public. When you speak of insect bioelectromagnetics,  what is the impact or the potential impact of your work on agriculture and what might farmers  
**[0:05:53-0:05:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:05:53):**  be able to apply in the future? That's a difficult question because when you get involved in the pure  bioelectromagnetics, you're looking at these fields that really are not measurable and for  the most part should not be measurable because the farmer is not going to be out there with the type  
**[0:06:11-0:06:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:06:11):**  of equipment in order to measure these fields. So, in a direct sense, there would be very little  impact. In the more general sense, there is a much larger impact that is simply not something that  most people are aware of and that is the energy and how it is acquired by plants. So, photosynthesis  
**[0:06:29-0:06:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:06:29):**  is certainly a well-known phenomenon that everyone is familiar with. You find in textbook after  textbook, whether it be in biology or plant physiology. And so, that's kind of a starting  point in the field of bioelectromagnetics is the agriculture. If you can optimize photosynthesis,  
**[0:06:46-0:06:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:06:46):**  once you optimize photosynthesis, which has that electromagnetic component,  biochemicals and organic chemistry and others as well, but once you optimize that, you then  optimize Brix level because the relationship between photosynthesis and Brix is about as linear  
**[0:07:03-0:07:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:07:03):**  as you can get. I mean, the more a plant photosynthesizes, the higher the Brix reading is  and the higher the Brix reading is, the healthier the plant. And when you have a healthy plant,  this is where you bring it into agriculture and it becomes very important to a farmer. Because  
**[0:07:17-0:07:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:07:17):**  when you're raising healthy plants, you don't have to bring in, for example, all of the pesticides  that are being used today, whether it be herbicides, insecticides, fungicides, nematicides,  it doesn't matter what side you're using, they're all doing the job of killing life and you're  
**[0:07:34-0:07:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:07:34):**  trying to, as a farmer, what you're trying to do is you're trying to augment life and this  augmentation can take many different forms. So the sun and the energy that comes from it is  certainly an obvious one. There are less obvious electromagnetic waves out there. The human  
**[0:07:49-0:07:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:07:49):**  frequencies are relatively well known and have been studied by atmospheric sciences for a long  time. Also, would have their influence too. And once you are surrounded by all these frequencies  and be able to absorb the energy or to use this as a communication piece, then you now have healthy  
**[0:08:07-0:08:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:08:07):**  plants, healthy crops growing in a very healthy environment. And so understanding that and ways  to optimize the electromagnetic component is only going to benefit the farmers. So if I were giving  a talk and I've given a few talks on energy in agriculture to help them understand these fields  
**[0:08:25-0:08:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:08:25):**  and how to optimize them and how to prevent the farmer from getting in the way or putting up any  blockages to these frequencies. I would love to hear more about your thoughts regarding  photosynthesis. I mean photosynthesis is so foundational that when you drive the increase,  
**[0:08:42-0:08:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:08:42):**  you're able to increase photosynthesis, then you have all these other benefits of increasing carbon  sequestration, improving plant health disease and insect resistance. This is something that we  focus a lot of attention on and usually approach from a biochemistry perspective of thinking about  
**[0:08:59-0:09:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:08:59):**  how we can optimize photosynthesis. I have a couple of questions for you. One is how much do  you think it's possible to increase photosynthesis above what is common perhaps or normal depending  on how you chose to define that word? How much can it be increased? And looking at photosynthesis  
**[0:09:14-0:09:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:09:14):**  from a bioelectromagnetics perspective, what tools would you use to optimize it and to increase it  if possible? Okay, well your first question and I'll probably forget your second question as I'm  describing the answer to the first, but how much can you increase it? You can increase it  
**[0:09:28-0:09:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:09:28):**  substantially and the reason why I know that is because most of the crops that I've had a chance  to take a look at are between four and eight bricks. Now once you get up to roughly right  around 12, all serious insect damage stops and once you get up to about 14, you have a genuinely  
**[0:09:46-0:09:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:09:46):**  healthy plant that is producing healthy food that you know can be consumed by a human being and will  lead to a long life, but because we are so far below what we consider to be let's say optimal,  optimal would be 14 and above. 12 is kind of like the minimum so that you don't get the  
**[0:10:02-0:10:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:10:02):**  insect damage, but because we're right now between four and eight, I can tell you unequivocally that  we can increase photosynthesis considerably simply because we have many plants right now which are  suffering, suffering in the sense that they're not working up to their potential and so because  
**[0:10:20-0:10:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:10:20):**  they're not working up to the potential, I know that we absolutely, I mean even getting to nine  which is still not a healthy plant is an improvement over a lot of the plants which I've  had a chance to look at whether it be plants out in someone's backyard or whether it be crop plants  
**[0:10:35-0:10:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:10:35):**  out in a farmer's field, they're all dealing with very low bricks and therefore the plants are  compromised and so really the only way you can only go is up because the only, once you go down,  plants die and there's really nothing which can save them at that point. So you do have a range  
**[0:10:52-0:10:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:10:52):**  and then if you want to maintain a plant at a very low bricks, let's say one or two, you have to feed  it every day. There's no way around it. So anyone who has ever played the game of golf has walked  on plants that are running about one or two and if you go even one day without feeding that grass  
**[0:11:10-0:11:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:11:10):**  under your feet, it will suffer considerably because they have very little photosynthetic part  above the ground. Their root system has been absolutely compromised due to usually what is  being applied and so that's the extreme case where you can actually, in a very artificial way,  
**[0:11:27-0:11:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:11:27):**  keep a plant going by continually feeding it. It's a force feeding operation and the same thing goes  with the crop plants. Now the crop plants, the farmer is not out there feeding them on a daily  basis such as you would find on the golf course. That would be obviously the exception but when  
**[0:11:44-0:11:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:11:44):**  you're dealing with a crop situation, the farmer is going to be feeding his crops at the minimum.  He's going to be doing it once or twice during the season but probably more often than that  depending upon what type of plant it is, whether it's a perennial or not. So it's a matter of  
**[0:11:59-0:12:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:11:59):**  getting the photosynthetic rate up and this means certainly, as I kind of alluded to,  is not putting up any of the blockages. Now some of the blockages that I'm kind of alluding to that  I discussed a little bit before are certainly and absolutely pesticide. The reason why this is so  
**[0:12:15-0:12:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:12:15):**  is because pesticides are killing all of the microbes in the soil and the microbes can be  selectively killed. So one herbicide is going to selectively kill certain microbes, an insecticide  is going to kill a certain set of microbes as well, a fungicide will kill a certain set of  
**[0:12:31-0:12:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:12:31):**  microbes and even a nematicide. We have nematicides down here in Florida. They're not as common in the  rest of the country but each one of these is doing its job to kill. Now when these microbes are gone,  they are no longer able to hold on to the energy that is in their body and so you have now given  
**[0:12:47-0:12:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:12:47):**  up a massive energy source and this is where the electromagnetics comes in is that if you do not  have those microbes in there, there is no energy in the soil and so this sequestered energy, each  microbe, just to give you an idea, is about half a volt. If you take all of the energy found in a  
**[0:13:02-0:13:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:13:02):**  microbe, a little bacteria, it's about a half of a volt. Now this does not mean that there is this  massive amount of energy that if you stepped on some ground with millions of microbes it would  blow your foot off or it would catapult you into the air. 15 feet, what this means is that this is  
**[0:13:18-0:13:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:13:18):**  clean stored energy in the, found in the membranes, it's found in chloroplasts, endoplasmic reticulum,  everything that is inside the cell has a nice clean storage form of this energy and that is  then made available to the plant either directly because sometimes the plant can use the  
**[0:13:36-0:13:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:13:36):**  nutrients if the microbe dies and microbes are dying all the time and then the some of the  nutrients can be taken up because everything is bioavailable when a microbe dies or you can have  a more indirect result when the microbe is actually releasing minerals to the plant so  
**[0:13:52-0:13:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:13:52):**  these microbes can break down minerals far more efficiently than plants and without these microbes  you're no longer able to get the minerals in and these minerals are the constituents, these are the  cofactors that are used to keep photosynthesis going hot and heavy so to speak. So without these  
**[0:14:11-0:14:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:14:11):**  minerals photosynthesis suffers and we see lower breaks and so the relationship how everything seems  to be kind of connected together through the microbes, the energy because the plants want to  put their roots into a high energy soil and if it's been sterilized they don't have that and so  
**[0:14:25-0:14:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:14:25):**  you then become incumbent in order to feed the plant, to force feed the plant and this is not the  way plants were designed to live is to be force fed on a regular basis so to kind of answer your  question and I'm trying to tie as many things together as possible so that you can see the  
**[0:14:40-0:14:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:14:40):**  importance of energy and it's not just about that which is above the ground the leaves and  photosynthesizing but also getting those minerals from the soil so that you can assist photosynthesis  going on in the leaves are all important and have a component and making sure that the energy system  
**[0:14:56-0:15:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:14:56):**  of plants are revved up and doing exactly what they're supposed to be doing and we can easily  measure this with a very simple measurement of bricks. There are many different ways of studying  plant health bricks is by far the easiest thing to do if you're a farmer there's really if you're  
**[0:15:12-0:15:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:15:12):**  going to be doing something on your own it's probably one of the easiest things to do. There are  other more comp you can send things out to a laboratory you can get tissue analysis you can  play all types of complex games scientific laboratories can get involved but if you need  
**[0:15:26-0:15:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:15:26):**  something that can be done right there on the spot it will be be bricks and so therefore when talking  to farmers if you you need to get them in that mentality to understand that there's an easy way  to tell whether their plant is healthy it will also have an impact on their crop which of course  
**[0:15:40-0:15:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:15:40):**  has to deal with their yield and money and in the long run. One of the pieces that we have been using  a lot and one of the tools that we've been using a lot in lieu of the refractometer or brick is  a sap analysis because it actually measures the actual measured sugar content and the the  
**[0:15:57-0:16:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:15:57):**  refractometer is a very useful and valuable tool but the challenge that many growers have with  using it regularly is just the variability in the inconsistency that can occur based on moisture and  sunlight levels and etc etc. So it's something that we do use but we actually use a lot of sap  
**[0:16:14-0:16:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:16:14):**  analysis results as well to try to remove some of the variability but I have a I have a follow-up  question to what you just described regarding photosynthesis so summary my summary of  understanding what you describe is essentially you are looking at plant growth from a biophysics  
**[0:16:32-0:16:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:16:32):**  perspective rather than from a biochemistry perspective and you're saying that energy for  plants doesn't just come from photosynthesis and sunlight it actually comes from soil biology  because of the voltage contained within microbial cells and soil profile and that if you really want  
**[0:16:48-0:16:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:16:48):**  to increase that the first step is do no harm and stop killing them is that a summary of what you're  describing? I think that would be a probably the worst the most worthwhile summary in order to say  yes that would be one of the first steps to do is to stop using the pesticides if we can help it  
**[0:17:05-0:17:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:17:05):**  there are some individuals who will need to wean themselves off over the course of one two maybe  even three seasons but to be honest with you I'm not sure if I would be an advocate of three seasons  I think that weaning yourself off of it should be done as soon as possible certainly within a  
**[0:17:21-0:17:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:17:21):**  season if you need to but there are ways in order to speed the process up in order to get the soil  healthy again so that you can start farming the way that God intended. What are some of those ways  of speeding up the process? I think that's the question that I'm really trying to get to is  
**[0:17:36-0:17:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:17:36):**  obviously we can stop and discontinue or kind of as we suggest earn the right to discontinue the  use of these pesticides but then what can we do to increase the energy flow in the soil profile?  Okay then the what I usually ask a farmer is for example how many how many acres do you have  
**[0:17:52-0:17:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:17:52):**  and let's just say they say a thousand I have a thousand acres so I would say all right how much  are you willing to give up how much can you afford not to produce on sometimes they come  back with well I can't afford anything but when you really press them and get them to the to the  
**[0:18:05-0:18:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:18:05):**  point where you could say how much can you afford to lose they'll usually tell you something like  five to ten acres and that would be an excellent starting point to to work with and I would say to  allow the ground to go fallow for at least one season and what you're going to do is you're going  
**[0:18:21-0:18:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:18:21):**  to allow the weeds to grow that are that want to grow on that soil because they're going to do  their best to improve it. You want to disc the weeds into the ground because all of that organic  matter needs to go back into the soil make sure it does not is not on the surface because it will  
**[0:18:37-0:18:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:18:37):**  get burned off in a slow oxidative process by the sun so get that stuff into the ground so every time  the weeds get to be you know you consider to be bad you would want to go out there and disc them  back in and the second thing that you would want to do is to put out about five pounds per acre of  
**[0:18:53-0:18:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:18:53):**  sugar as often as you can afford as often as you can afford that's different for every farmer. Why  would you want to do something like that? The reason why is when you put sugar out you increase  the microbial content tremendously and the fastest way to get rid of toxins in the soil is through  
**[0:19:09-0:19:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:19:09):**  microbes. Why? Because the microbes have the glutathione transferase they have the esterase  they have the p450 they have all of the equipment necessary in order to break down those toxins so  you want to increase the level of the microbial activity tremendously almost to it to an unhealthy  
**[0:19:25-0:19:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:19:25):**  degree and get the microbes cleaning out the soil because they do not like to be in with all those  pesticides and they will do their part to clean it out and the fastest way to do that is to throw  massive amounts of sugar at the at the ground. There are some other things that can be done  
**[0:19:42-0:19:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:19:42):**  they're a little bit sometimes more expensive and if you have deep pockets you can go that route but  this is usually the simplest and the cheapest thing in order to clean out your soil in as  little as one season. Now you can do it in less than one season depending upon how toxic the  
**[0:19:57-0:20:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:19:57):**  ground is once you've started to clean things out and you're disking weeds back in you can improve  the the ground tremendously in about one year and you're going to be able to plant on that so it's  not like I'm destroying the farmer's livelihood he's still going to be able to take care of his  
**[0:20:13-0:20:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:20:13):**  family he's let's say got almost a thousand acres left he's only putting aside let's say five acres  but his production on that five acres will far exceed that which he is getting on the rest and  this is a process that needs to continue that is done rather painlessly there are some individuals  
**[0:20:29-0:20:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:20:29):**  who would like to switch over immediately that's a little more painful but if you want to do this a  little bit slower you can do so relatively inexpensively and that is the best way to clean  things out so if you continue to use the pesticides because you feel you have to then I would choose  
**[0:20:43-0:20:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:20:43):**  some high ground necessarily to start with the five acres the reason why is because the runoff  I don't want any pesticides getting on that land that you've just spent time cleaning up. Now if  you let the ground go fallow for 10 years in almost 100% of the cases everything will be taken  
**[0:20:59-0:21:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:20:59):**  care of almost 100% so there have been studies been done on this and it's relatively well  documented but no farmer wants to let his ground sit for 10 years and that's why there are ways of  cleaning things up quickly and the fastest way it's not through chemicals there's no chemical  
**[0:21:13-0:21:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:21:13):**  you can get from sigma chemical or any other place that's going to get rid and detoxify those  chemicals better than microbes and so by putting the sugar out you increase the microbial content  so high that you you know you probably wouldn't even want to be putting plants on there but  
**[0:21:29-0:21:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:21:29):**  that's not the idea that the idea is to clean your soil up as quickly as possible if you can put five  pounds down a week that that would be ideal because you will clean out the ground very quickly  some farmers they've tried to put it up 10 pounds I don't usually advocate that because I don't want  
**[0:21:46-0:21:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:21:46):**  it's getting a little sticky and I don't want the nozzles getting all stickied up but some people  have compensated with a little more water to put out there I mean that's your your choice but if  you're putting about five pounds of acre you're going to be in good shape so if you feel you can  
**[0:22:01-0:22:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:22:01):**  up it your nozzles aren't getting all gunked up you can go ahead and do that and that will be the  easiest and the fastest way of not only increasing the carbon content of the soil but getting rid of  those toxins and you will have saved yourself many many years of trouble because this is a process  
**[0:22:18-0:22:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:22:18):**  that would have happened over time but you can speed up considering that sugar goes for in my  supermarkets about a dollar a pound so we're not talking about a lot of money here with that so if  you can afford to do five dollars a week then you've simply got the cost of going back and  
**[0:22:32-0:22:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:22:32):**  forth over your field that you have to contend with and I don't think that there's anything  faster than that right now this does go along the line some people have suggested cover crops and  that's really very similar to what I am suggesting the cover crops is allowing things to grow you can  
**[0:22:46-0:22:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:22:46):**  put some sure you can put some cover crops out and they can do their job too and that's also  fantastic as well but the thing with cover crops is there are many different cover crops out there  some people like to do one some people you know you've got compaction problems so you want to use  
**[0:23:03-0:23:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:23:03):**  radishes down here we use ryegrass a lot because we don't have compaction problems but sometimes  there's the difficulty of choosing what cover crop you want to do because the cover crops will also  do a very quick job of removing it but not quite as fast as the sugar because when you put up pure  
**[0:23:18-0:23:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:23:18):**  sugar you will see a massive spike in the microbial content that you will never get from a plant and  you will never get from a cover crop what the plants do is they're releasing between 20 to 70  of their photosynthate back into the soil depending upon how healthy they are and it's a  
**[0:23:36-0:23:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:23:36):**  slow process it goes on 24 hours a day especially at night so they're introducing the sugar into the  soil but they may have some difficulty doing that as as quickly as just giving it a massive dose  and so once the cover crop has taken hold if you wanted to back off of the sugar then you can you're  
**[0:23:52-0:23:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:23:52):**  going to be in pretty good shape at that point make sure that that cover crop is dissed back  into the soil because the mistake is made essentially lawn mow it so to speak where  everything is laid out on the surface because you know they're thinking about soil erosion and  
**[0:24:05-0:24:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:24:05):**  things of that sort but soil erosion will be taken care of you can have bare soil and have very little  soil erosion if you have a high microbial content because the high microbial content leads to a high  fungal content and the high fungal content brings in the glomerul the glomula the having a what's  
**[0:24:23-0:24:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:24:23):**  the name of that glomalin i was thinking i was thinking glomerulite because i'm back in my  insect laboratory here right now but the glomalin comes in there will stick things together and so  you can really prevent soil erosion from occurring by having good healthy soil whereas if it's if  
**[0:24:38-0:24:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:24:38):**  it's not cohesive and it's not bonded together through the glomalin or some other things yes  you can lose the soil quickly but honestly erosion is not so much of a problem in decades past it has  only recently become a huge issue because we have sterilized the soil nothing is holding it together  
**[0:24:55-0:25:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:24:55):**  and anytime wind or water comes along it is easily picked up and tom you've mentioned a number of  pieces that i i want to follow up on you describe the differences a bit between cover crops and  just applying trivia direct and i think this is a fascinating conversation because it's many  
**[0:25:11-0:25:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:25:11):**  agronomists agree that it is very important to keep soil covered with green growing plants and  preferably a diversity of green growing plants for an extended period as much as the year as  much of the year as possible when you look at when you look at the mathematics of what you just  
**[0:25:27-0:25:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:25:27):**  described if most plants are contributing 20 to 70 percent of their photosynthesis to the soil  profile isn't that a much larger quantity than five pounds of sugar per week and why would cover  crops not have a much bigger impact than the sugar itself the cover crops take time in order to grow  
**[0:25:42-0:25:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:25:42):**  so most of the individuals who are putting on the sugar have ground where nothing is growing so the  cover crops over time they will catch up and you are correct when you have a healthy amount of  cover crops they're going to be putting more sugar hopefully assuming their brix levels are  
**[0:25:57-0:26:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:25:57):**  high enough then they will be putting more sugar into the soil but for those individuals i'm sorry  i guess i probably should preface this with some of the farmers that have had to deal with they're  dealing with dead soil so there's no electric very high electrical conductivity high salt soils  
**[0:26:12-0:26:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:26:12):**  nothing is growing not even you know foxtail and kosha and so you've got a situation right now where  we need in order to revitalize the soil and taking care of the salt problem as well as the pesticide  problem can quickly be taken care of because you've got bare ground and that is by throwing  
**[0:26:28-0:26:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:26:28):**  sugar so the sugar is usually a great way to start if you are doing the cover crop soon after  that should be able to catch up relatively quickly especially depending upon the cover  crop and if you've got a variety that's better than using one cover crop there are some advantages  
**[0:26:42-0:26:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:26:42):**  to doing just one and this has to do with machines you know it's easier to go over something if it's  the same cover crop rather than having a variety but if you've got the capabilities of taking  pretty much any of the cover crops and throwing them back into the soil whether it be through  
**[0:26:56-0:27:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:26:56):**  disking or some other means then not only will you have the sugar being thrown into the plant  by the cover crops but you will also have the organic matter the carbon under the soil too  which will be broken down by the microbes and will then add considerably to the carbon  
**[0:27:12-0:27:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:27:12):**  sequestration of the soil so excellent point excellent point you're right there are various  situations that would call more for the cover crops than they would the the sugar so i probably  should have prefaced it with the type of soil that you might be dealing with if you're putting  
**[0:27:27-0:27:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:27:27):**  out sugar on a weekly basis thanks for clarifying that you mentioned that erosion was a much bigger  challenge has become a much bigger challenge recently as compared to historically why do you  believe that is the case well i think i just mentioned it and that's because the microbes are  
**[0:27:41-0:27:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:27:41):**  gone so because the microbes are gone you have fluffy soil that is easily washed away whereas  when the microbes are in there they are they are dying all the time so microbes are dying and when  they die they uh their membrane breaks and you've got you know liquid goo comes out of their system  
**[0:27:56-0:28:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:27:56):**  so you're having millions upon millions upon millions of microbes dying every second in your  soil and that in and of itself is is is a type of goo which helps keep the soil together so if you  sterilize the soil i mean just imagine putting it under a heat lamp and sterilizing it so that  
**[0:28:12-0:28:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:28:12):**  you've got nothing in there right now it is very easy in order to wash that away you're going to  have no moisture you're going to have no microbes and you can blow on that type of soil or sand and  it will easily get blown away or you can put some water on it it will easily get washed away and  
**[0:28:27-0:28:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:28:27):**  this is a situation that was not as serious and decades past that has become more serious because  with the advent of the pesticides which have helped to sterilize the soil and make it far  easier in order for soil to be picked up and deposited somewhere somewhere else got it what  
**[0:28:44-0:28:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:28:44):**  has been something that you puzzled over for a long time would this be agricultural for i mean  am i talking to farmers right now or are we talking about science and we're talking about  science we're talking to i should have perhaps at the beginning but we're talking to agronomists and  
**[0:28:59-0:29:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:28:59):**  extremely and extremely knowledgeable farmers citizen scientists okay okay okay um yeah i guess  i i guess that would be my own research uh we um i don't want to get too much into this uh because  i might get off the beaten path but we have puzzled for over 20 years how insects uh smell  
**[0:29:18-0:29:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:29:18):**  and so this is something which has been a big issue for me we knew that they were smelling  electromagnetically uh but we did not know the process and how it was occurring and so when i say  puzzled over it i mean this is probably at least 10 years pushing 15 where um i was unable to put  
**[0:29:35-0:29:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:29:35):**  the pieces of the puzzle together and so that that has been that this is really my bread and butter  here in the laboratory is to understand how insects smell and even though we knew it was  electromagnetic process was not well worked out though in consulting and understanding how  
**[0:29:49-0:29:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:29:49):**  photosynthesis and rhodopsin and some other proteins work about absorbing energy to understand  how ultraviolet energy is absorbed by certain amino acids and understanding how this process  occurs it has helped me to understand how insects are actually smelling and as of november of 2016  
**[0:30:09-0:30:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:30:09):**  we were able to decipher the insect olfactory coat so as of a year and a half ago we were finally  able to to figure out what the insects were doing to understand what frequencies were involved and  how to determine something like this and therefore new puzzlements have come so even though that we  
**[0:30:26-0:30:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:30:26):**  finally uh after practically my entire professional life is to figure out how they're doing that now  that we've got the system down it's a matter of taking a look and going through and working out  the details now there's understanding not just how insects smell carbon dioxide but to explain to you  
**[0:30:43-0:30:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:30:43):**  why carbon dioxide is detected differently among culex mosquitoes anopheles mosquitoes aedic  tikitos so on and so forth why bed bugs smell carbon dioxide differently why kissing bugs smell  it differently to understand why some lepidoptera butterflies and moss do so and it's really getting  
**[0:31:00-0:31:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:31:00):**  into the details right now of yes we understand how they're doing it but now we understand that  each insect is smelling differently which has helped bring up new puzzlements if i may use that  word again in it so that's that's been the big one that's been the big one so we were happy to solve  
**[0:31:16-0:31:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:31:16):**  it but it was a source of contention for a long time in our laboratory this is a fascinating piece  tom and i know that this is something that many growers are very interested in and above to  understand much better would you be willing and able to dig a little bit deeper into describing  
**[0:31:34-0:31:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:31:34):**  how the olfactory senses work and why some insects are attracted to certain regions where others are  not um i would not be able to discuss with you too many of the details because it is proprietary  information so what i'd be happy to do is discuss in generality if i could please the ins the insects  
**[0:31:51-0:31:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:31:51):**  are smelling with their antenna and with their palps which are some of the mouth parts so when  they're flying through the air they pick up various odorants in the air and these odorants are  vibrating and giving off energy they're absorbing and emitting energy constant as long as they're  
**[0:32:06-0:32:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:32:06):**  above zero degrees kelvin which is absolute zero they are vibrating and these electromagnetic  vibrations can be easily detected by various equipment in the laboratory as well as the  equipment on an insect so they have various uh uh scents i would call them tiny antenna  
**[0:32:24-0:32:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:32:24):**  on the actual antenna proper of the insect and it's these antenna whether it be the antenna proper  or whether it be the smaller scents on the insect which are tuned into very particular frequencies  and these particular frequencies are all important for the particular insect so some insects would  
**[0:32:42-0:32:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:32:42):**  not be tuned into co2 they would have no reason to whereas other insects like mosquitoes would be  tuned into co2 there are certain floral compounds given off by plants that some insects are going to  be attracted to honey bees being prominent among them and then you have certain scents that are not  
**[0:32:59-0:33:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:32:59):**  attractive at all because some insects don't go after flowers extending what i'm talking about  right now there are some plants that advertise themselves as unhealthy and when they do so they  are picked up by other insects and so insects are only tuned in to the unhealthy plants no insect  
**[0:33:16-0:33:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:33:16):**  will ever attack a healthy plant so what they're zooming in on is the unhealthy plant because  digestible healthy plants are not digestible unhealthy plants are so because they can't digest  a healthy plant there's there's no interest in even attacking it so it either has to be injured  
**[0:33:32-0:33:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:33:32):**  or it has to be unhealthy and then by doing so it is now digestible and this is what an insect is  going to attack so beginning of the conversation i mentioned you know how insects are once you get  above 12 bricks really aren't causing any more issues with your plants and once you get above 14  
**[0:33:46-0:33:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:33:46):**  they're really not even landing on your plan except if they just want to rest on it because  they won't be able to take a bite or if they do take a bite they either won't be able to get  through the the plant cuticle or if they do take a bite or even get in the phloem tissue it's not  
**[0:34:01-0:34:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:34:01):**  going to be digestible to them and they'll have to pull out and move on to a different source so  all insects are flying above looking for crop plants that are digestible to them and they  advertise themselves plants advertise themselves as being unhealthy essentially saying i'm unhealthy  
**[0:34:17-0:34:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:34:17):**  please come eat me and so the insect will come in and it will start eating the plant because that's  job our job is to eat healthy plants we have a much more elaborate enzyme system our digestive  systems are designed in order to eat healthy food we don't do well eating doritos all the time we do  
**[0:34:35-0:34:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:34:35):**  do well eating healthy plants and this leads us to be healthy for the insect it's different the  insects do not do well on healthy plants they can starve unhealthy you can take a Colorado potato  beetle and put it on a healthy potato plant and it will not be able to eat it but you can take an  
**[0:34:50-0:34:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:34:50):**  unhealthy potato plant and the Colorado potato beetle will go to town because this is what is it  is it is meant to do and so because insects are only attracted unhealthy plants the unhealthy  plants will advertise themselves they've got certain visible frequencies that they can detect  
**[0:35:06-0:35:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:35:06):**  especially from a distance and they've got certain odors and these odors can be picked up by the  antenna and by the tilla and the insect will move in for the kill so to speak what are some of when  we look at plant health you're talking about healthy plants versus unhealthy plants what are  
**[0:35:22-0:35:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:35:22):**  some of the compounds that serve as insect attractants that we can manage and monitor  you can in general yeah in general you would have to it would really have to be a general thing  generally speaking ethanol is a universal odorant that advertises itself as being unhealthy so a lot  
**[0:35:43-0:35:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:35:43):**  of the plants will release not just ethanol but also various alcohol components not all alcohols  but a lot of alcohols advertise a plant as being unhealthy which is a hallmark of fermentation  fermentation produces the alcohol so when a plant is degrading and it's in trouble and it's  
**[0:35:59-0:36:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:35:59):**  fermenting even in a small way even in even in an imperceptible way it is you know going to be  fermenting in its own way and therefore it will advertise itself so if these odorants are being  released they will be picked up by insects it will change how the plants are perceived so you can  
**[0:36:15-0:36:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:36:15):**  take satellite images of two crop plants and they look different on various images it can be a  visible image there can be an infrared image but they both may be corn they both may be soybean  they both may be anything you can think of but they will not have the same look under an infrared  
**[0:36:31-0:36:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:36:31):**  camera or under a visible camera and this is another way that the plant would use in order to  say oh this is an unhealthy plant i will fly down and i will start eating this is something which is  very profound in the grasshoppers so the locust the locusts worms that you will find you don't  
**[0:36:46-0:36:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:36:46):**  find them so much in the united states but in in other continents the locusts worms are a problem  and it's really quite remarkable because these locusts worms not just millions of individuals  but billions sometimes trillions of individuals will descend upon a very particular crop and take  
**[0:37:02-0:37:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:37:02):**  it all the way down to the roots and then pick up and fly away and they will leave a farmer's field  right next to that exempt and these are the remarkable things that you you realize when you  see stuff like this oh the grasshopper made a decision it made a decision to eat one plant over  
**[0:37:17-0:37:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:37:17):**  another why why didn't it just come down and eat everything we've always been told that grasshoppers  will eat anything and yet there was you know direct proof and some of the images that i have  seen and testimonies of others is that no they actually are very selective now i should tell you  
**[0:37:34-0:37:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:37:34):**  that grasshoppers are less selective than other insects some insects will disappear by about  bricks of eight other insects they will continue to chew on your plants right up through 10 11 12  bricks and once they get to about 12 they will they will lose interest and the grasshoppers are  
**[0:37:51-0:37:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:37:51):**  among them so you can find the grasshoppers among slightly healthier plants for that reason but  you're going to find the aphid the leaf hoppers some of the other homopterous insects once they  get to eight the plant gets to eight they lose interest in the plant and you just won't find  
**[0:38:08-0:38:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:38:08):**  insects on a plant above eight if it's a homopterous insect and those are the ones that  have the beak that they stick into the foam tissue and take a sip from the sugar water that is flowing  around the foam tissue so every insect has its own cut off and so you really have a lot of insects  
**[0:38:24-0:38:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:38:24):**  fall off by the time you get to eight and as i mentioned at the beginning of this you know most  of the crops are between four to eight so a lot of plants are really susceptible to every single  insect that is out there but if you can get above eight you pretty much can take care of your aphids  
**[0:38:38-0:38:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:38:38):**  and your leaf hoppers and psyllids the asian citrus psyllid down here in florida and others  because it's very rare to find a citrus tree that's above eight we've tested a lot of them  and so once you move up the scale other insects fall off at nine ten eleven twelve and at that  
**[0:38:55-0:39:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:38:55):**  point insects really lose interest once you get above 12 and as i said 14 is your is your safe  zone that's a relatively safe zone that you don't have to worry about 12 you know a plant can dip  down and can easily go 10 or 11 on the brick scale on certain circumstances and this is some of the  
**[0:39:11-0:39:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:39:11):**  variety that you were mentioning before is that yeah sometimes it's a little difficult to predict  bricks because there are conditions which allow it they're all sending messages as a scientist i  like to decipher these codes to try and understand what plant is telling us when it was in at a  
**[0:39:26-0:39:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:39:26):**  bricks is 10 one day and the next day it goes down to three and there are very specific reasons as  to why a plant uh would do something like that so if you're going to ask and this may be on your  mind right now john so i'll just answer the question for you but down here we have something  
**[0:39:42-0:39:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:39:42):**  called storms i know the storms are not as common in the rest of the country but down here in  florida we have storms all of the time and so plants you know in a very gentle freak out sort  of fashion when a storm comes in a big storm uh they they shunt all of the sugar down into the  
**[0:39:58-0:40:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:39:58):**  roots and so you could have drastic drops in bricks levels when i talk about bricks i'm talking  about leaf bricks you could have drastic drops in leaf bricks we have tested plants that looked  healthy to us they looked healthy like oh this looks like a healthy plant relatively green leaf  
**[0:40:12-0:40:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:40:12):**  and we'll test it right before a storm and it comes in at one to three bricks one to three i  mean it's based upon readings like that uh and we've even got to the 10th i've gotten 1.1 1.3  uh and you think to yourself how is this plant even surviving well it's just a temporary thing  
**[0:40:29-0:40:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:40:29):**  because when a major storm comes in if the top of the plant is lost uh the uh the sugar that's  in the roots will allow the plant to regrow again once the danger has passed and we've detected  leaves uh in let's say the one to three bricks range but then we have to go deep we pull out  
**[0:40:44-0:40:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:40:44):**  some of the roots and they're coming in at 14 bricks not because the roots are normally at 14  bricks but simply because it's a temporary shunting of the sugar around the plant and see  these are little clues that help you to understand bricks a little bit better so these exceptions  
**[0:41:00-0:41:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:41:00):**  i mean over time and again it's probably because i'm a scientist i'd like to like take a look at  the exceptions to understand it because people will come up and say well i found some some  psyllids on my citrus plant or some leaf hoppers here and we tested it and the plants were coming  
**[0:41:13-0:41:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:41:13):**  in at nine so i don't see what the problem is well you have the plant is never uh at at a uniform  let's say nine bricks there are certain regions of the plant that are going to be a little bit  lower than others and those are the ones that will get attacked so with the case of citrus  
**[0:41:27-0:41:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:41:27):**  greening for example it happens to be one of those diseases that i call it a plug disease  for a simplistic sake a plug meaning it forms a plug it's a carbohydrate plug and it prevents  nutrients from passing into a particular branch which causes the branch to um to uh to go down in  
**[0:41:45-0:41:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:41:45):**  bricks and so therefore that branch will become susceptible so it will advertise itself the Asian  citrus psyllid will come in and some others will come in and because of this uh that branch will  be affected but the tree may be a little bit healthier due to the plug because uh things are  
**[0:42:00-0:42:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:42:00):**  not flowing around the plant the way that they should be and so these are the cases that you run  into is you can have certain parts of the tree or even a branch which have a temporary unhealthy  aspect which can bring in the insect and these are all the exceptions that i realized i'm you know  
**[0:42:13-0:42:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:42:13):**  by talking about the exceptions i'm not talking about the reason the real reason why you do do  rubrics this may be causing some confusion among some of my listeners but by understanding one the  one the generalities of bricks and then understanding all the exceptions helps you to  
**[0:42:26-0:42:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:42:26):**  understand what's going on with the plant and is allowed scientists like me to understand what game  the plants are playing and why when we use sap analysis with many of the farmers that we are  working with one of the fractions that are measured some of the pieces that are measured on  
**[0:42:42-0:42:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:42:42):**  a sap analysis are we are looking at different parts of the nitrogen profile so we're looking at  the entire the total nitrogen in the plant and also looking at the nitrate nitrogen and the  ammonium nitrogen and we've observed through field experience a correlation between elevated  
**[0:43:01-0:43:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:43:01):**  concentrations of say nitrate or ammonium to specific groups of insects are those compounds  serving as insect attractants based on what you're doing what you've been describing um i would say  indirectly yes uh the reason why is because when you say attractant usually you smell something and  
**[0:43:16-0:43:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:43:16):**  then you go to it and that's kind of how attractants work whereas the the high nitrogen  that you're referring to right now is not what i would consider to be an attractant and that is  nitrogen molecules are not emanating from the plant and being picked up so it would not qualify  
**[0:43:29-0:43:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:43:29):**  as an attract what is going on is you have an imbalance in the plant it's a physiological  imbalance in the plant which causes the nitrogen to be shunted in between one form and another uh  which can be a healthy form or an unhealthy form or a reproductive form or vegetative form the  
**[0:43:45-0:43:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:43:45):**  reason i'm getting you know a little bit complicated i don't want to cloud the picture that  i'm saying but when you have these conditions going on in the plant that's that's a way that  the plant is now advertising itself as unhealthy and it can do so almost directly in the electromagnetic  
**[0:43:59-0:44:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:43:59):**  spectrum i mean there will be visible frequencies or infrared frequencies that will be picked up  immediately by insects because the plant is stressed what do i mean by that so for example  if you have a plant that's suffering i mean you look at it you know you look at it i look at it  
**[0:44:13-0:44:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:44:13):**  we can see okay this this plant needs a little bit of help and let's just say for the sake of argument  we put down a nitrogenous fertilizer a classic npk that you get uh in most stores so we have a quick  bloom uh that the plant greens up everything kind of looks good and it looks like the plant has just  
**[0:44:29-0:44:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:44:29):**  gotten healthy and to a certain extent it has but what you've done is you've stressed out plants  because nitrogenous fertilizers are salt-based uh it's a force-feeding operation that goes on with  the plant the plant is not really feeding itself you put the salt-based fertilizer down it uh  
**[0:44:44-0:44:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:44:44):**  increases the conductivity forces the nutrients into the plant causes a quick burst of growth but  all along the plant is stressed and the insects know that and the insects know that so you can  have a case for example of if you have a plant grass is a good one but there are other grassy  
**[0:45:00-0:45:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:45:00):**  type plants monocots that kind of fall into the same situation is that if they start to go through  drought conditions so the water levels are going down and you see the plant is starting to suffer  many individuals say i can see the plant's in trouble right now and need to feed it not  
**[0:45:14-0:45:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:45:14):**  thinking necessarily that it probably needs water because of the drought conditions but that it  needs something else so you will put down a nitrogenous fertilizer in order to green things  up and so what this does it is very very attractive to the chinch bug so blissus leucopteris the chinch  
**[0:45:30-0:45:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:45:30):**  bug is very attractive to those situations one drought condition two uh high nitrogen so when  you have that combination you're going to bring in the change bug because this is what it likes  you will notice down here and elsewhere too that the chinch bug does not attack grass  
**[0:45:44-0:45:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:45:44):**  indiscriminately it has to attack grass under very specific circumstances so it's not just about the  drought nor is it just about putting down the nitrogenous fertilizer and throwing excess  nitrogen into the plant the plant the the insect is is looking for a very specific combination  
**[0:46:01-0:46:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:46:01):**  because the type of stressed plant that it's looking to eat is going to be more easily  digestible under certain circumstances and so even though you know one million insects have  not been deciphered we understand you know how some insects work and why some insects are  
**[0:46:17-0:46:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:46:17):**  attracted to some unhealthy plants and other insects are attracted to other unhealthy plants  citrus down here for example we have multiple insects that are attacking the citrus but you  usually don't find you know all of them you don't find the citrus leaf miner nor do you find the  
**[0:46:34-0:46:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:46:34):**  asian citrus psyllid nor do you find some of the notchers the leaf notchers down here all feeding  on exactly the same plant and exactly the same population level instead you'll find the asian  citrus psyllid focused in one area the leaf notchers located another and the citrus leaf  
**[0:46:49-0:46:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:46:49):**  miner on another these are all clues that give you an idea that yes the plant is unhealthy that's  that's a universal constant but uh that the conditions are different for each insect because  each insect has its role in eating that which is digestible to it the citrus leaf miner is inside  
**[0:47:05-0:47:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:47:05):**  the leaf the asian citrus psyllid is going after the phloem tissue uh the leaf notchers uh some of  them are going after the roots they'll go ahead and take a bite of the leaf but they've all got  different parts of the plant and plant has to be a certain uh state of unhealthiness in order to be  
**[0:47:21-0:47:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:47:21):**  attacked and so this is why the generalities of bricks have been kind of lost on a lot of people  and i kind of got that a little bit from you at the beginning is that you know bricks is a little  difficult to decipher i'm not sure if it's really given me the answers that i want and that is uh  
**[0:47:34-0:47:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:47:34):**  because it really is more complex than we think because i know in the past everyone has said  bricks of 12 bricks of 12 get to a bricks of 12 the insects stop and and that's not absolutely  true i have seen insects take a bite of a plant above 12 bricks it will not stay and feed but  
**[0:47:50-0:47:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:47:50):**  will take a bite from it and so this looks like a contradiction but it's not really and so to  understand what really is going on uh with the bricks and using that as as an idea to understand  what the insects are doing allows you to make these connections which again will go ahead and  
**[0:48:06-0:48:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:48:06):**  help the farmer because i can go out take a look to see what insect is attacking a plant and give  you a pretty good idea what the bricks is going to be before i even test it earlier you mentioned  just in general some of the compounds that plants are releasing and also the signals that these  
**[0:48:21-0:48:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:48:21):**  compounds are transmitting yes at various distances or and i know we're speaking in  very high level generalizations but um in general what might what are the possible detection  distances for some of these compounds as that serve as insect signaling mechanisms oh my gosh  
**[0:48:39-0:48:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:48:39):**  the same as any other odorant it actually doesn't really differ at all john so it doesn't matter  whether it's uh 10 yards away or whether it's a mile away any of these odorants you know can  be detected from great distances so as far as long as an odorant is able to uh to get blown away by  
**[0:48:56-0:49:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:48:56):**  the wind and an insect can smell it they will then follow the scent of that odor into its source and  so the distances can be tremendous as far as the electromagnetic uh that really depends upon you  know the electromagnetic component so that would be the compound eye how far can the insects see  
**[0:49:13-0:49:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:49:13):**  grasshoppers are flying pretty high up in the atmosphere so they're when they're looking down  they're not looking at individual plants like a lot of insects would they're looking at they see  what we see when we see satellite images they see a bunch of squares rectangles and trapezoids  
**[0:49:30-0:49:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:49:30):**  that's that's really what they see and when they see a trapezoid that looks attractive they will  descend upon that trapezoid and that's plant that they will look doom because it's sending off a  general electromagnetic visual type of message because the odorants are generally not getting  
**[0:49:44-0:49:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:49:44):**  up into the atmosphere when a locust swarm passes by unless they're they're flying low enough but a  lot of them are flying pretty high other insects yes they will key in on a very specific plant and  even sometimes more specific than that they will key in on the part of the plant that is suffering  
**[0:50:00-0:50:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:50:00):**  like i said a branch that may be dying that's where the insects will congregate if they're  going to start eating that particular plant whatever that plant will uh will happen to be so  the the distance is not really that important they're going to be able to detect it no matter  
**[0:50:15-0:50:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:50:15):**  no matter where they are just as they would any other odorant that comes out there so  perhaps a non-agricultural related question i have friends who will attract every mosquito for dozens  of yards around and other friends who are for all practical purposes mosquito immune can you  
**[0:50:31-0:50:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:50:31):**  describe the differences i hate doing this because you're recording it right now but uh that is the  difference between healthy people and unhealthy people so if you have digestible blood the insect  can use your blood if you have healthy blood the insect is not as attracted to it does this mean  
**[0:50:46-0:50:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:50:46):**  you're healthy all the time no people have certain states of healthiness and unhealthiness but as  long as your blood is digestible it's going to be attractive to an insect and so human beings  advertise themselves as being more digestible from the standpoint of the blood because it goes with  
**[0:51:01-0:51:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:51:01):**  what i talked about before it's the digestive system insects do not have very good digestive  systems stuff has to come in digested to them because they cannot digest things they just  don't have the enzymes they're garbage collectors they eat muck they eat garbage they eat bad stuff  
**[0:51:17-0:51:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:51:17):**  they eat stuff that we don't want to eat take a look at cockroaches for example there are many  other examples fruit flies they're always around decaying fruit they're not around healthy fruit  and so you've got these insects that are keying in on very specific uh plants or even let's say  
**[0:51:31-0:51:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:51:31):**  the fruiting structures like a tomato and that's what they are they are they are keying in on so  the mosquitoes need something that's digestible so when they take a blood meal it must be  incorporated through the process of vitilogenesis take that those nutrients in your blood and  
**[0:51:47-0:51:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:51:47):**  incorporate them into an egg and this occurs in about 24 hours so it's all done very very quickly  so if they're not getting digestible blood they cannot through the process of vitilogenesis take  those nutrients and feed their eggs and that's a problem because obviously the mosquito wants to  
**[0:52:03-0:52:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:52:03):**  feed its eggs that's the only reason it takes a blood meal is to feed its eggs and so we do have  these differences of individuals and some are just more digestible than others and they're going to  be more attractive you can force you know an insect to take a blood meal but they can do better and  
**[0:52:18-0:52:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:52:18):**  therefore they have a choice what i talked about before with the grasshoppers they'll have a choice  as to what crop they eat and the mosquitoes have a choice as to what blood meal they wish to get  and so through their antenna and all of their senses they detect that some one is more digestible  
**[0:52:34-0:52:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:52:34):**  in another and they're going to go after that individual and that's exactly what's happening  and even though i may be offending some people out there right now i do feel an obligation in  order to tell the truth the way that i know it according to the information that has been given  
**[0:52:49-0:52:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:52:49):**  to me for the past 20 to 30 years of my life studying insects i very much doubt that you're  offending people i would say much more you're uh you're communicating some very intriguing ideas  that are based on many many people have many of us have observed these things to be true in real life  
**[0:53:02-0:53:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:53:02):**  and i've wondered about the differences so thanks for sharing that oh happy to do so it's like when  you go inside a supermarket when you see fruit flies flying around the tomatoes some people  think oh i don't want to grab these tomatoes they got fruit flies in them but honestly all you got  
**[0:53:14-0:53:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:53:14):**  to do is search and you will find that one tomato maybe near the bottom that is injured and that's  the one where all the fruit flies are located so everyone i think instinctively knows this who has  ever bought a tomato in a supermarket before you've seen the fruit flies you kind of get how  
**[0:53:30-0:53:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:53:30):**  the process goes but you just kind of have to put two and two together and realize oh yeah the fruit  fly is not attacking all the tomatoes it's only going after the ones that are unhealthy and that  essentially equates to that which is digestible so a tomato that is degrading that is decomposing  
**[0:53:46-0:53:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:53:46):**  uh is being broken down and when it's being broken down it's digestible that goes back to what i was  saying insects will only eat that which is digestible to their system quite some time ago  tom we had a conversation you and i where we were talking about environment-determined genetic  
**[0:54:00-0:54:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:54:00):**  expression and the idea of the genetics and you expressed that you have had difficulties infecting  some mosquitoes with malaria and so just as we're having this conversation about mosquitoes that  popped back into my mind once more what are the differences between healthy and unhealthy  
**[0:54:17-0:54:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:54:17):**  mosquitoes as vectors of bacteria okay well i specifically have not infected mosquitoes with  malaria so let me just make that clear right now it wasn't me it was through talking to researchers  and understanding the diseases out there is that many insects most a little bit of this way most  
**[0:54:37-0:54:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:54:37):**  anopheles mosquitoes do not transmit malaria most 80s mosquitoes do not transmit dengue yellow  fever or zika most culex mosquitoes do not transmit encephalitis and that then goes back  to what we're talking about before is you know when you when you see this observation you  
**[0:54:55-0:55:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:54:55):**  understand that not all insects are infected with the disease so you can get you know bitten by  thousands thousands of anopheles mosquitoes and not get malaria but all you have to do is get bit  by one mosquito that does have malaria in order for you to get it and this is one of the truths  
**[0:55:10-0:55:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:55:10):**  of biology that has been revealed to us and that is that insects also have various states of health  and unhealth in order for them to be relatively healthy they need digested components i've talked  about that their food source need to be as such but if their food source is not that good if it's  
**[0:55:27-0:55:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:55:27):**  missing something they can suffer insects have died in the field i've seen it many times sometimes  people try to keep them as pets and they die we see them dying in the field all the time so  insects die they are susceptible to disease and so they also have states of health and unhealth that  
**[0:55:44-0:55:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:55:44):**  are you know somewhat analogous to what you would find in a human and they are more susceptible at  that point so when you have a disease and if you're working with mosquitoes in the laboratory  and you try and infect them with the particular disease that they're supposed to be infected with  
**[0:55:57-0:56:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:55:57):**  anopheles mosquitoes with malaria for example you will not get a 100 infection rate and that  is kind of amazing and that is in part because you know when you're raising them in the laboratory  they're they're cuddled they're they're given everything that they need and so therefore they're  
**[0:56:13-0:56:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:56:13):**  they're in pretty good shape and it becomes a little difficult in order to to infect them so  out in the field they might be more susceptible ones that are more susceptible might might die  others would be more susceptible to actually getting a disease like say the malaria protozoan  
**[0:56:27-0:56:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:56:27):**  or the zika virus or anything of that sort and it can actually take hold of the system because the  insect is unable to doesn't have the immune system in order to take care of it so therefore it kind  of sets up shop inside the insect so this is kind of briefly what we were discussing in that  
**[0:56:44-0:56:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:56:44):**  conversation to which you refer is that not even all insects have diseases i mean most humans are  mostly healthy most of the time and that's actually kind of relatively true of insects as well and i  would guess you know speaking as an entomologist it's probably true for most animals and plants  
**[0:57:02-0:57:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:57:02):**  intriguing absolutely intriguing in all the various research and different things that you've  looked at looked at through your very rich career what has been something that really surprised you  um something that really surprised me um the the uh i guess the first thing that comes to mind is  
**[0:57:18-0:57:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:57:18):**  that which is recent and i kind of alluded to it before simply because it's a focus of my research  now and that is after we decipher the insect olfactory code there are a massive number of  details to be worked out and so the thing which i've talked about a lot over the past few months  
**[0:57:34-0:57:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:57:34):**  to my laboratory mates and others too is how different insects are smelling the same molecule  that is something which is kind of forefront on my mind right now as i'm you know conducting this  interview so if i had to go back in my past it might take me a little longer to come up with  
**[0:57:49-0:57:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:57:49):**  something and maybe be more intriguing than what i'm telling you right now but as of right now  that is on my mind and i'm amazed at how as a matter of fact while i'm giving this interview  i'm looking at frequencies right now for uh the indium meal moth on my desk and uh taking a look  
**[0:58:04-0:58:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:58:04):**  at the uh the frequencies and understanding how they're smelling how they're picking up the  pheromone and seeing the differences between the various odor receptors, gustatory receptors,  ionotropic receptors, things of that sort and putting this stuff together into a cohesive  
**[0:58:18-0:58:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:58:18):**  smell is something that uh has kind of taken me off guard i was kind of of the impression  certainly 20 years ago is that when you smelled an odorant that you know we had a receptor that's  that's kind of the way i looked at it you know we had a receptor and this receptor responded to  
**[0:58:35-0:58:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:58:35):**  this particular smell now we know differently we know just for example and this is common knowledge  is that there are between two to three co2 receptors for insects they don't have one  receptor for carbon dioxide they have two to three receptors for carbon dioxide and i would  
**[0:58:52-0:58:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:58:52):**  go so far as to say they have more but i won't go any further than what i just said and so when you  take a look at this and you see wow this is amazing i mean there's a complexity about it  but there's also a simplicity uh too it is more complex because it wasn't what i thought but it's  
**[0:59:07-0:59:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:59:07):**  simplistic because i see when you put all this stuff together and i think wow this just kind  of gives you a window into uh into what god has done and you understand that you don't know  anything where you think you did i mean 20 years ago when i started the laboratory and i graduated  
**[0:59:22-0:59:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:59:22):**  i mean i had i had the big bad phd so i you know you kind of sort of think at that point that you  you know quite a bit and now i can absolutely tell you how little i know i could not tell you  how little i knew 20 years ago but i can tell you exactly how little i know now and so these are  
**[0:59:39-0:59:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:59:39):**  some of the surprises that have come up to me is that it's not what i expected and because it's not  what i expected i just kind of have to follow the evidence being a scientist you have to follow the  evidence you follow reason as far as your mind is allowed you this is what has been given to us so  
**[0:59:54-0:59:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=0:59:54):**  we scientists are able to reason through things every human being is meant to reason we are  obligated to do so in the scientific world and then taking scientific evidence and then applying  reason to it in order to rationally wade through the muck which is all of the knowledge that we  
**[1:00:12-1:00:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:00:12):**  don't know and so finding out these things has been an absolute joy and this is part of the joy  of being a scientist it's part of the joy of being in a laboratory and coming up with new things and  this is also part of the joy of not only giving interviews like this but speaking to groups at  
**[1:00:27-1:00:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:00:27):**  conferences and and and divulging some more of this information so that you can bring the wonder  of science the wonder of insects or even the wonder of insectile faction to people who've  never had a chance to think about it before absolutely we live in an incredibly beautiful  
**[1:00:42-1:00:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:00:42):**  world if we take the chance to observe it it's what you're describing is really fascinating for  me because what you're describing in essence is that every insect can be in the precise same  environment but they perceive their environment differently from an olfactory perspective which  
**[1:00:56-1:01:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:00:56):**  basically is that they're smelling things differently which is really intriguing because  we've known that to be true for various organisms from a visual and auditory perspective but  particularly i would say from a visual perspective and that different organisms can look at something  
**[1:01:10-1:01:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:01:10):**  but they perceive different wavelengths and so they see a different image and what you're  describing in essence if i'm understanding it correctly is that they are also perceiving their  environment differently from an olfactory perspective as well they are they are yep  
**[1:01:22-1:01:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:01:22):**  yep that is fascinating what do you believe to be true about modern agriculture that many other  people don't believe to be true what do i perceive to be true wow that's a loaded question i'm not  sure if i got an answer which comes to the top of my mind uh immediately because honestly a lot of  
**[1:01:39-1:01:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:01:39):**  the things that i think are important i think a lot of people know about so if i told you you know  something that i that i know about agriculture i can almost guarantee you you already know about  it john because i know you uh so what do i know that maybe you don't know or someone else doesn't  
**[1:01:53-1:01:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:01:53):**  know i'm not sure if i do to be honest with you let me there are let me let me rephrase the  question a little bit what what do you believe to be true that a tomato grower in california  doesn't believe to be true okay well let me talk about something that i talked about already  
**[1:02:08-1:02:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:02:08):**  uh and this is summed up in one sentence insects are only attracted to unhealthy plants yeah this  has become like my most popular talk you just get shocked from people i mean you have spoken heresy  so even though i mean i i know where you stand on this john and and i understand many other people  
**[1:02:26-1:02:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:02:26):**  do agree with this philosophy and i get that but it still causes shock when i give this presentation  it still does and it's one of the opening slides that i do and i said look if i'm gonna say a  heretical comment i'm gonna make it right now but then i go through and i back up uh why i say what  
**[1:02:41-1:02:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:02:41):**  i say i've talked a little bit about that right now but that's really the big shocker so if i  had to limit myself to agriculture uh i would say that insects are only attracted to unhealthy plants  because if you believe that and i'm sure most of my listeners do not because i've seen the looks  
**[1:02:58-1:03:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:02:58):**  uh on the crowds that i've spoken to if you do believe that your whole thinking changes on  insects suddenly you have no use for insecticides i mean it just follows with that level of thinking  because you realize well insects i'm not competing with them then they're just eating some of the  
**[1:03:15-1:03:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:03:15):**  garbage plants that i shouldn't be eating so i really don't need to spray them anymore so now  are the organophosphates and synthetic pyrethroids and carbamates and uh and neonicotinoids they're  all kind of unnecessary and that's the the you know as you reason through this that's one of the  
**[1:03:32-1:03:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:03:32):**  conclusions that you come to you have to come to it when you believe that insects are only attracted  to unhealthy plants it's not just that statement that stands alone it's that statement and then you  have extensions coming off of that statement which help to explain things that people might not have  
**[1:03:49-1:03:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:03:49):**  considered before so i don't even have to come out as some sort of anti-pesticidal guy i can simply  say insects are not attracted to unhealthy plants and by extension i would say yes insecticides are  unnecessary they're just unnecessary as a whole under specific circumstances they have their role  
**[1:04:06-1:04:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:04:06):**  because i will be the first to admit to you you know i've had fire ants sometimes they'll come  into the house i do have a raid can in my house and we have had situations where the kids you know  would leave food crumbs around and you know the situation has to be taken care of so i'm not afraid  
**[1:04:22-1:04:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:04:22):**  uh to use insecticides and i understand that they have their place however having said that uh when  i'm raising crops uh and i and i do plant some stuff in my garden at my house i'm never ever  spraying it with anything i'm not putting well i mean not pesticides i have no insecticides i don't  
**[1:04:38-1:04:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:04:38):**  have a knowledge of all the insecticides but i don't use any of them i'm not using any herbicides  or fungicides i'm just not going that route and that's just what comes that with that knowledge  of that insects are only attracted to unhealthy plants that are not my enemy and i use them as  
**[1:04:51-1:04:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:04:51):**  indicators so i go out and i would check uh my my uh my corn plants for example and i would look to  if it's being attacked and if it is what's what insect is attacking it and therefore come to  a conclusion as to something maybe that i forgot on a particular so for example the first time i  
**[1:05:08-1:05:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:05:08):**  started planting corn i did have a few insects that were attacking it um by the time i got to  the third time that i was planting corn no insects were attacking it but i had i suspect deer came in  and cleaned me out and this is the difference between the insect digestive system and the  
**[1:05:25-1:05:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:05:25):**  mammalian digestive system is we have a higher level digestive system we can handle healthy food  so the deer are more interested in healthy uh crop they're not going to go after unhealthy stuff  that'll they'll leave that up to the insects uh but if you do have a healthy crop you're going to  
**[1:05:40-1:05:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:05:40):**  watch out for the deer because the deer came in and i think one night maybe two nights and i don't  know how many of them came through they cleaned out about 140 i had about 140 corn plants that  i had planted for the benefit of my family and i lost 99 of years on it uh overnight so these are  
**[1:05:57-1:06:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:05:57):**  the things that i think i mean in a sense i'd like to pat myself on the back and think okay well at  least the insects didn't get it i'm an entomologist that would have been embarrassing but the deer  sideswipe me and clean me out and so these are the things that you kind of learn as you're not  
**[1:06:10-1:06:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:06:10):**  only planning stuff but also observing is that you need to go out and take a look at your crop  plants understand what's going on and that will give you clues as to uh as to what is going on  and therefore give you an idea as to what you need to do in order to take care of the problem and  
**[1:06:25-1:06:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:06:25):**  there are many different ways of taking care of uh all of the problems that uh farmers run into  when when planting crops what is a book or a resource that you recommend most often to growers  um i don't uh i haven't recommended a book or a resource to a grower in a long time to be honest  
**[1:06:45-1:06:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:06:45):**  with you so there are a number of books that i have read um i look at them more as academic than  anything else um i guess i haven't read the type of books that uh should be read by the farmers i  mean i keep myself uh always looking for the cutting edge type of thing i'm not looking at  
**[1:07:02-1:07:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:07:02):**  necessarily like picking up a book on how to raise tomatoes or something like that i'm looking for  something ridiculously complex because this is just you know the the problem that i've had and  i've always had it's a birth defect is that we scientists we we like to make things more complex  
**[1:07:16-1:07:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:07:16):**  than they actually are and this is something that i haven't been able to shake so because of that i  probably am not well read enough in order to recommend a a book a publication or anything like  that in order to help a farmer one of my the things that i really love to do in this interview  
**[1:07:32-1:07:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:07:32):**  is part of it is to actually just go out there and talk so to talk to the farmers directly so  it's i like it when it's not filtered i like it when i go and i talk to a hundred to a thousand  farmers at once i get a high from that type of thing because i can talk to them directly about  
**[1:07:49-1:07:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:07:49):**  their crop plants sometimes you need to talk one-on-one with them after the presentation is  over when they kind of see where you're at and those are the things that i like rather than just  kind of giving them a cookbook as to what they need to do which is usually what you find in a  
**[1:08:01-1:08:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:08:01):**  book i prefer to actually talk to them directly because each one has their own story to tell and  their own uh problem uh as well so that's a long roundabout way of saying i'm just not able to  answer your question john but good question nonetheless great what is the question you wish  
**[1:08:17-1:08:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:08:17):**  i would have asked that you would have liked to talk about um no no i think you asked some great  questions right there i mean we touched upon probably the most important one and that is  insects are really attracted to unhealthy plants and all of the extensions that come from that  
**[1:08:30-1:08:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:08:30):**  which we have we've touched upon some of them and i touch upon more in a in a more formal  presentation those are the type of things i think if you can get something like that out you you  change the mindset of everyone people are no longer planting crops the same way that they did  
**[1:08:46-1:08:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:08:46):**  before and that is is to disseminate information is to talk to them about energy systems so that  they understand how to raise a high energy crop talk to them about insects so that they understand  that all of them are indicators they indicate to you what's going on with the plant they're not  
**[1:09:01-1:09:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:09:01):**  something to be fought against because this is the consensus not only in the scientific world  but among secular society as well too is that this is something that we just need to consign  ourselves to do is to try and beat down the insects but uh if we take a look at that the  
**[1:09:16-1:09:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:09:16):**  whole mindset changes and i love seeing that change in the mindset way when people start  thinking of ways of things in a very different way than they had done before and then their mind  starts to go in that direction and they start bringing up points that are just pure genius  
**[1:09:32-1:09:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:09:32):**  because they're immediately able to apply it to their crop they understand oh yeah i mean i was  out the other day in a certain part of my field which was being attacked and i was in another part  of the field and nothing was being attacked right there and this is making so much sense  
**[1:09:45-1:09:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:09:45):**  they start putting things together and then they become a better farmer and when you get better  farmers you get better food you get better food you get a a healthier society and when you have  a healthier society there's just no stopping a good healthy society so let's continue to eat well  
**[1:10:01-1:10:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:10:01):**  and continue to educate the farmers which i so enjoy doing so that they continue to give us good  food not only for myself for my wife uh but for my children as well absolutely tom this has been  a fascinating conversation thank you so much for joining us for this episode and i look forward to  
**[1:10:17-1:10:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:10:17):**  having you back on the podcast in the future thank you very much we've been very honored to have you  here that would be fine i enjoyed it too john and thank you so much for the opportunity thanks tom  this podcast was brought to you by a great company that i work for advancing eco agriculture the  
**[1:10:31-1:10:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:10:31):**  leader in regenerative agriculture since 2006 at aa we believe in challenging the status quo to  find more profitable and regenerative ways to grow crops we also believe that healthy plants are  resistant to pests and disease and that to grow healthy plants we must first think differently  
**[1:10:49-1:10:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:10:49):**  about agriculture about empowering life instead of suppressing life about regeneration versus  degeneration to achieve this we formulate and sell products that help growers produce higher quality  yield with less risk of crop failure in short we help growers make more money with less risk  
**[1:11:06-1:11:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/how-insect-pests-identify-unhealthy-plants-with-tom-dykstra/#t=1:11:06):**  if you aren't yet an aa customer go to advancing eco ag.com and use the code  regenerate5 for five percent off your first order thank you for listening  