---
title: Increasing Biological Populations With Robert Kremer
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### Regenerative Agriculture Podcast  (2018-04-13)  
### Author(s): John Kempf  

**[0:00:00-0:00:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:00:00):**  Hi friends, I'm John Kempf, hosting this podcast. I am passionate about developing regenerative  agriculture systems that improve soil health, produce crops that are completely resistant to  diseases and insects, and produce fruit of such an exceptional quality that we can have a legitimate  
**[0:00:16-0:00:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:00:16):**  conversation about growing food as medicine. I've discovered that there are many people with  incredible knowledge and information about soil and plant systems and how to develop regenerative  agriculture systems. However, much of this knowledge and this information is scattered,  
**[0:00:33-0:00:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:00:33):**  it's found all over the place. Some of it has been published in peer-reviewed publications,  but there are many incredible stories and a lot of knowledge that has not been published,  and that hasn't been shared with many people. I started Advancing Eco-Agriculture in 2006 to  
**[0:00:49-0:01:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:00:49):**  bring this knowledge together in a more coherent fashion and incorporate it into products and  growing systems that growers can easily put into practice. It's my personal mission to have these  regenerative agricultural systems become adopted globally and become the mainstream, the status  
**[0:01:06-0:01:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:01:06):**  quo against which all other growing systems are compared. To help achieve this goal, I want to  share the knowledge that we have learned in the last decade and make it available to everyone.  While we have developed products at AEA that embody the principles of regenerative agriculture  
**[0:01:22-0:01:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:01:22):**  systems and make them easier for growers to apply, this knowledge and these principles can be applied  anywhere. And when they are applied properly, they will always increase farm profitability  and resilience to climate stress. If you have any questions, suggestions, comments, or ideas,  
**[0:01:40-0:01:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:01:40):**  topics that you would like for me to discuss, please connect on LinkedIn or on Twitter,  where my username is at visionbuilder7, or you can also email me at john at johnkempf.com. I would  very much like to hear from you and to hear your feedback. Be sure to subscribe to this podcast,  
**[0:01:59-0:02:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:01:59):**  and thank you very much for listening. Enjoy the show. Greetings, friends, and welcome to the  Regenerative Agriculture podcast. On this podcast, we explore the science and practical application  of regenerative agriculture ecosystems, how to regenerate soil health, crop health and quality,  
**[0:02:15-0:02:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:02:15):**  and increase overall farm profitability. Our goal is to give you clear and easy to understand  information and actionable information that you can actually implement on your operation.  In this episode, I'm very excited to welcome Bob Klamer to the podcast. Robert has a lifetime of  
**[0:02:35-0:02:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:02:35):**  very rich experience in the agricultural space working both for the USDA and for the University  of Missouri in a variety of different areas related to plant sciences and soil microbiology,  looking at the interactions of soil microbiology and weeds, weed seeds, weed germination, and a  
**[0:02:53-0:03:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:02:53):**  whole range of different topics that tie into looking at soil health and developing suppressive  soils. So Robert, welcome to the podcast. We're very honored to have you. Thank you, John. It's  good to be here. So Robert, you've done a lot of very interesting work. What are some of your  
**[0:03:10-0:03:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:03:10):**  most memorable moments that led you to where you are today and some of the things that you work on?  Oh, well, yeah, it's been several years to culminate to where I'm at today, I guess, but  I, you know, I think probably the first challenge was with the appointment with the USDA Agricultural  
**[0:03:32-0:03:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:03:32):**  Research Service when I was asked to look at possibilities of decomposing weed seeds and soil  using microbiological approaches that really no one had really looked at doing before because  at the time that I came into the agency in the early 80s, it was pretty much everything was  
**[0:03:50-0:04:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:03:50):**  chemical-based as far as weed management and actually any sort of pest management.  And so to have a challenge like that was pretty unique at the time. And really, you know, looking  for native microorganisms that could essentially rot seeds and soil was a pretty challenging  
**[0:04:14-0:04:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:04:14):**  task. But that really kind of led things into really looking at more at plant and soil microbial  interactions and leading to natural ways of trying to control weeds using biological control  approaches. And that was kind of started the way into looking at, well, you know, what do pesticides  
**[0:04:41-0:05:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:04:41):**  do when they're in the management system? And that eventually led to my interest in soil quality,  which was the big buzzword at the time that evolved into soil health. And, you know, with soil health,  folks are looking at management assessment approaches. And at the time that we really got  
**[0:05:03-0:05:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:05:03):**  into it, that's when the genetically modified crop issue came into vogue or into wide practice.  And then on top of that, you add the whole Roundup or glyphosate issue. And certainly no one was  really looking at that as that being a factor that was affecting soil health. And so, you know,  
**[0:05:23-0:05:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:05:23):**  we kind of diverged and looked into that for a while as well. So, you know, I'd say I probably  hit about a half a dozen highlights over the career that I've had. And it always seemed  like if you turn the corner going to something else, then it was a very interesting challenge.  
**[0:05:42-0:06:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:05:42):**  You've mentioned a number of very intriguing pieces that I want to follow up on. But let's  perhaps begin at the beginning. When you described your early work in seeking to develop  microbiological control of weed seeds and weed germination, did you have any success in developing  
**[0:06:01-0:06:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:06:01):**  biological controls? And are there any tools available for farmers to use today?  Well, I would say that a lot of the work that we started, all the research that we started,  eventually was served as a pattern for others to take that up and pursue that kind of development.  
**[0:06:22-0:06:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:06:22):**  You know, we had some... My main task was to try to look at controlling these weeds in annual  row cropping situations. And it was almost impossible because, especially if you want  to call it conventional or modern type input-based agro ecosystems, so many weed seeds had been built  
**[0:06:46-0:07:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:06:46):**  up over the years, plus the fact that they were so diverse. You know, you had a number of weed  seeds in the field that, you know, we were very... Although we found some bacteria and fungi that  could affect maybe two or three weed species, you know, we would still have in some situations,  
**[0:07:05-0:07:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:07:05):**  seven or eight weed species in the field that would still be problematic. So it came to the  point that in a midwestern situation with corn and soybeans, it was almost impossible to come  up with something that was effective biologically within the framework that the practices that were  
**[0:07:25-0:07:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:07:25):**  in place. And, you know, I'm talking about a short rotation of corn and soybean, no cover crops to  build up the microbial diversity and continuous chemical application. So, but I will say that  our work did kind of set the stage for others in other parts of the country that have developed  
**[0:07:45-0:08:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:07:45):**  these types of organisms. For instance, in the Pacific Northwest where cereal crops are the  dominant production system and where there's only one or two weeds in the system, such as downy  brome or jointed goat grass, they used this kind of approach. And there is some organisms  
**[0:08:05-0:08:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:08:05):**  available today that are under development for commercial applications in those types of systems,  where it would work. That is fascinating. I was going to ask you about other types of ecosystems  where this would be appropriate. Has there... Are you aware of any development work that has been  
**[0:08:20-0:08:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:08:20):**  done that would be relevant for fruit and vegetable production systems or where you have  agriculture ecosystems that do have a longer crop rotation incorporating cover crops and so forth?  Has there been any work done on those areas? Well, there's been a little bit. You know, some of the...  
**[0:08:38-0:08:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:08:38):**  There's been some Canadian work. The Canadian Agri-Food Canada has really supported this  type of approach. And for instance, there was a specific pathogen they developed for a particular  weed in horticultural crops such as strawberries. And that was particularly effective. It was  
**[0:09:00-0:09:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:09:00):**  against a... I think it was an annual weed. It was a mallow weed. It was in the cotton family.  And there are a few other examples, but really, the effort that has put into this  relative to the number of products that are available is very lopsided. I would say there's  
**[0:09:21-0:09:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:09:21):**  not that much out there. And I would say that one of the problems is for development of such  a product to go to market. There's a lot of companies out there that don't want to take  that risk, especially if the crop is not a high value, that's not going to bring a lot of profit  
**[0:09:38-0:09:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:09:38):**  back to them. So that's always been an obstacle as well. One of the pieces that you mentioned was the  impact of pesticides on biological processes in the soil. Could you elaborate a little bit on what  you've observed the impact of various pesticides to be? Sure. It's been somewhat variable.  
**[0:09:59-0:10:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:09:59):**  I mean, what we're finding is some pesticides will be, let's say, detrimental or toxic to just a  group of microorganisms in the overall soil community. And the same ones may stimulate other  components of the microbial community. And then you would end up with this imbalance of the various  
**[0:10:23-0:10:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:10:23):**  microorganisms that are in the soil. Now, a very good example of this was in the late 70s, early  80s, we had a lot of soil applied herbicides, fungicides, and insecticides. And these were going  on at very high rates. Some of them, you might recall, furadans as one of the insecticides and  
**[0:10:47-0:11:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:10:47):**  EPT-C or sutan herbicides, they went on pounds per acre. And the other interesting issue with  those were that their chemical structure had a group in there that was very similar to  what you find in proteins, the peptide bond, or they called it the carbamate bond. And these  
**[0:11:07-0:11:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:11:07):**  really stimulated a lot of microorganisms that were able to use proteins. They just adapted  and used those for metabolism. And the first thing we had, we had a lot of pesticide failures  due to that. And then that's when we evolved into more post-emergence type herbicides that  
**[0:11:25-0:11:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:11:25):**  everyone thought, well, that's going to take care of that issue. And then what happened after that,  we got a lot of, we began getting a lot of herbicide resistant weeds. And this was even before  we had the Roundup resistant weeds. We had a lot of ALS inhibitor resistance and even atrazine  
**[0:11:44-0:12:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:11:44):**  resistance in the weeds. What was also happening at that same time was that with continuous  application of these same herbicides that was causing weed resistance, it was also altering the  soil microbial community at the same time. Because what we often forget, let's say like in the case  
**[0:12:05-0:12:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:12:05):**  of glyphosate, is that even though we're applying it to take out all weeds in a genetically modified  crop that is tolerant to glyphosate, only about 5% of what's applied is being taken up by the weed.  We have all the rest of it is taken up by the resistant plant, the resistant crop,  
**[0:12:29-0:12:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:12:29):**  and the other and the remaining proportion is reaching the soil in some means or another.  You add to that fact that being a systemic herbicide, that compound is released throughout  the plant and it goes to the growing points, which includes the roots. So we have a lot of  
**[0:12:46-0:13:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:12:46):**  that compound being released into the soil, into the rhizosphere where you have the most active  and dominant communities of microorganisms because that's where all the nutrients are being released  by plants and that's where you find most of your microorganisms. We get glyphosate in there.  
**[0:13:07-0:13:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:13:07):**  I have to admit over the last 20 years, that's the one herbicide I've worked with most.  We've documented that glyphosate will affect or is active in the root zone of genetically modified crops  as just like it is in the root zones of weeds. It's released, it causes a lot of leakage of  
**[0:13:29-0:13:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:13:29):**  nutrients, the sugars, carbohydrates, and amino acids out of the roots and this stimulates a  certain segment of the community. In this case, a lot of fusarium fungi and some of the other  detrimental bacteria like agrobacterium and those that oxidize manganese that makes it  
**[0:13:48-0:14:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:13:48):**  unavailable to the plant. So often the resistant plant or the resistant crop that's soybean or corn  will not be infected by these organisms because they're able to resist it, but they are setting  up a shift in the microbes in the soil that can be detrimental to other plants. It can be  
**[0:14:13-0:14:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:14:13):**  detrimental to other microorganisms and now what we're finding is that even though we've been  told that glyphosate dissipates and is neutralized and is degraded, we're finding residual glyphosate  in the soil now. That's where we're at now. We don't know exactly what that residual glyphosate  
**[0:14:32-0:14:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:14:32):**  at whatever concentrations they are after the crop is gone, what they're doing to the whole soil ecosystem.  So this is fascinating. You've mentioned a number of interesting pieces.  Let's perhaps begin with your last point of residual glyphosate. How long do you find that  
**[0:14:53-0:15:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:14:53):**  glyphosate residues are remaining in the soil profile application? Well, we've really started  looking at this in a, well not even a systematic manner, but at least in a cursory manner beginning  in 2014. We were looking in field plots at the time because one of the projects was  
**[0:15:15-0:15:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:15:15):**  can we come up with some treatment that might be able to overcome the effects of  glyphosate on the soil function or microbial activity and function. So we had these  these soils analyzed and half the plots had not received glyphosate for at least a year and  
**[0:15:32-0:15:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:15:32):**  the other half had received glyphosate during the growing season. And when we had that analyzed,  we found that plots that had gone a year without Roundup application, some of those plots had  as high residual glyphosate as the plots that received the glyphosate in the current year.  
**[0:15:53-0:16:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:15:53):**  So that was amazing to us because that did show us we are seeing a carryover of the  glyphosate. And the other interesting thing was that it was random.  We had how a field plot design is set up in a very structured arrangement.  
**[0:16:13-0:16:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:16:13):**  Maybe one plot that received glyphosate might be over a thousand parts per billion and  then another plot that received the same treatment may only be at 350. So there's a lot of  factors going on here that affect persistence of this particular active ingredient. And if I could  
**[0:16:34-0:16:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:16:34):**  just add one more thing, so that was the first year where we only detected glyphosate alone.  In the last two years, we've been using a different lab that is able to separate glyphosate  from its major breakdown product which is aminomethyl phosphonic acid. That's the AMPA or AMPA  
**[0:16:55-0:17:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:16:55):**  that we talk a lot about. And that metabolite can be just as toxic as glyphosate itself.  So we have those two compounds analyzed, the glyphosate and the AMPA, we find about anywhere  from 10 to 50 times more AMPA than glyphosate. And what that indicates is that glyphosate  
**[0:17:18-0:17:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:17:18):**  can be degraded by the microbes by one step but then when it gets to AMPA, the enzymes to  further break that down is not there within that microbial community. And thus, it's either  they've been wiped out due to intensive farming or other herbicides or glyphosate itself but it's  
**[0:17:41-0:17:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:17:41):**  pretty interesting. And we're finding the AMPA to be carried over by more than a year or two as well.  What are the implications of high concentrations of AMPA in the soil profile? Do they have a similar  effect on the soil biology as what you described for glyphosate? Oh yes, it has a very similar  
**[0:17:58-0:18:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:17:58):**  effect because the active group in glyphosate and in AMPA is the same. It's that phosphonate  group. So as far as you listen to Dr. Huber and then talk about chelation of micronutrients by  glyphosate, well AMPA will do the same thing because it has not been degraded to the point  
**[0:18:22-0:18:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:18:22):**  where it loses that characteristic. So it can, you know, it can sorb the soil, it can exchange with phosphorus in the soil just like glyphosate.  So I have kind of two related questions. One, back at the beginning when we first started this  conversation, you mentioned that you had done some work looking at soil quality and looking at soil  
**[0:18:46-0:19:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:18:46):**  health. So I have a question around that which is what defines soil quality? What defines soil  health? How do you know that you have a healthy soil? And then the follow-up question to that is  based on the pieces that we've just been talking about around glyphosate and AMPA, how do, what are  
**[0:19:04-0:19:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:19:04):**  the long-term impacts of soil quality by these compounds? Oh okay, yeah so I'll go with the term  soil health. Soil health is a little more holistic and it really emphasizes soil  biological function and as well as the microbial component. Soil quality was originally proposed  
**[0:19:30-0:19:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:19:30):**  mainly to see how well your management is in terms of providing an acceptable agronomic production.  You see, so and they didn't really emphasize the environmental effects as much. So anyway,  that might be a picky point but I'll just go with soil health. So you know what makes a soil healthy  
**[0:19:52-0:20:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:19:52):**  is of course you have to look at in the context of, you know, similar soils within a given landscape  and there are several indicators that will suggest good soil health but the two main ones  is soil organic matter or soil organic carbon and the microbial diversity. Certainly we're getting  
**[0:20:15-0:20:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:20:15):**  to the point where we can quantify differences in soil health based on what I would call soil organic  carbon quality which is a fairly high proportion of the overall soil organic carbon or soil organic  matter is in a pool called labile carbon or active carbon and that's important because that is the  
**[0:20:39-0:21:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:20:39):**  portion of carbon that supports the microbial community in the soil plus it can serve as a  source of substrates or energy for growing plants as well as the activity of the microorganisms that  are involved in all the nutrient cycling and plant growth protection. So you know having a  
**[0:21:00-0:21:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:21:00):**  having a soil with a good proportion of labile carbon is real important. Now I can't tell you,  you know, what the proportion should be, you know, maybe it's 25 or upwards of 50 percent but that  just kind of depends on the quality of organic matter that has been returned to the soil over  
**[0:21:19-0:21:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:21:19):**  the years. Certainly in a ecologically based farming system where you have a lot of diverse  plant material and maybe compost additions and that active carbon is going to be quite that high  and the quality is going to be as high as well but then connected with that is this microbial  
**[0:21:37-0:22:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:21:37):**  diversity. That primarily means that you have a diversity in the types of fungi and the types of  bacteria as well as a good component of things like protozoa that kind of complete the food web  and feeding on these fungal and bacterial communities to kind of keep them unbalanced  
**[0:22:00-0:22:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:22:00):**  but also recycles nitrogen and phosphorus through their decomposition of microbial biomass.  Plus the diversity of these, let's say the bacteria is important because you need several  different species in order to accomplish a function. In other words, you know, an example  
**[0:22:22-0:22:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:22:22):**  would be if we have corn stover on the surface of the soil or just into the surface, one  microorganism cannot break that vegetative material down to mineralize the carbon and nitrogen  out of it and form organic matter. You have to have a successional group of microorganisms,  
**[0:22:43-0:23:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:22:43):**  often we say they're consortia that work together to break all this material down and to  get the beneficial effects out of that. And oftentimes we see this in soils that I would  say are not as healthy, soils that have been planted to let's say genetically modified corn  
**[0:23:05-0:23:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:23:05):**  for example, modified for BT production and maybe a Roundup Ready or glyphosate resistance.  Sometimes we find corn stocks in these fields for three or four years after the  crop was harvested and these things are just laying on the ground and not being decomposed.  
**[0:23:26-0:23:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:23:26):**  And I believe what's happening is that we have really caused an imbalance in the overall  soil microbial community that just can't get the decomposition job done. And there are  other things you can check with for soil health assessments such as rate of respiration or  
**[0:23:43-0:24:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:23:43):**  carbon dioxide evolution out of the soil which indicates good microbial activity and enzyme  activity and all that. And then with biological indicators, there should be some physical  and chemical indicators as well. And these are fairly obvious things that we've already  
**[0:24:03-0:24:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:24:03):**  known about through soil testing such as the amount of available phosphorus and pH and  then on the other hand, the bulk density, the aggregate stability or the proportion  of aggregates in the soil. We take all those things together and I don't want to get into  
**[0:24:20-0:24:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:24:20):**  the technicality of it but we are coming to the point where we can model all these  indicators and put these into a model and come up with a soil health index. And that's  what's going to be important when we begin looking at comparing management systems as  
**[0:24:37-0:24:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:24:37):**  well as using that information to come up with guidelines that farmers can use to actually  improve their management to improve soil health. And I think that's the most lacking piece  of information right now is that there's not a whole lot of guidelines out there for the  
**[0:24:53-0:25:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:24:53):**  guy who's out in the field. And we can research all this as much as we want but it's not  going to do any good until we have something that is usable by the farmer.  So if I'm a farmer today, how would you advise me to begin measuring some of these pieces?  
**[0:25:10-0:25:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:25:10):**  Are there any lab reports or any laboratories that are doing this type of analysis at the  moment that I could begin establishing a baseline of where my soils are at the moment?  Yeah, that's right. There are a few around the country that will do this, both commercial  
**[0:25:26-0:25:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:25:26):**  and extension type of labs. There's a lab out in Nebraska called Ward's Lab. They do  this kind of thing and they include a profile of your soil microbial communities. It tells  you what the different main components are there and gives you an idea of also how much  
**[0:25:47-0:26:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:25:47):**  microbial biomass you have. Cornell University has a soil health lab that does similar things  and there's another one out east. And we have a soil health assessment center here. At the  University of Missouri, it's still kind of in the formative stages. It does real well  
**[0:26:10-0:26:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:26:10):**  with chemical analysis and it does do one analysis for microbial diversity. So one can  send soil samples to any of those labs and some have better reports on your results or  interpretation than others. And that would be a good way to get started on assessing  
**[0:26:33-0:26:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:26:33):**  your soil health. Also, some states have incentives for farmers to do this. I know the Natural  Resource and Conservation Service here in Missouri will subsidize some of the testing  for farmers to have this done because they have a program. I think NRCS nationwide has  
**[0:26:55-0:27:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:26:55):**  a soil health program where they're trying to improve soil health and maintain it and  they're trying to get farmers to get behind this and they are paying them to do that kind  of assessment.  
**[0:27:05-0:27:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:27:05):**  Coming back to the conversation around glyphosate and AMPA, you've described a little bit what  soil health means and perhaps we have time to later explore the labile carbon soluble  carbon component or active carbon component. But I'd like to come back to the one question  
**[0:27:23-0:27:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:27:23):**  I asked which was how does glyphosate and the accumulation of glyphosate and AMPA over  extended periods impact the overall soil health?  Well I can give you a little bit of information that at least we can see that there's some  
**[0:27:39-0:28:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:27:39):**  indirect effect of continuous use of glyphosate on soil health because we usually will measure  a lot of the biological parameters when we set up assessments such as this. We see there's  some effects on some of the beneficial bacteria that are involved in plant growth promotion  
**[0:28:03-0:28:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:28:03):**  such as producing plant growth regulators that stimulate root growth and other beneficial  bacteria that will produce pathogen suppressive compounds. What we're noticing is that glyphosate  tends to suppress those beneficial groups of bacteria so that has an effect on subsequent  
**[0:28:28-0:28:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:28:28):**  plant growth as well. So we feel that there's a problem there. I briefly mentioned the effect  on some of these microorganisms that are known to cause certain micronutrients to be immobilized  and therefore not available for plant uptake. And one of these is manganese and manganese  
**[0:28:50-0:29:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:28:50):**  of course is a very important for activity of many enzymes that are involved in many  of our metabolic pathways. And if that's tied up, you may have poor photosynthesis, you  may have a poor amino acid formation because you don't have enough of that micronutrient  
**[0:29:08-0:29:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:29:08):**  to satisfy the needs of the enzyme. So we have found for example the Fusarium that will  colonize the roots of plants that are treated with glyphosate. They are manganese oxidizers.  So they immobilize manganese and if they're on the root system, they're not going to be  
**[0:29:26-0:29:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:29:26):**  taken up. And if they are built up in the soil, whether there is a genetically modified  crop there or not, they're going to remain in the soil and they're going to continue  to immobilize manganese. So if you don't have a lot of available manganese, that's going  
**[0:29:43-0:30:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:29:43):**  to affect the overall soil health as well. You get into a lot of other things, things  such as glyphosate may exchange with phosphorus in the soil and then you have problems with  either excess phosphorus or phosphorus being, if it's not being taken up by the plants,  
**[0:30:04-0:30:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:30:04):**  it can be an environmental problem. So we mentioned the probability of effect of the  quality of the organic matter because we're using basically just two crops that are the  source of the organic residues being returned to the soil. Certainly if we don't have the  
**[0:30:25-0:30:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:30:25):**  microbes there to decompose them or if there's not enough, there's not a diverse enough quantity  of organic substances to help build up soil organic matter, that will affect soil health  as well because like I mentioned before, organic matter is one of the key indicators for good  
**[0:30:44-0:31:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:30:44):**  soil health. In our experience working with many different farms, I would say just off  the top of my head that greater than 90% of the farms that we work with experience severe  manganese deficiencies. And I have wondered about the long-term effects. When you have  
**[0:31:04-0:31:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:31:04):**  glyphosate accumulation, you have this shift in the pessarium population and you have oxidizing  organisms that are immobilizing manganese. What are the long-term implications of that  manganese immobility in the soil profile? How long does it take before that manganese  
**[0:31:21-0:31:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:31:21):**  might be released again and converted back into a form that the plants can actually utilize?  Yes, that is a concern and I think there's several issues here. You have the effect on  the shift in the balance of the microbial diversity and if that's shifted towards a  
**[0:31:46-0:32:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:31:46):**  lot of manganese oxidizers that is causing manganese not to be available. I think over  time if one were to offer the management to include let's say cover crops or at least  the different crops within the rotations and once you do that, you can stimulate other  
**[0:32:04-0:32:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:32:04):**  types of microorganisms that will help free that manganese or at least compete with those  oxidizers to reduce their impact on that. So that would be one possibility. The other  and how long that will take, it's hard to say. It may take a couple of seasons or maybe  
**[0:32:26-0:32:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:32:26):**  less. That's something that really needs to be looked into. The other issue is something  that we mentioned previously is that how much manganese can be immobilized or chelated by  the residual glyphosate and residual AMPA. That I think is a very serious issue especially  
**[0:32:46-0:33:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:32:46):**  if we are in soils where the texture is such or the level of phosphorus in the soil is  low that you don't have any competition with the glyphosate and AMPA, they will obviously  chelate or immobilize manganese as well. I don't think we have any real good information  
**[0:33:11-0:33:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:33:11):**  on how long that can happen or what the extent that situation is as far as tying up manganese  over the long term but I think taking all that together with the shift in the microbes,  the residual glyphosate and the AMPA and the basically continuous corn-soybean rotation,  
**[0:33:32-0:33:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:33:32):**  if that continues the manganese problem may persist.  When you speak of growing crops in or bringing crops into a rotation to help reduce some  of that manganese and increase its availability, what are some crops that are really effective  
**[0:33:49-0:34:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:33:49):**  at having a reducing effect and shifting the biology and the availability of manganese  in the soil profile?  Well, I don't have any very specific ones but certainly when you have a diversity of  
**[0:34:04-0:34:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:34:04):**  let's say cover crops in a mix, there will be some that will either support different  local communities that are able to let's say mobilize these micronutrients, others that  can actually mobilize the nutrients themselves. A common example is the use of let's say buckwheat  
**[0:34:28-0:34:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:34:28):**  that can or some of the brassica crops that can mobilize phosphorus or neutralize nitrates,  those types of things.  And then let's say you bring in something like sorghum into the rotations, grain sorghum  
**[0:34:42-0:35:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:34:42):**  or sweet sorghum, anything in that sorghum family, from my experience they have a keen  ability to host a lot of mycorrhizal fungi in their root system. And of course mycorrhizae  are very adept at mobilizing many nutrients, not just phosphorus. If you could put in a  
**[0:35:06-0:35:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:35:06):**  crop like that or other crops that can host mycorrhizae, that would be a very good way  of maybe getting around the manganese problem and improving root growth as well as improving  the overall diversity of microbial community.  
**[0:35:22-0:35:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:35:22):**  One of the pieces you mentioned earlier was the impact of genetically modified plants  themselves outside of glyphosate and AMPA. How do GMOs impact the soil's microbial community?  Well there's not a lot of information. We know that we found with soybean for example,  
**[0:35:45-0:36:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:35:45):**  you have what happens during genetic modification, you can have some what's called pleiotrophic  effects which are in other words indirect effects due to the genetic modification that  is additional to the intended effect. In other words, in addition to the effect of making  
**[0:36:04-0:36:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:36:04):**  the plant resistant to glyphosate. And so there's things that can happen that we've  noticed in the root system with some of the early genetically modified soybean varieties  anyway that even without being treated with glyphosate, the roots seem to release a lot  
**[0:36:24-0:36:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:36:24):**  more quantities of carbohydrates or soluble carbon and amino acids. And so this is problematic  because what that does, it attracts a lot of microbes that readily use this material  and many of those can be potential pathogens. So you have a potential problem with not only  
**[0:36:44-0:37:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:36:44):**  some root pathology but also it's possible to build up these segments of the microbial  population that can be carried over from year to year. Another situation where we find these  effects we noticed in corn but not in all corn varieties but in many varieties that  
**[0:37:05-0:37:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:37:05):**  had been genetically modified to be resistant to insects using the BT gene, there would  be a side effect where some of the corn stalks would have a lot more lignin in it than others.  Lignin is very difficult to decompose. That's one of the reasons why sometimes we see a  
**[0:37:23-0:37:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:37:23):**  lot of that residue being carried over for two or three years in the field because so  much lignin, it can't be decomposed very fast. And I think there are other situations that  can occur. I mean there may be some modification that we found. I had a Brazilian student there  
**[0:37:44-0:38:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:37:44):**  that looked at some of the nutrient composition, some of the omega fatty acid ratios were changed  in soybean due to the genetic modification and that kind of thing. Now I can't say for  sure if that has changed with some of the more recent cultivars because I haven't really  
**[0:38:06-0:38:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:38:06):**  been looking at that too closely over the last few years but as you know in our commodity  agriculture these varieties change almost from year to year and some of the varieties  that we were using let's say 15 years ago are not available anymore. So that's always  
**[0:38:22-0:38:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:38:22):**  another problem. You just don't know whether the effects of these newer varieties are any  better or if they're any worse unless somebody has a research program that's addressing that.  Your first point is very intriguing though. In essence what you're describing is that  
**[0:38:37-0:38:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:38:37):**  these crops and these plants may have the capacity to actually develop a disease enhancing  soil profile which is interesting when you consider the long-term implications. Right.  Yeah I mean that was a complete unexpected result that we had and we were comparing this  
**[0:38:54-0:39:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:38:54):**  to some of the old non-GMO varieties like Williams 82 or Maverick and these kinds of  things and they had much lower soluble carbon and amino acid release. So it was quite interesting  to say at least. What do you believe to be true about modern agriculture that many other  
**[0:39:16-0:39:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:39:16):**  people don't believe to be true? Oh well it's you know there are a lot of issues. You know  we can kind of go back to this whole organic matter issue. We're seeing a lot of soils  under modern agriculture and we say that you know we talked about the intensive use of  
**[0:39:37-0:39:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:39:37):**  chemical inputs and the GM crops and all that. You know we're seeing a depletion of soil  organic matter content in these fields. I've been tracking some fields for 30 years or  better and soils at one time had let's say 3% organic matter and now down to almost 1%.  
**[0:39:55-0:40:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:39:55):**  And I think a lot of folks will not you know kind of dismiss that like it isn't happening  but when you use you know intensive let's say nitrogen inputs like anhydrous ammonia  and all that and you're not putting in more organic residues whether it's from the crop  
**[0:40:16-0:40:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:40:16):**  or with cover crops or organic amendments like manures and compost, that nitrogen has  to be used. If it's not all used by the crop, the microbes are going to use it and they  are going to use whatever carbon is available in the soil and I'm certain that's where a  
**[0:40:32-0:40:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:40:32):**  lot of that depletion in the organic matter is happening. And you know there are some  real good studies over at the University of Illinois that have shown this and even they  were very much criticized by that. People didn't want to believe it and of course a  
**[0:40:45-0:41:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:40:45):**  lot of it you know it comes down to money, it comes down to what the fertilizer companies  are trying to make money at that. If you tell them that some of their product is ruining  soil, some of the soil properties, that's not going to make them very happy.  
**[0:41:01-0:41:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:41:01):**  This idea of the soluble carbon component and the importance of the soluble carbon component  has come up in conversation a number of times recently and you've just expressed how we  are losing that. How can we regenerate that in the soil profile?  
**[0:41:17-0:41:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:41:17):**  Well you know again it all goes back to having plants and I think I've seen this on your  website, you know having a diversity of plants on the soil and having living roots in the  soil for as long during the year as possible. You know when you can do that and harvest  
**[0:41:38-0:42:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:41:38):**  as much carbon dioxide and use the sunlight to produce the carbohydrates in the plant  and if you have a good profile that is inhabited by roots, you will get that soluble or labile  carbon back and the reason that is is because many plants, well I should say all plants,  
**[0:42:02-0:42:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:42:02):**  estimated depending on the plant, anywhere from 20 to maybe 50% of the carbon that is  fixed through photosynthesis will be released through roots by the plant and it's not because  the plant is compromised like with a disease or anything, it just naturally does that and  
**[0:42:20-0:42:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:42:20):**  that carbon supports the microbial communities in the soil. So I think something just as  simple as mixing up that rotation, it's too bad that we don't grow as much wheat in the  Midwest like we used to, that would be an excellent way of doing that. You follow corn  
**[0:42:39-0:43:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:42:39):**  or soybeans with wheat, you have wheat going into the winter, you can frost seed clovers  or lespedeza or whatever in with the wheat and then next spring and you have a nice cover  crop going into the next planting season, what better way to really get your soil revitalized  
**[0:43:00-0:43:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:43:00):**  than doing something like that? Certainly the farmers that we have observed who are  developing strong cover crop systems such as Gabe Brown and Dave Brandt and others are  regenerating their soil carbon and their soil organic matter very rapidly and producing  
**[0:43:17-0:43:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:43:17):**  some very nice crop results as well. So I believe there's a lot of potential. Exactly.  What is a book or resource that you recommend most often to growers to learn more information  about any of these various systems that we've talked about? Well, there are some around  
**[0:43:38-0:43:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:43:38):**  that are useful and are not that technical. The one on teeming with microbes is good.  Is that a long one? Yes, that one I think is a good overview of what's going on in the  soil and describes what these different organisms are. I know he's got one called Teeming with  
**[0:43:59-0:44:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:43:59):**  Fungi but I don't know if that's much more informative than just the first one that he  wrote on teeming with microbes. Another one that I found that is very interesting is one  called Mycorrhizal Plant. Are you familiar with that one? I'm not familiar with that  
**[0:44:15-0:44:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:44:15):**  one. Pardon me? That is a new one for me. Yeah, well you can get it from acres and it's  really good. If you wanted to focus on the mycorrhizae and what they are, what they do  and how to have those established in the soil, I think that's about as good as a, let's say  
**[0:44:36-0:44:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:44:36):**  at the high school level I'd say as far as understanding what's going on. I think that's  a good one to have and it's reasonably priced. So those are two that with the standpoint  of having a microbial emphasis is good. And then there are some others about, oh, whether  
**[0:44:56-0:45:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:44:56):**  it's Save Our Soil or something like that, that would be good from a soil standpoint.  I just don't have those titles at hand right now but certainly I could provide you a list  of what I have later. I would appreciate that and I will attach that list to the episode.  
**[0:45:13-0:45:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:45:13):**  Okay. What is the question you wish I would have asked? Yeah, that's a good one. Well,  I'm sure this is something that I'm sure you have encountered. I have also, one of the  things that I did mention of the many projects that I've had over the years is that I get  
**[0:45:35-0:45:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:45:35):**  asked to evaluate a lot of biological products. I don't know if a lot of the folks that you  work with have looked into these kinds of things but some of those are very interesting  and some of them I would not recommend at all. That kind of question I thought maybe  
**[0:45:59-0:46:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:45:59):**  would come up. So of these various biological products, what are some of the ideas or the  technologies that you're really excited about? Okay. Well, there are some that I think, okay,  I think we got maybe back up a minute. There are a lot of different classifications of  
**[0:46:18-0:46:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:46:18):**  biological products and I don't think anybody has really settled on anything that is set  in stone so to speak at this point. But there are things like biostimulants that help with  the microbial community activity as well as the plant especially in terms of root growth  
**[0:46:39-0:46:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:46:39):**  and plant growth regulation. There are things that are called probiotic type biological  products and these have the actual living organisms in them and they are supposed to  be selected that help promote growth of plants and maybe help some of the soil functions  
**[0:46:56-0:47:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:46:56):**  such as cyclone nitrogen and phosphorus and these kinds of things. Some claim to have  nitrogen fixing bacteria in them but I haven't had much luck in showing that that actually  happens. And then there's another product, class of products known as prebiotic and there  
**[0:47:14-0:47:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:47:14):**  are quite a few of these out there. What a prebiotic is, is a solution or a product that  is made of the metabolites or the biochemical products of microorganisms but do not contain  living microorganisms. So you have that kind of thing and they're supposed to again, they  
**[0:47:38-0:47:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:47:38):**  not only stimulate growth of the plant because I've seen the chromatographic spectrum of  one product and it shows there could be 300 different compounds in this thing. They don't  even know what they all are or what they all do but they do know that some of them stimulate  
**[0:47:54-0:48:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:47:54):**  plant growth. Some of them are plant growth regulators like cytokinin and gibberellins  and all that and some of them stimulate the microbes in the soil. So here's the issue  with all this is that most of these products, their effect or their efficacy is primarily  
**[0:48:15-0:48:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:48:15):**  based on testimonials. They haven't really been tested by unbiased parties. But there  are a few out there that have been tested like we've tested some and some have been  tested by other either institutions or companies to show some effect. So I guess what I'm saying  
**[0:48:38-0:49:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:48:38):**  is that those that I've looked at that work really well, I'm impressed with. Some of them  have these specific plant growth regulators that really help with root growth. It helps  with plant vigor and we find that they will also stimulate certain microbial groups in  
**[0:49:01-0:49:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:49:01):**  the root zones or rhizospheres of these crops. And of course, here's the other caveat to  all this. A lot of these companies will approach us and say they want to test their chemical  to see if they can offset the effects of glyphosate because they know there might be an angle  
**[0:49:19-0:49:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:49:19):**  there that might make their product a little more valuable to the farmer because if they  can say, well, glyphosate has these detrimental effects that have these side effects but our  product can counteract that, well, that makes that product even more valuable. So in some  
**[0:49:36-0:49:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:49:36):**  cases, we've been able to show that. Some of these products we tested for more than  two or three or four years, we consistently see that there is an offset. But the biggest  issue I've had is that some of these products will do all that. Will even actually help  
**[0:49:54-0:50:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:49:54):**  the soil health indicators and help plant growth. But then at the end of the day, at  the end of the season, we don't see that much increase in yield. And I think that's the  bottom line with these products is that if you're going to sell or buy these, you want  
**[0:50:07-0:50:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:50:07):**  to have enough of a yield increase that will pay for the product. A few years ago when  we had higher prices for corn, there were a lot of people using these things. Right  now, not so much. But I do believe that some out there that are worth the money because  
**[0:50:25-0:50:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:50:25):**  I've seen how they work. And I think that they not only help the current crop, but I  think they help offset some of the detrimental effects that has happened to the overall soil  community due to some of the modern agricultural techniques that we're using.  
**[0:50:40-0:50:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:50:40):**  We use these various, we use a number of different bio stimulants and probiotics, microbial inoculants  in the crop programs that we put together. And as we have tested many different products  from different companies over the years, one of the biggest challenges that we have observed  
**[0:50:59-0:51:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:50:59):**  is, and of course, looking at things on a field scale and not always that they're not  usually replicated to trials. But one of the challenges that we've observed is the inconsistency  of results where we might have a product that produces extraordinary results, perhaps let's  
**[0:51:17-0:51:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:51:17):**  say 30 or 40% of the time. So it works really well sometimes, but it doesn't work consistently.  And it's, that's been a very interesting observation because it happens and has happened, has occurred  with quite a number of products, which has led me to ask the question or to wonder whether  
**[0:51:36-0:51:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:51:36):**  there is also an environmental component of what is happening in the soil profile, what's  happening in that field, and do we really have the right conditions where we're giving  an inoculant or a probiotic the opportunity for success?  
**[0:51:51-0:52:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:51:51):**  No, I think you're right on onto something there, John, because that's what I try to  indicate to the manufacturers when we test these products here, because we're seeing  the same deal. That's why I wouldn't make any conclusions on what we've seen on just  
**[0:52:12-0:52:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:52:12):**  one year data. We've got to have at least two or three years. And even at that, sometimes  we do have the same positive yields. And the very thing that you mentioned about the other  factors that enter into this as far as the performance of these products, that point  
**[0:52:34-0:52:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:52:34):**  is well taken. And I say that because we're located in a part of the state that doesn't  have the best soils for producing corn and soybean. I mean, it has this clay pan. Conditions  have to be just perfect in order to get a very good and acceptable harvest from year  
**[0:52:54-0:53:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:52:54):**  to year. So I think we're testing some of these products under conditions from the standpoint  of soils that is pretty rigorous. And if we take this and do it, say, in some of the molestalls  or the high organic or more fertile soils in the upper Midwest, we might see something  
**[0:53:17-0:53:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:53:17):**  completely different. So I think these companies, I know that they are not as flush as some  of the big ag chemical companies, but they really want to show how these products perform.  They need to be doing this in different regions of the country or even internationally in  
**[0:53:35-0:53:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:53:35):**  order to really show how these products perform.  Absolutely. What is the one action that you would recommend that growers need to take?  Growers from the standpoint of growers under any situation or any system.  
**[0:53:51-0:54:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:53:51):**  Just in general?  Yeah, in general. Well, here's the deal, I think. We look at some of the principles of  sustainable agriculture. One of them is we've got to keep the soil covered. And that doesn't  
**[0:54:08-0:54:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:54:08):**  necessarily mean that we have to have cover crops on it. But we've got to have, after  harvest, that soil needs to be covered because if it's bare or if there's not much covered  with the residue, it is exposed to the elements. There's hardly any restoration of moisture  
**[0:54:29-0:54:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:54:29):**  in there if it's bare. I think that is a key. And then, of course, keeping living plants  on that soil is even better yet because we get that organic matter built up, it will  absorb more soil, you won't have a lot of erosion, and infiltration will be more regulated.  
**[0:54:51-0:55:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:54:51):**  And I think those are keys. I had to say one thing to produce. There is one thing, if we  have a little time, one thing that we didn't mention, and this is a practice that we used  to do, let's say 50, 40 years ago, was to integrate livestock in with the cropping system.  
**[0:55:11-0:55:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:55:11):**  I believe that if we could run livestock, again, out on the fields, and I know it's  not going to happen, but maybe for family farmers it can, and we can have livestock  out there that helps process the residues or even graze cover crops and recycle some  
**[0:55:28-0:55:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:55:28):**  of the organic matter, stimulate the root growth by grazing. I think that's a great  practice that we have pretty much forgotten about.  That's a very interesting comment, Robert, because that's come up in a number of conversations  
**[0:55:42-0:56:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:55:42):**  recently about the impact that livestock can have on rebuilding soil organic matter and  kind of rebuilding the entire ecosystem to a much higher plateau, a much higher state  of health and overall vitality and performance. So, I guess the question I would have for  
**[0:56:01-0:56:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:56:01):**  you is that there's been some discussion that perhaps the economics of beef production,  if we were to look, if we were to manage our livestock, and more specifically, if we were  to manage forages with the same level of intensity that we manage some of our other crops, the  
**[0:56:20-0:56:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:56:20):**  economics may actually be there to out-compete and to outperform current commodity crops,  particularly with commodity crop prices, such as corn prices being where they are right  now. So, do you have any insights to offer on that? What are the economic implications  
**[0:56:35-0:56:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:56:35):**  of managing grazing very closely and very carefully compared to current commodity crops?  Oh, yeah, that's a good question. I don't have a whole lot of insight into that, but  just knowing in isolated situations where, well, your example of Gabe Brown is perfect  
**[0:56:56-0:57:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:56:56):**  for this because they've got the system where they integrate their grazing herds into their  forages that is then rotated eventually into row crops, as I understand it. So, the economics,  I think, would be there. And of course, this is a bias. I believe the more exposure you  
**[0:57:21-0:57:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:57:21):**  have for livestock that are grazing, that are not confined, that meat quality is going  to be so much better than what you find from a feeding floor. I think if one would push  the pencil on that, I believe you would find that the overall profits in a system that  
**[0:57:40-0:58:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:57:40):**  would very much outweigh the way we are doing commodity crops currently. To me, commodity  crops are just, it's just emphasized a little bit too much. It's for the commodity market,  for exports, for biofuels and all that. Very little of it goes to feed, although a lot  
**[0:58:02-0:58:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:58:02):**  of soybean meal go to feed, but for livestock feed. But we've really gotten away from what  an agro-ecosystem should be. I think when the family farmer or the smaller scale farmer  had livestock integrated into the system, the profitability was there. It's just that  
**[0:58:27-0:58:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:58:27):**  it's been hijacked by industry. I think that's the bottom line. Now, if there were a way  to turn that corner and bring some of that back, I believe a lot of folks would be surprised  how profitable that would be. But unfortunately, I can't give you any solid figures at this  
**[0:58:45-0:58:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:58:45):**  point.  That's okay. Robert, it's been a tremendous honor to have you here on the podcast and  sharing your thoughts. Thank you very much. We look forward to having you back at some  
**[0:58:56-0:59:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:58:56):**  point in the future. Thank you for sharing.  All right, John. It's been my pleasure. I've enjoyed visiting with you. I hope that this  little information will be useful to your listeners.  
**[0:59:06-0:59:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:59:06):**  Thank you.  This podcast was brought to you by a great company that I work for, Advancing Eco-Agriculture,  the leader in regenerative agriculture since 2006. At AA, we believe in challenging the  
**[0:59:18-0:59:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:59:18):**  status quo to find more profitable and regenerative ways to grow crops. We also believe that healthy  plants are resistant to pests and disease and that to grow healthy plants, we must first  think differently about agriculture, about empowering life instead of suppressing life,  
**[0:59:34-0:59:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:59:34):**  about regeneration versus degeneration. To achieve this, we formulate and sell products  that help growers produce higher quality yield with less risk of crop failure. In short,  we help growers make more money with less risk. If you aren't yet an AA customer, go  
**[0:59:50-1:00:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/increasing-biological-populations-with-robert-kremer/#t=0:59:50):**  to advancingecoag.com and use the code, REGENRATE5 for 5% off your first order. Thank you for  listening.  