---
title: Jerry Hatfield on Why Should We Care About Soil Health
---
### Regenerative Agriculture Podcast  (2018-05-30)  
### Author(s): John Kempf  

**[0:00:00-0:00:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:00:00):**  Hi friends, I'm Jon Kempf hosting this podcast. I am passionate about developing regenerative  agriculture systems that improve soil health, produce crops that are completely resistant to  diseases and insects, and produce fruit of such an exceptional quality that we can have a legitimate  
**[0:00:16-0:00:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:00:16):**  conversation about growing food as medicine. I've discovered that there are many people with  incredible knowledge and information about soil and plant systems and how to develop regenerative  agriculture systems. However, much of this knowledge and this information is scattered.  
**[0:00:33-0:00:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:00:33):**  It's found all over the place. Some of it has been published in peer-reviewed publications,  but there are many incredible stories and a lot of knowledge that has not been published  and that hasn't been shared with many people. I started Advancing Eco-Agriculture in 2006 to  
**[0:00:49-0:00:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:00:49):**  bring this knowledge together in a more coherent fashion and incorporate it into products and  growing systems that growers can easily put into practice. It's my personal mission to have these  regenerative agricultural systems become adopted globally and become the mainstream, the status  
**[0:01:05-0:01:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:01:05):**  quo against which all other growing systems are compared. To help achieve this goal, I want to  share the knowledge that we have learned in the last decade and make it available to everyone.  While we have developed products at AEA that embody the principles of regenerative agriculture  
**[0:01:22-0:01:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:01:22):**  systems and make them easier for growers to apply, this knowledge and these principles can be applied  anywhere. And when they are applied properly, they will always increase farm profitability and  resilience to climate stress. If you have any questions, suggestions, comments, or ideas,  
**[0:01:40-0:01:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:01:40):**  topics that you would like for me to discuss, please connect on LinkedIn or on Twitter, where  my username is at visionbuilder7 or you can also email me at john at johnkempf.com. I would very  much like to hear from you and to hear your feedback. Be sure to subscribe to this podcast  
**[0:01:59-0:02:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:01:59):**  and thank you very much for listening. Enjoy the show. Greetings friends and welcome to the  Regenerative Agriculture podcast. On this podcast, we explore the science and practical application  of regenerative agriculture ecosystems and talk about how to regenerate soil and crop health and  
**[0:02:15-0:02:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:02:15):**  quality. And also very importantly, how to increase farm profitability. In this episode,  I'm very excited to welcome Jerry Hatfield to our show. Jerry and I had a bit of a technology  mishap. I actually interviewed Jerry a little while ago and we mysteriously lost the first  
**[0:02:37-0:02:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:02:37):**  several minutes of the audio recording vanished into the ether somewhere. So I'm circling back  around with Jerry to recapture some of the pieces that we spoke about in the very beginning.  And you may notice a short blip as the audio switches from one to another a few minutes into  
**[0:02:55-0:03:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:02:55):**  the clip, but wanted to recapture some of those pieces. So Jerry, thank you very much for joining  us. We're very excited to have you here in the podcast. Well, I'm glad to be here, John. Jerry,  you've done a lot of intriguing work with soils, looking at how soils and plants interact and how  
**[0:03:13-0:03:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:03:13):**  they are impacted by climate. What have been some of the highlights that have led you to the things  that you're working on today and some of the things that you're looking at? You know, you look  at, it's always interesting to look back at one's career and think about the paths that we take in  
**[0:03:30-0:03:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:03:30):**  terms of investigations and looking at the piece of this. But I think the largest thing that drives  me is how can we improve the efficiency of plants to capture water, capture nutrients, capture light,  and put that into productivity. And we don't often think about, we've got this basic process of  
**[0:03:54-0:04:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:03:54):**  photosynthesis, you know, that creates all the carbohydrates that really drives the whole plant  growth process. But that system in itself is really interacts with what happens within the soil.  It happens with what happens within the plant. You got this very complex set of interactions going on.  
**[0:04:16-0:04:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:04:16):**  But what drives a lot of our questions right now is, what role does this whole soil-plant  atmosphere continuum have in terms of improving not only the productivity of the plant, but also  the quality of the products that that plant is harvested for. And if we're thinking about the  
**[0:04:40-0:04:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:04:40):**  grain with protein or a vegetable with a certain amount of material that we want in their sugar  content and fruit, you know, all those different things. And so become very fascinated with just  how some of these things that we do influences what the quality of that produce that we're  
**[0:05:00-0:05:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:05:00):**  trying to derive from that plant. Today, there's a lot of discussion about how if we want to grow  healthy plants, we need to have a healthy soil. And there are lots of conversations around  soil health and how to improve soil health and you can do this and you can do that.  
**[0:05:19-0:05:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:05:19):**  But it seems to me that perhaps we've missed one of the several important pieces in thinking  about soil health. And the question I would have for you is, why should we care about soil health?  Yeah, that's not to say that's always an interesting question, because I think that  
**[0:05:36-0:05:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:05:36):**  sometimes we're so enamored with soil health and saying, well, what's the perfect measurement of  soil health, that we lose sight of the fact of why do we want healthy soils to start with? I mean,  if you just think about the whole process, I think they're in the whole soil health arena,  
**[0:05:56-0:06:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:05:56):**  they're really looking at a couple fundamental pieces of this. And one of the first pieces of  soil health is what I would call the aggregation structure. What is really that surface of that  soil look like? Because the surface of the soil is the interface between the soil and the atmosphere.  
**[0:06:16-0:06:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:06:16):**  And we know that those stable aggregates that are near the surface is what allows the rainfall  or irrigation water to penetrate into that soil. And we say, well, we've improved the  infiltration rate, we get water into it. But we forget that same aggregation structure  
**[0:06:35-0:06:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:06:35):**  is critical for the exchange of CO2 and oxygen between the atmosphere and the soil as well.  And that may be even more critical than the water infiltration rates. And why that becomes important  is because below our soil surface is a really complex set of biological components, whether  
**[0:06:57-0:07:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:06:57):**  they be roots, all the microbial system that's there, the fauna that's living there, earthworms,  bugs, everything else is living there, all of those need oxygen as well. And so when we  trap that off, you know, we basically have, we limit our biological activity. But if you just  
**[0:07:16-0:07:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:07:16):**  take and extend that simple process and say, all right, we're getting water into the soil,  we're getting air into the soil, CO2 and oxygen into that soil, and that's driving the biological  process. But it's that biological process that's going on that really determines the what those  
**[0:07:34-0:07:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:07:34):**  plants are doing in terms of being able to take up nutrients, how nutrients get cycled, the  differences between a diseased soil and a non-diseased soil, all of those things that we look at.  And so you can think about the healthy soil as a healthy ecosystem below the soil surface,  
**[0:07:54-0:08:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:07:54):**  and you begin to drive this process forward. And the reason for caring really comes down to  very simple things is that we make that whole plant system much more efficient in terms of the  use of water, or the use of light or the use of nutrients so that we're actually getting more  
**[0:08:12-0:08:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:08:12):**  plant biomass or more plant product, whether it's grain or fruits or vegetables or anything else,  per unit of the natural resources that we're putting in. And the soil health becomes the  kind of the unifying factor that allows that efficiency to take place. It also allows that  
**[0:08:31-0:08:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:08:31):**  quality of that produce to be positively affected.  So in essence, what I'm hearing you describe is that soil health is a very big term that  encompasses multiple aspects, but the big pieces are that, or perhaps the most fundamental piece  
**[0:08:49-0:08:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:08:49):**  is that it provides the environment in which biology can function to increase, which provides  the environment for plants to really be a lot more efficient. You're describing, if I'm  understanding it correctly, you're describing soil health is needed and is necessary to allow  
**[0:09:09-0:09:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:09:09):**  biology to function so that plants can function. So you're really describing biology as being  kind of this bridge, this mediator between what is happening in soil and what is happening in plants.  Yep, that's really the essence of it. And I don't know that we've ever, we don't put it in that  
**[0:09:24-0:09:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:09:24):**  context very often. We talk about soil health, we talk about the fact that we've improved  infiltration or we've improved gas exchange or we've, we actually it's even more fundamental than  that. We talk about improving CEC or improving infiltration rates or aggregate structure,  
**[0:09:43-0:09:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:09:43):**  reducing bulk density. To me, those are metrics, but in reality, we need to put it together and  say, so what? And the so what is that we want that soil really to enhance our plant function  at the end of the day for multiple reasons.  
**[0:10:00-0:10:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:10:00):**  In terms of how things get cycled, how they get released, how they begin to apply back to that  crop. So now you think about the other piece of this is that we've released all this, we've made  it available, there's plenty of oxygen for that root to grow quite efficiently. There's plenty of  
**[0:10:21-0:10:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:10:21):**  water for that plant not to have any suffering in there. And so we end up balancing that whole  system so that plant can perform optimally. And when it begins to perform optimally is when we  see a lot greater increase in quality. It really, it makes a little difference if we're talking  
**[0:10:42-0:10:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:10:42):**  about a grain crop, a fruit crop or a leafy vegetable crop, we see in those crops and when we  put them in those situations, much higher quality produce of however we think about  produce out there. If it's lettuce, it's kale, or if it's tomatoes or strawberries, or if it's  
**[0:10:59-0:11:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:10:59):**  corn or wheat, we see an improved quality of all that just because of the simple changes that we  made that basically started with soil health. So that's a really, Jerry, when you talk about  quality for all these different plants, some crop quality, we're talking about improved test weight,  
**[0:11:18-0:11:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:11:18):**  others we're talking about improved protein content, we're talking about improved protein  content, there's many different components of quality. How does one overarching characteristic  such as improved soil quality improve all these various characteristics with different plants?  
**[0:11:36-0:11:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:11:36):**  Yeah, that becomes a dynamic that if we think about improvement, and let's just take  grain for example in terms of test weight protein content as one example in all of this, is we begin  to create a more balanced system within our soil so that we've got this balanced nutrients and  
**[0:11:59-0:12:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:11:59):**  we're balancing that against all the different things of root function in terms of the water  uptake and gas exchange and exudates and all of that, is that we basically are taking that plant  and saying that metabolically within that plant we've created a condition in which that plant  
**[0:12:19-0:12:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:12:19):**  has the capacity to store more carbohydrates more efficiently and all the carbohydrate byproducts  efficiently within that grain. And we end up with higher test weights, we end up with  higher protein content, we can end up with higher oil content of what that's what we're looking at,  
**[0:12:37-0:12:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:12:37):**  and it really is a complex set of interactions but it all begins with saying how do we improve  the capacity of that plant and that soil to interact together in terms of extracting these  nutrients, extracting water, and just allowing that plant to optimize itself. We've been having  
**[0:12:55-0:13:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:12:55):**  this conversation about soil health and crop health but I think perhaps we haven't discussed  one very fundamental piece is how do we regenerate soil health? How do we improve soil health to a  much higher plateau of performance? Yeah, you're right, it's very good to talk about the impact  
**[0:13:15-0:13:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:13:15):**  of what this means but the question that producers ask is how do we get there? And I  constructed a while ago what I call the soil aggregation ladder. How do you build soils back up?  And the first rung on that ladder is biological activity. We have to restore biological activity  
**[0:13:38-0:13:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:13:38):**  within that soil and soil biology wants four things. It wants food, water, air, and shelter.  And what do you want? You want food, water, air, and shelter. The basic four needs that we have  as humans is what the biology wants within that soil. You think about the shelter piece and just  
**[0:13:58-0:14:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:13:58):**  very quickly to explain that, the shelter piece is soil biology doesn't want any more extremes in the  environment than you and I do. They don't want to be exposed to real hot conditions or real dry  conditions or real cold conditions. So one of the things in terms of shelter is basically to put  
**[0:14:15-0:14:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:14:15):**  some sort of cover over that soil. Living cover, residue cover, compost cover at the surface  because it modifies that temperature moisture regime that that soil is going through.  Just to give you an example, conventional corn soybean systems early June typical year,  
**[0:14:37-0:14:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:14:37):**  that soil surface temperature will be 120 degrees Fahrenheit. It'll be plus 100 with  one or two inches within that soil surface and extremely dry. Well that's beyond the range in  which plants biological activity really functions well. But if we just add a little bit of shading,  
**[0:14:57-0:15:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:14:57):**  a little bit of residue cover to that, we take that soil surface temperature down to 86 degrees,  85 degrees, we keep it moist all the time. Well that's the optimum environment for that  biology to begin to express itself. So we don't cook that biology out of the soil.  
**[0:15:15-0:15:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:15:15):**  You know, at the same time adding that root material and everything else as a food source  for the biology to be working on. A lot of our modern agricultural systems is that we're not  supplying food throughout the whole year. I mean you just go back to corn and soybeans. Basically  
**[0:15:34-0:15:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:15:34):**  they're growing three, three and a half months out of the year. You know, what if I only fed you  three and a half months out of the 12 months? You know, and that's kind of how we do our biology is  that we don't think about what it takes to feed that biological systems throughout the whole  
**[0:15:51-0:15:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:15:51):**  12 month cycle that's out there. And the other piece then is again going back to why do we do  soil health in terms of the oxygen exchange is that a lot of these are aerobic systems. You know,  they want oxygen as much as you and I. If you cut that oxygen supply off, you cut the biology off  
**[0:16:11-0:16:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:16:11):**  as well. So you've got food, water, air and shelter. And so all of these things fit together  and that's the first rung on this ladder in which we begin to build soils up. Well once we begin to  stabilize that, we see a lot of organic matter cycling. They begin to break down root material.  
**[0:16:30-0:16:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:16:30):**  You know, the more diverse we can keep the root system in terms of all this, the more diverse we  see our biology. One of the things that fascinates me is that in our soils where we've got diverse  rotation, we see a lot different biological activity. We see a lot different CO2 and oxygen  
**[0:16:51-0:16:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:16:51):**  dynamics going on in that profile which is indicative of the biological activity than if we  have a monoculture. And so it's very interesting in all of this and I think we're just on the cusp  of really beginning to realize how the diversity of plants that we put on in a soil increases the  
**[0:17:08-0:17:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:17:08):**  diversity of the biological system. The unfortunate part is that if we talk about the soil microbiome,  all the different things that make up that biological system in the soil, is that we  probably only understand 5% of that microbiome. 95%, you know, we don't really understand yet.  
**[0:17:27-0:17:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:17:27):**  So we're in a frontier in my opinion of being able to do this. So you know we've got organic  matter cycling. Once you get the organic matter cycling, we see a lot of nutrient cycling going  on and those are what I characterize as the dynamic and invisible processes that are going  
**[0:17:45-0:17:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:17:45):**  on in soil. We don't see them but we do see the outcome of one of the outcomes that we see out of  that that we've talked about earlier is that we see that stable aggregates because we know that  those aggregates come from a biological system that's giving off exudates forming that glue that  
**[0:18:05-0:18:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:18:05):**  makes that aggregate, the sand, silt and clay and organic matter really form together in a much  better way than what we have. And then we also see the other outcome in terms of improved infiltration  rates and gas exchange rates. So it's just kind of that ladder that we build up as we think about  
**[0:18:22-0:18:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:18:22):**  all these things coming together. One of the pieces that I've just been amazed by is how quickly  the entire ecosystem can improve and how quickly soil health can get to a much better place.  So how fast do you believe we can regenerate soil health and improve soil health to a much  
**[0:18:42-0:18:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:18:42):**  higher plateau of performance? That's a fascinating question because we often assume that  soil is a very sluggish system that it takes years and decades to see these changes in here.  But we're seeing that within one growing season we can begin to see changes in the aggregates  
**[0:19:08-0:19:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:19:08):**  near the surface, we change changes in the biological activity, we see all of these things  going on. I think there are a lot of dynamics that are occurring very very quickly in our soils.  Any step back and you think about why would that be? Well it really is a function that  
**[0:19:27-0:19:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:19:27):**  biology actually works quite quickly. The impacts of that occur quite quickly. It may take centuries  to degrade a rock to soil but it may take only months to see changes in how that biological  system is working. We've been able in some of our experiments where we control the environment,  
**[0:19:52-0:19:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:19:52):**  we put different combinations of crops on there. We've seen that we can change the aggregates near  that surface within one growing season and those aggregates haven't fully reached the  stable aggregate size yet but the fact that they've already begun to change is indicative of  
**[0:20:13-0:20:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:20:13):**  that we can take these soils through transitions, we can do it rather quickly and we have a  tremendous impact on this. We just have to understand that we as humans tend to think  that we manipulate this system and can do anything we want with it. We need to change our philosophy  
**[0:20:28-0:20:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:20:28):**  and say how do we allow the biology to assist us in reaching the end goal that we want out there  in terms of soils. Exactly. A moment ago you mentioned how you had observed having a diverse  number of different plants produce very different soil microbial changes or soil aggregate changes  
**[0:20:48-0:20:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:20:48):**  than just having a single species. Can you describe a little bit for us what you've been observing?  Yeah, we have a very interesting experiment underway and these are columns of soil.  These are 18 inches in diameter, they're 24 inches deep, they're instrumented with soil water  
**[0:21:06-0:21:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:21:06):**  sensors and temperature sensors and electrical conductivity and CO2 sensors and oxygen sensors  and we've taken these 18 inch cores and we've divided them into basically pie shapes so there's  a third of the core and it's divided all the way down to the bottom so they're separate pieces  
**[0:21:25-0:21:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:21:25):**  except for drainage at the bottom. We put in a no cover crop, we put in an oat cover crop and we put  in a cover crop cocktail which was an oat, a pea and a radish. Where we did the oat, pea and a  radish even compared to the monoculture oat we saw an entirely different CO2 and oxygen regime within  
**[0:21:52-0:21:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:21:52):**  that the soil columns. We saw a different change in the aggregate structure because we come in and  we just collect samples right near the surface when we finish these runs. All these different  things are going on but you also, this isn't just our observations out there. If you look at  
**[0:22:12-0:22:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:22:12):**  individuals that have been running cover crop cocktails in you know fields and things like that,  the changes that they see in their soils and when they talk about the changes in organic matter and  changes in soil, much more rapid when they've got the cocktail than when they've got the monoculture  
**[0:22:30-0:22:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:22:30):**  out there and that was what kind of fascinated this on this whole process of really what's  happening in there. Well if you think about this just merely from a standpoint that exudates are  going to be given off by an oat as opposed to the exudates from a legume or an exudates from a radish  
**[0:22:48-0:22:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:22:48):**  are going to create a diverse set of exudates which in reality probably create a diverse set  of microbial aspects because not everybody likes to eat the same thing and so I think we just end  up amplifying the diversity of the biological system within that soil merely by how we've  
**[0:23:09-0:23:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:23:09):**  changed that mixture of crops that are out there and we see that a little bit of the same thing if  we think about adding a diverse rotation, if we add small grains into a corn soybean system,  we see a much different response in terms of that crop than if we just have the corn soybean in part  
**[0:23:29-0:23:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:23:29):**  of this and so you know you see a lot of this evidence that's out there the real question that  we're trying to ask is why are we what's really in the in the soil that's causing this reaction or  what's in that system that's causing that change within the soil. And what is your answer to that  
**[0:23:44-0:23:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:23:44):**  question? Well the answer to that question is that we're trying to understand all of this. We know  that the microbial microbiological activity because we actually collect that of our columns as well  is much higher in that diversity, that diverse system. So the answer is that we're trying to  
**[0:24:04-0:24:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:24:04):**  understand this, that we don't fully recognize how all these pieces fit together because it's  a question that we really have not asked very in a very detailed fashion in terms of saying you know  how do these things really interact within this. So this is probably one of the great front in my  
**[0:24:24-0:24:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:24:24):**  opinion one of the great frontiers in science right now. Yeah I see when with the various farms  that we work with the bringing cover crop diversity and bringing a strong crop rotation  back to the farm can regenerate soil health and it is it is amazing how as that soil begins changing  
**[0:24:44-0:24:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:24:44):**  crops begin changing as well and the best way that I know how to describe it is that  crops begin behaving differently. We thought we knew exactly how a certain crop would grow  and respond and how it would respond to certain climactic conditions and all of a sudden it's as  
**[0:25:02-0:25:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:25:02):**  though the crop begins behaving differently it begins responding differently and it gets to be  a lot of fun to see how crops change out in the field. I can't disagree with that I mean if you  really look at all of these things that are happening John is that I think we need to rediscover  
**[0:25:20-0:25:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:25:20):**  what the value of rotations are in this system and if you look at where we've sort of progressed over  the last 20 or 30 years and maybe even longer back than that is that we we assumed that we knew  what crops were going to do how crops are going to respond and but if now that we're going into  
**[0:25:46-0:25:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:25:46):**  much more diverse rotations I think we have to rediscover some of the information that was  probably available to us you know 50 60 years ago when we had more diverse rotations and we saw  different responses and I think that this is going to be if we if we go back to this whole thing  
**[0:26:05-0:26:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:26:05):**  of regenerative agriculture when we look at regenerative agriculture what does that really  mean are we regenerating the soil or are we regenerating our ability to understand how  things behave much more in an ecological system you know and that we really need to look at all  
**[0:26:25-0:26:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:26:25):**  the parts that are available to us and by looking at all the parts I mean what's going on within the  soil what's going on within the the cycling that's going on within the soil and and what is it  looking at in terms of plant response we know that as we begin to bring these things together  
**[0:26:44-0:26:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:26:44):**  the plant becomes more efficient it becomes more efficient in its use of water it becomes more  efficient in its use of nutrients that gets out of the soil it becomes more efficient in its use  of solar radiation and it captures do we tend to to get a higher quality product out of that we  
**[0:27:00-0:27:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:27:00):**  were tending to get more growth and the other piece of this which intrigues a lot of producers  and why they're interested in this is when we begin to do these things we're increasing their  stability of yields over time so that they don't see the wild swings as the weather changes from  
**[0:27:16-0:27:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:27:16):**  year to year as those yields become more stable and you know you mentioned at the very beginning  that it was really about increasing profitability well you can increase profitability at two ways  one is to improve the parts of your field that that are costing you money the other one is to  
**[0:27:34-0:27:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:27:34):**  improve your stability among the years so that you're not having these wild swings and yield  reductions when the weather's bad both of those are very important pieces and yeah just going back  to you made a couple of comments that we have observed in the field and they're they're really  
**[0:27:52-0:27:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:27:52):**  exciting when they start happening one of one of your comments was that not what are we really  regenerating are we regenerating soils are we regenerating the thought processes and the models  that we use and i really think that a major major part of the changes that happens is beginning to  
**[0:28:11-0:28:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:28:11):**  think differently about what is happening and looking at different components and managing them  differently out in the field yes and it's we're i think it is the regenerative agriculture is that  we're going to have to rediscover how agriculture fits into an ecological concept i think that  
**[0:28:32-0:28:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:28:32):**  and when we talk about these processes it is not just about agronomic management it's really  placing that our agronomic management in the context of the whole ecosystem that we're working  in and i think that becomes the critical knowledge piece that we need to start wrestling with to be  
**[0:28:53-0:28:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:28:53):**  able to take us to the next level of how we begin to maybe rediscover these processes but begin to  place these processes into the next generation of saying how do we take agriculture to the next  level and one of the pieces that i believe taking agriculture to the next level that i'm personally  
**[0:29:09-0:29:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:29:09):**  really excited about is this idea of increasing water use efficiency and nutrient use efficiency  this is without question something i'm certain we have observed on some of the farms that we've  worked with where all of a sudden we're growing we're able to grow a 220-booker acre corn crop  
**[0:29:28-0:29:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:29:28):**  and yet we're not applying the same amount of water that we thought we needed to apply to grow  that crop and i believe this is something that's going to become increasingly important extremely  important in the future as we have more limited water resources and then the same also holds true  
**[0:29:44-0:29:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:29:44):**  of course for nutrient use efficiency where all of a sudden we're seeing that we are able to get  the yields that we are the targets that we're setting with less nitrogen applications and  and better nutrient use efficiency what are the pieces that you have observed happening in the  
**[0:30:00-0:30:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:30:00):**  field only in regards to those two pieces we've observed the same thing if you think about water  use efficiency because just looking at a at a field you look at the high yielding parts of the  field and low yielding parts of the field basically the same rainfall falls on that whole field you  
**[0:30:22-0:30:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:30:22):**  know that if we just take water use efficiency and say that's productivity relative to the amount of  water that that plant has available to it is that in some cases we have a soil limitation that you  know we don't hold as much water so it's already water limited from that standpoint the other piece  
**[0:30:39-0:30:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:30:39):**  of this because water and nutrients are actually intrinsically tied together when we talk about  why do we see limitations in water use efficiency at times it's because the plant is nutrient  limited so that it doesn't have those nutrients to grow and therefore we may be expending a lot  
**[0:30:57-0:31:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:30:57):**  of water by that plant but not getting much of a return in terms of of fruit or grain or even  leafy production out of that and so when we optimize both water and nutrients together  and then we begin to see this real increase in in productivity and again back to the stability  
**[0:31:17-0:31:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:31:17):**  of that productivity and you know and and so we've added that additional component  and that is how efficient is that plan in capturing solar radiation because if you think  about what that plan is doing is is taking solar radiation is converting it into photosynthate  
**[0:31:35-0:31:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:31:35):**  that's where all the growth products come from both in the shoots as well as the roots  and they're mediated by water and and nutrients so the more efficient we can make that plant  in capturing light and converting it into this and then looking at all right where does that fit in  
**[0:31:52-0:31:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:31:52):**  terms of water use efficiency you know and and a lot of that is due to how plants respond early in  the season and I'll go back to this thing of why aggregates and gas are so important is because  a lot of times we see limitations of plant growth early in the season because that plant is oxygen  
**[0:32:14-0:32:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:32:14):**  limited we end up with a lot of rainfall in the spring we flood that soil we don't have the  aggregate structure we end up with a lot of yellow plants out there everybody assumes that's nutrients  but it's really gas oxygen limitation and once we begin to limit the vigor of that plant early  
**[0:32:31-0:32:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:32:31):**  in the season it carries throughout the whole season and so we've already said what's that and  you can never quite catch up again you never catch up you know and I think this what happens  in the early part of the season really does set the tone for the rest of the season it also sets  
**[0:32:47-0:32:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:32:47):**  the tone for how efficiently that plant takes up nutrients and so all of these things you know  call us crazy but I think we we have to look at how water and nutrients light and light all  and light all interact together in terms of this these processes to understand how do we really  
**[0:33:07-0:33:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:33:07):**  again take agriculture to the next level in terms of productivity but also quality.  Jerry within the context of all these various pieces we've been talking about perhaps in a  broader context if you wish what is something that you believe to be true about modern agriculture  
**[0:33:23-0:33:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:33:23):**  that many other people don't believe to be true? I think one of the truths in modern agriculture  that we need to discover is is how important improving our soils really are to  increasing productivity. I think we we live under this false assumption that genetics will always  
**[0:33:47-0:33:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:33:47):**  lead to improved productivity but if you look at this I mean you you look at at wheat production  you look at some rice production some of these we're seeing slight increases in productivity  but we're seeing that we're beginning to level off so we're not getting the full capture of what  
**[0:34:07-0:34:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:34:07):**  that potential crop is out there and so then that comes back and saying all right how do I manage  that crop differently and so I think that when I begin to discover is that we need to to look at  how does this system and we and we put together this concept that we call genetics by environment  
**[0:34:26-0:34:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:34:26):**  by management and it really was set up in such a way to break away from the old classic genetics  by environment interactions to genetics by environment by management to get producers to  realize that they had a very specific role in their crop management that was beyond just hybrid  
**[0:34:47-0:34:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:34:47):**  selection and it was really saying all right how does the management of their their soils how is  their management of their nutrients how does the management of everything fit in to allow those  genetics to be optimized and when you start having that dialogue with producers and begin to realize  
**[0:35:04-0:35:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:35:04):**  that there are a lot of options but maybe a path of discovery about why is what's causing their  yield limitation why aren't they getting the yields that they think they should be getting  what's causing that yield variation among the years that are out there and so it's just asked  
**[0:35:22-0:35:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:35:22):**  what it's doing is leading to a point in which is causing them to ask different questions about the  overall system that's out there. Jerry what is the what is the possibility what is the opportunity  in terms of improved yield and quality when when you when we have this conversation about improving  
**[0:35:39-0:35:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:35:39):**  soil health and the impact on test weight and yield we talk about gas exchange carbon dioxide  improving substantially improving photosynthesis what do you believe that can mean for growers in  terms of profitability what really is the opportunity? I think it's quite large in terms  
**[0:35:56-0:36:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:35:56):**  of profitability and the reason I say it's in terms of profitability is is think about the an  average field that that's out here and this would be an average grain field I mean we see a lot of  variation in yield across that field because the different soils that are out there if we improve  
**[0:36:15-0:36:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:36:15):**  those soils in the lower or in the bad parts of field field that's showing more yield variation  among the years is if you can get those soils improved automatically we improve the overall  profitability of that field because producers are basically putting on the same amount of inputs  
**[0:36:32-0:36:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:36:32):**  they're putting on the same nitrogen they're putting on the same phosphorus  you know maybe even liming the same across that overall field but still getting different yield  responses and so if if you could just improve the the return on your investment for what you  
**[0:36:48-0:36:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:36:48):**  put on there by improving the soils you'd automatically improve the profitability of that  field and so you know I think that becomes a piece of this puzzle that we begin to look at  the other piece of this in terms of profitability and it goes back to the conversation we had on on  
**[0:37:05-0:37:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:37:05):**  water and nutrient efficiency and particularly in the nutrient efficiency because when we get  these soils improved is that we have to put less nutrients on and if you look at long-term no-till  producers is that you know a lot of them have reduced their nitrogen rates by half and still  
**[0:37:24-0:37:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:37:24):**  have the same yields out there because that soil is supplying so many of those nutrients so if  you can reduce your inputs you can begin to improve your profitability as well because  you just begin to see a better return on investment again it's getting the producers to  
**[0:37:41-0:37:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:37:41):**  start looking at their systems and and saying what are you getting in return for what you're putting  into that and I think that that's the dialogue that we've got to have for this and I think that  once we begin to do this then we begin to see that we can not only improve the overall levels  
**[0:38:01-0:38:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:38:01):**  of productivity but as I talked about how do you improve those that reduce that variation  among the years in terms of increasing yield stability and those are things that are important  to producers as I've found as I've talked to them. Jerry where would you where would you begin what  
**[0:38:16-0:38:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:38:16):**  would your advice be to a producer what's the first action that farmers should take right now?  Well one of the things I think they should take right now is it's getting a cover crop onto that  system getting a if you want to feed want to start building soil health up first you've got to get  
**[0:38:35-0:38:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:38:35):**  back to increasing the biology within that soil you increase the biology within that soil by  increasing the diversity of that rotation putting that cover crop on and maybe even going to that  cover crop cocktail but allowing that crop residue layer to be there to protect that soil against the  
**[0:38:55-0:39:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:38:55):**  raindrop energy in the spring allow those aggregates to begin to form all these different  pieces and it just begins with that step right there you don't want to go to cover crops you  know reduce your reduce your tillage keep that residue layer on the surface out there to protect  
**[0:39:14-0:39:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:39:14):**  that soil surface allow the biology to work and have a stable home in that you know you can even  diversify the rotation putting a wheat corn soybean system on this I tell producers that  when we reduce our tillage out there we preserve that structure of that upper surface plants are  
**[0:39:37-0:39:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:39:37):**  like kids they're lazy they're going to follow an old root channel rather than make a new path  to grow down through that and so we see the advantages of not disturbing that soil just on  how the that subsequent crop explores the profile from the previous crop so all of these things I  
**[0:39:55-0:40:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:39:55):**  think there are many different ways we can get there but it's going to take an understanding of  really what's happening within that field and then an understanding of what the producer wants to do  the producer wants to do within that system so wonderful Jerry thank you very much for joining  
**[0:40:14-0:40:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:40:14):**  us here on the show and thank you to all the listeners who have been listening in if you've  found this insightful and enjoyable please subscribe at regenerativeagriculturopodcast.com  and please share with your friends and neighbors and other people who think you believe might be  
**[0:40:29-0:40:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:40:29):**  interested as well thanks very much for participating Jerry we hope to have this  conversation with you again soon oh anytime john though appreciate it thanks this podcast was  brought to you by a great company that I work for AEA Advancing Eco Agriculture the leader in  
**[0:40:44-0:40:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:40:44):**  regenerative agriculture since 2006 at AEA we believe in challenging the status quo to find  more profitable and regenerative ways to grow crops we also believe that healthy plants are  resistant to pests and disease and that to grow healthy plants we must first think different about  
**[0:40:59-0:41:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:40:59):**  agriculture about empowering life instead of suppressing life about regeneration versus  degeneration to achieve this we formulate and sell products that help growers produce higher quality  yield with less risk of crop failure in short we help growers make more money with less risk  
**[0:41:16-0:41:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/jerry-hatfield-on-why-should-we-care-about-soil-health/#t=0:41:16):**  thank you for listening  