### Regenerative Agriculture Podcast  (2018-07-13)  
### Author(s): John Kempf  

**[0:00:00-0:00:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:00:00):**  Hi friends, I'm Jon Kampf, hosting this podcast. I am passionate about developing regenerative  agriculture systems that improve soil health, produce crops that are completely resistant to  diseases and insects, and produce fruit of such an exceptional quality that we can have a legitimate  
**[0:00:16-0:00:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:00:16):**  conversation about growing food as medicine. I've discovered that there are many people with  incredible knowledge and information about soil and plant systems and how to develop regenerative  agriculture systems. However, much of this knowledge and this information is scattered,  
**[0:00:33-0:00:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:00:33):**  it's found all over the place. Some of it has been published in peer-reviewed publications,  but there are many incredible stories and a lot of knowledge that has not been published,  and that hasn't been shared with many people. I started Advancing Eco-Agriculture in 2006 to  
**[0:00:49-0:00:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:00:49):**  bring this knowledge together in a more coherent fashion and incorporate it into products and  growing systems that growers can easily put into practice. It's my personal mission to have these  regenerative agricultural systems become adopted globally and become the mainstream, the status  
**[0:01:05-0:01:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:01:05):**  quo against which all other growing systems are compared. To help achieve this goal, I want to  share the knowledge that we have learned in the last decade and make it available to everyone.  While we have developed products at AEA that embody the principles of regenerative agriculture  
**[0:01:22-0:01:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:01:22):**  systems and make them easier for growers to apply, this knowledge and these principles can be applied  anywhere. And when they are applied properly, they will always increase farm profitability and  resilience to climate stress. If you have any questions, suggestions, comments, or ideas,  
**[0:01:40-0:01:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:01:40):**  topics that you would like for me to discuss, please connect on LinkedIn or on Twitter, where  my username is at visionbuilder7, or you can also email me at john at johnkempf.com. I would very  much like to hear from you and to hear your feedback. Be sure to subscribe to this podcast,  
**[0:01:58-0:02:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:01:58):**  and thank you very much for listening. Enjoy the show. Hi friends, welcome to the regenerative  agriculture podcast. Today in this episode, I am super excited to have Greg Pennyroyal here on the  show with us. I'm not even quite sure how to introduce Greg. He has done some fascinating work,  
**[0:02:17-0:02:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:02:17):**  currently working in video culture, vineyard production in California, but he also has a very  interesting background doing quite a bit of work and a fascinating life story. Perhaps, Greg, I'm  just going to turn it over to you. Can you tell us a little bit about the pathway and the journey  
**[0:02:32-0:02:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:02:32):**  that has brought you to where you are today and some of the things that you've worked on along  the way? Absolutely. Hi John, always a pleasure to talk to you. Yeah, I've had kind of a journey from  starting with a small family farm in upstate New York to where I am now, which is the vineyard  
**[0:02:49-0:02:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:02:49):**  manager at Wilson Creek and professor of viticulture at the local college, but let's  start at the beginning. Actually, the real start was I grew up in New Jersey in Asbury Park with  a rock and roll band and living the whole Asbury Park rock and roll lifestyle, which I recommend.  
**[0:03:06-0:03:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:03:06):**  If you can survive it, I highly recommend it. It was a ton of fun, but then we went from literally  the bosom of sex, drugs, rock and roll, and high culture in New Jersey to Appalachia in New York,  where we bought a family farm and we didn't know what we were doing. My mom was actually  
**[0:03:24-0:03:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:03:24):**  a classically trained herbalist from Norway and she had always wanted to move back to the farm.  So when we got a chance, we moved out of New Jersey. I was still in high school. We moved  up to the farm. We took the band van and moved everyone. It said in big letters on the side,  
**[0:03:39-0:03:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:03:39):**  Lady's Choice, which was the name of the disco band at the time. And we showed up at this farm  not knowing what to do. So I promptly went to the auction house, bought what I thought was a plow,  but it was actually a horse-drawn cultivator. We couldn't afford a tractor or a horse, so we hooked  
**[0:03:54-0:04:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:03:54):**  it onto the bumper of the Lady's Choice band van and started trying to plow an abandoned field with  a cultivator, which I could do. You could imagine it just didn't work. One of my neighbors, an old  silly gentleman, would pull up every day, pop open the tailgate of his, I believe it was a 46 Ford,  
**[0:04:15-0:04:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:04:15):**  in immaculate condition, crack open a beer, smoke a cigar, shake his head, get in his truck. And  then finally after four or five days of this, he calls me and he goes, hey boy, get up here.  And I walked up and he said, you don't have a damn clue what you're doing, do you?  
**[0:04:30-0:04:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:04:30):**  And I said, no, sir. I have so little of a clue that I don't even know how clueless I am. I have  such a little clue. And he laughed and he introduced himself. He was the local dairy farmer.  He had 250 acres, 90 heads. He had just retired about a year before and was bored. And the stars  
**[0:04:47-0:04:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:04:47):**  aligned for me on that day. His name was Hiram Wilbur. Still to this day, I count him as one of  my best friends. He passed away years ago, but he was my first mentor and he was a great mentor.  He had that classic knowledge of what goes on. He was also just funnier than hell and fun to work  
**[0:05:03-0:05:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:05:03):**  with. But he said he'd come over a couple of days a week and give me a pointer for a couple of hours.  He wound up coming down five, sometimes six days a week, working with me three, four hours.  Loaned me his Ford Ferguson tractor, which I have to admit with a nice three bottom plow on it,  
**[0:05:18-0:05:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:05:18):**  was a huge improvement over a band of cultivators spinning in the mud. And that first lesson I kind  of learned on that was the value of having a mentor. So sort of a shout out to some of the  young farmers or people, actually not to be young, just people who are getting into agriculture,  
**[0:05:34-0:05:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:05:34):**  try and find a mentor. And especially if you can find an old school mentor, you will be really  well served. I learned things from Hiram that have served me literally all my life. Still to this day,  I'll sometimes be in a pickle and I'll think, well, what would Hiram do here? And it's just  
**[0:05:49-0:05:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:05:49):**  that kind of down home logic that he had. But he also had a, his ability to observe was phenomenal.  And that's one of those things, if I'm confused about something, I'll sometimes just stop and look  and observe like Hiram would do. So that was my first major lesson in agriculture. I learned a  
**[0:06:04-0:06:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:06:04):**  lot of very specific things like how to run a tractor and how to cultivate and how to do things  like that. But it was mostly an approach I took. And having that perspective when I went to college  and I started taking agronomy classes and all that, it heightened my bullshit detectors.  
**[0:06:19-0:06:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:06:19):**  And I would read kind of the standard university dogma of what they thought should happen. And  I just had that heightened sense of this doesn't really make sense. And this is one of those  things that's really common in the, whatever you call the sort of community that we all live in,  
**[0:06:35-0:06:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:06:35):**  John, this alternative ag or biological ag or eco ag. People have that sense. They can just look at  something and go, you know, it just doesn't quite make sense. And I think the difference is we've  learned how to observe. We've learned how to go out there and observe. So we were pretty successful  
**[0:06:50-0:06:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:06:50):**  on the farm, ran that farm for about a decade. Then I got an opportunity to a friend of mine,  Lon Johnson owned Trout Lake Farms. At the time, Lon was, he's an organic farmer. At the time,  it was about 380 acres of certified organic herbs, Echinacea, Valerian, St. John's Wort, you know,  
**[0:07:07-0:07:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:07:07):**  a lot of mostly medicinal herbs. Went to visit Lon, realized that we had a chemistry together  and that Lon was just brilliant in agriculture. And I could bridge that world between agriculture  and business, because I was also running a construction company, putting myself through  
**[0:07:23-0:07:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:07:23):**  school at the time. And I wound up working with Lon for over a decade. And Lon and a bunch of us  together built that company from just under 400 acres to 3,000 acres of all organic medicinal  herbs. And it was a real admit, this was the Pacific Northwest, the soil was volcanic soil,  
**[0:07:41-0:07:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:07:41):**  was unusually rich. We had a program of only going into valleys that are, you know, growing areas  that had a dairy, because our main nutrient source was composted lagoon, dairy manure, and dairy  waste that we composted. And what I learned there is that how you can scale up and the profitability  
**[0:08:00-0:08:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:08:00):**  of organic agriculture. I hear this from some organic growers. For example, one of the odder  claims to fame is we had is we literally cornered the market, the world market in catnip. And if you  go out to the store and you buy catnip for your cat, you'll notice it almost always says organic.  
**[0:08:16-0:08:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:08:16):**  Well, the reason being is it's actually cheaper to grow organic, a lot cheaper to grow organic.  And the oil content is quite a bit higher, and you get a slight premium for it. So sort of a win,  win, win all the way across the board. And what I learned with working with Lon is how you can  
**[0:08:29-0:08:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:08:29):**  integrate business ideas and figure out where your strengths are, where the biological agriculture  gives you benefit and use that to your advantage. But don't become greedy with it. We could have  probably charged more for our catnip and we didn't. We charged a slight premium, which helps support  
**[0:08:46-0:08:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:08:46):**  other things, but it also solidified our place in the market. People came back to us and even when  other people tried to compete, they would say, you know, you've always been fair to us. You've always  sold us a great product at a reasonable price and sort of that business side of how to scale up.  
**[0:09:01-0:09:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:09:01):**  Then after that, I got an incredible opportunity to work with a company called liner health product,  which made a lot of OTC drugs for the consumer market and primarily a drug company, but they had  a dietary supplement division that was taking off. And the head of their science center, Dr. Bob Kay,  
**[0:09:18-0:09:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:09:18):**  recruited me because he wanted to get more into botanicals. And the great part about liner is  we're in trout lake. I had a few thousand dollars per year for research, but with liner,  I had hundreds of thousands of dollars per year to do research. So I promptly called up every crazy  
**[0:09:34-0:09:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:09:34):**  wacko, PhD, you know, natural products, biochemist, and everything. And we pulled together this  science team. And if you're involved in the dietary supplement industry, you'll notice there  was sort of a boom of scientifically supported dietary supplements starting in about 1998.  
**[0:09:52-0:09:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:09:52):**  And a lot of that came out of liner health. And the value I learned about that is the value of  science is just because we are looking for alternatives, standard agriculture, that doesn't  mean we need to be looking for alternatives for science. You know, the great limitations of science  
**[0:10:09-0:10:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:10:09):**  where you pull away a lot of the variables and you look at single things, you get incredibly deep  insights, but you tend not to see how things are connected together. And the value of that  experience was learning how powerful science can be if you have a perspective that sort of connects  
**[0:10:26-0:10:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:10:26):**  the dots, if you know how that fits in. We are also able with that to develop something called  genomic assay testing for natural products. And the challenge in the past was they said that  natural products could never have standards like medicines because you couldn't standardize the  
**[0:10:45-0:10:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:10:45):**  raw material. They said the basic raw material was too complex. You know, they tried to go after  the single active compound, and that's just bogus because that's not how plants work. And that's  not actually not how our bodies work either. And it's surely not how the two work together.  
**[0:10:59-0:11:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:10:59):**  Then they tried to do polypharmy and it was a pharmaceutical and there's a bunch of ways of  approaching it. But the breakthrough that we made, and it was connected to my experience in  agriculture, is we would get samples of say Echinacea purpura. We were getting samples from  
**[0:11:13-0:11:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:11:13):**  across the country and even across the world. And we were seeing a huge variation in hemotypical  expression of the plants, you know, the chemical components. And the one thing that we noticed is  those that tended to be grown in an ecosystem that was closer to where the plant was native to  
**[0:11:30-0:11:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:11:30):**  and used biological principles had much, much less variation from season to season, from  farm to farm. And we drilled down to figure out that the plants that are built, that are  grown in a biological system, tend to have much more biochemical homeostasis. That homeostatic  
**[0:11:50-0:11:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:11:50):**  variable layer becomes incredibly narrow. And so the variable that people were dealing with wasn't  actually natural plant hemotypical expression variation. It was expression from plants being  grown in inappropriate ecosystems with inappropriate inputs and techniques. And once we stuck to pretty  
**[0:12:08-0:12:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:12:08):**  much biologically formed and organic materials, that variability narrowed way down. And so now we  had that variability issue dealt with, and we needed a way of having an understanding of how  that works in the body. And so we developed a system where you can take herbal extracts,  
**[0:12:28-0:12:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:12:28):**  you put them in a clone selection of white blood cells, and we're not talking like GMO clones,  it's just me to take a single cell, you keep growing it out till you get consistency in the  cell. And the way cells naturally communicate with the body by doing something called up and  
**[0:12:42-0:12:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:12:42):**  down regulation. All genes send out this constant little chemical bleep, bleep, bleep, I'm here,  I'm here, I'm here. And then when a material is introduced to it, either bleep bleep bleeps  faster and sends out faster signal or slows down. It's called up and down regulation. And when you  
**[0:12:57-0:13:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:12:57):**  look at that across the 40 something plus thousand genes, you can compare that to databases. And that  says, oh, this is anti-inflammatory, this is, you know, whatever the physiological relationship is.  What was so exciting about that is that made a connection between biological integrity and the  
**[0:13:19-0:13:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:13:19):**  human genome, which means us. And this is one of these things that those of us in the alternative  agricultural community sort of know intuitively, but it's nice to have hard science behind it. And  it's nice to be able to get quantitative data out of that. One of the other interesting things that  
**[0:13:36-0:13:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:13:36):**  came up with that is we not only tested herbal extracts, but we tested a homeopathic preparation  of Arnica, Montana. Those folks who aren't familiar with homeopathy, which I don't think is  a whole lot, but the basic theory is you start out with a 1X, which is a 10%. It's an herbal extract,  
**[0:13:53-0:14:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:13:53):**  basically. And then you dilute it by 90%, you know, one 10th, the 2X. You dilute it again,  it's a 1%, the 3X, et cetera. And you saw the drop off of the gene expression that you would  extract. But then when you got near 24X, which is Avogadro's number, it means theoretically,  
**[0:14:08-0:14:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:14:08):**  there's no molecules of the original substance left in that water. It started to go back up.  And when we got to 30X, it was actually stronger than the original herbal extract.  That's incredible.  
**[0:14:22-0:14:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:14:22):**  Yeah, that blew our minds. You know, those of us, I've always taken Arnica. It works. You know,  I also take rust poxodendron. If you're out in the woods collecting stuff and you're susceptible  to poison ivy, a couple of rust poxodendron in your water bottle will sort of keep you from  
**[0:14:36-0:14:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:14:36):**  getting it. But that was sort of a glimpse into this whole thing of quantum chemistry and that  there are whole other worlds that we have just kind of barely scratched. You know,  I think of guys like Phil Callahan, who just, you know, made the connection between radio frequency  
**[0:14:54-0:15:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:14:54):**  and plant communication. And that led me to doing some work with the Global Institute of  Tibetan Medicine. And what we're looking for them is this work that we did with the USP eventually  led to a dietary supplement compendium and a traditional medicine compendium, which is pretty  
**[0:15:11-0:15:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:15:11):**  cool because now there is a legal compendium for dietary supplements and traditional medicines.  And people can't make the claim anymore that these are unregulated non-drugs. They have the  same standard as non-prescription drugs because of this. But the Global Institute of Tibetan  
**[0:15:28-0:15:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:15:28):**  Medicine approached me to do something similar for Tibetan medicine. And I'm actually still  working with them on that. But the real value of that one, with my interaction with the Global  Institute of Tibetan Medicine, was this huge paradigm shift. The Tibetans have such a different  
**[0:15:43-0:15:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:15:43):**  view of the world, it's shocking. And the insight that they get from it is even more shocking. So,  for example, we were working on a multiple sclerosis medicine based on a Tibetan herb  that's extremely rare and hard to find. And Dr. Lovesong, the head physician,  
**[0:16:01-0:16:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:16:01):**  identified the California white sage as being energetically similar. And when we actually ran  the genetics on it and did it, lo and behold, it really was. But the part that was the most  fascinating about that is we're working with a researcher, Dr. Cynthia Husted, at the time she  
**[0:16:19-0:16:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:16:19):**  was at UC Santa Barbara. And she had come up with a new theory for multiple sclerosis, which is that  what happens is the myelin sheath, it's like an insulating layer of lipids around the nerve,  starts to demyelinate. And she had invented this technology called an atomic force microscope,  
**[0:16:36-0:16:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:16:36):**  or I should say, invented the application to how to do this, and came up with a new theory,  which by the way, is now the theory of demyelination and multiple sclerosis.  And this Tibetan doctor, Dr. Lovesong, pulls out these hooks from these scrolls that were almost  
**[0:16:50-0:16:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:16:50):**  400 years old and had the exact same thing on it. And Dr. Husted and I are looking at her and  at him saying, how did you figure this out without the technology? And they said, well, we have a  theory and we post a hypothesis, and then we meditate and do mental models and meditate our  
**[0:17:08-0:17:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:17:08):**  way through this and come out with a new theory. And then they literally run facsimile experiments  in their mind, which is pretty cool in itself. It works. And so that just blew my paradigms out of  the water to realize there's so much more out there than we know. And to be open to it, you  
**[0:17:28-0:17:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:17:28):**  know, you have to, you know, you have to have your bullshit detectors on both sides. You know, there's  the woo-woo kind of new age thing, and then there's the kind of equally woo-woo, you know,  commercial scientific Monsanto side. And they're both trying to tell you stories. And I'm not sure  
**[0:17:41-0:17:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:17:41):**  how to advise people to figure out what's true, except to learn how to listen to your heart and  to just get a sense. You know, you see the dots kind of connecting and things generally tend to  fit into that, or they generally tend to not. And that eventually led me here to Wilson Creek Winery.  
**[0:17:57-0:18:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:17:57):**  And that would seem like an odd turn, but not really. I mean, one, I have to admit making wine  is so much fun and hanging out with people at a really great time is just so much fun.  But after the kind of intense life I led with the USP and the NIH grants and all that stuff,  
**[0:18:14-0:18:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:18:14):**  it's a welcome relief. But the really interesting part about viticulture is it's one of the very  few agricultural crops where you actually get paid for quality. If I can produce great grapes  and I can produce an amazing bottle of Malbec, I can get 60 to 80, actually $100 a bottle of it's  
**[0:18:30-0:18:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:18:30):**  really good, which equates to $6,000 a ton. That's $6 a pound for grapes. That's six times  the commercial market for it. And not that money drives everything, but when you're doing research,  it helps. And so the unique position I find myself in here is I have the ability to gamble,  
**[0:18:49-0:18:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:18:49):**  do experiments, figure out what works. And if it doesn't work, we're not going to go broke.  We're doing okay. The wine business is a good business. And we have a wine club with 7,000  people in it. We get on weekends up to 2,000 people coming to visit the winery. People like  
**[0:19:07-0:19:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:19:07):**  to come to classes. They like to hear lectures. People don't come to wineries for the wine. They  come to wineries for the experience. And the unique position I find myself here is instead  of giving them a rote experience about just talking about Bordeaux and blah, blah, blah,  
**[0:19:22-0:19:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:19:22):**  and some of that, which is interesting and fun. When I start talking about the kind of things  that you and I are exploring and experimenting with, John, that whole thing about the connection  to the microbiome and the connection to who we are and that drinking a glass of wine that comes  
**[0:19:37-0:19:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:19:37):**  from a highly balanced, highly connected microbiome very likely is going to positively  affect your microbiome. People intuitively know that this is true and they light up,  but they don't hear this very often. I think we often get discouraged because we have to  
**[0:19:52-0:19:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:19:52):**  do our work over the loudspeaker of Monsanto and Bayer Pharmaceuticals and all these guys who have  quite a paid megaphone. But the truth of the matter is when you sit down with people and you  feed them real food and you feed them a really good glass of wine that comes from a biological  
**[0:20:08-0:20:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:20:08):**  vineyard, the intelligence of that just transfers directly and they get it. You and I were talking  last week about a research article that I just sent called the Microbiodeography of Wine Grapes  as a Condition of Cultivar Vintage and Climate. And basically what it's saying is there's a  
**[0:20:24-0:20:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:20:24):**  concept in winemaking called terroir. And terroir is that unique characteristic that grapes get and  that is transferred into the wine based on a unique region. So for example, to cite the  examples in the study, there's the Sonoma, Napa, and then Central Coast. And they're all considered  
**[0:20:43-0:20:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:20:43):**  regions of unique terroir. So what they did with this is because we can now do polymer chain  reaction, polymerized chain reaction to get the DNA from large sections, you can literally collect  the air, the soil, everything from a region and look at all the DNA that's expressing in that  
**[0:21:02-0:21:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:21:02):**  region, which is something new that we haven't been able to do. So what they did is they went  to three different cultivars in three different regions, they collected all the data, and then they  had the computer scramble it and then say, okay, these naturally fall together based on varietal.  
**[0:21:18-0:21:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:21:18):**  And they did to a pretty good extent. The Cabernet tended to have one bio-genomic expression, the  other two were. But here's the mind blower. They then said, okay, is there a connection  between those regions that are uniquely identified as having a unique terroir? In other words,  
**[0:21:38-0:21:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:21:38):**  same genus species varietal, but grown in different regions. And each one of these regions  is known to have a unique taste influence, tactile, olfactory, all those aspects. And  the answer was not only yes, it was even stronger than the species association.  
**[0:21:57-0:21:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:21:57):**  Wow, that's incredible.  Yeah, we've been struggling with this whole thing about what makes terroir. And the geologists all  think it's geology, right? The biologists all think it's biology. The geneticists all think  
**[0:22:09-0:22:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:22:09):**  it's genetics. The old Maslowian thing, if all you have is a hammer, everything looks like a nail.  Well, they're all pounding their nails until these guys came along and said, no, it's probably the  microbiome. I was thinking of the guys who were trying to identify the elephant.  
**[0:22:21-0:22:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:22:21):**  Yeah, yeah. So it's the microbiome. And they make that, what I really love about this article too,  is, as you know, you probably read a lot of scientific articles also. When they actually  come to the conclusion to the significance, there's sometimes a little chicken about  
**[0:22:36-0:22:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:22:36):**  actually, you know, making assumptions and saying, this is the potential of this. These guys aren't,  they say, this has huge implications, not only for winemaking, but for food production. It means  the taste and hence the quality and the nutritional density has a lot to do with what they call  
**[0:22:53-0:22:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:22:53):**  microbial patterns, which enhance biological control in these systems. They're making that  connection. And, you know, I wouldn't exactly call these guys alternative, but they looked at  the signs and it led them to biological ecoag. That is really fascinating. It also leads us back  
**[0:23:09-0:23:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:23:09):**  to what you were mentioning earlier when you were describing phenotypical expression. And I'd like  to understand a bit more deeply, you described that when plants were grown in their native  environment with biological practices, the phenotypical expression, which another way  
**[0:23:27-0:23:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:23:27):**  of saying that, if I'm understanding it correctly, is the profile of the medicinal compounds or the  plant compound, various compounds that plants are producing were optimized is the word that I'll use.  Right. And that's actually, we were looking at not only phenotypical, but more chemotypical is the,  
**[0:23:44-0:23:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:23:44):**  you know, the chemical matrix. And what we found is that when you have plants that are grown in  using commercial agriculture, or if you're growing things like echinacea, which tend to be a prairie  plant, and you're growing them too far south or too far north or in soils that they don't like,  
**[0:23:59-0:24:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:23:59):**  they tend to like fairly rich soil. We saw a lot of difference between the different compounds.  And at a certain point, the ratio of compounds stabilizes. And then from there, they all tend  to go up quantitatively. And this fits in, you know, really closely with plant sap bricks analysis,  
**[0:24:19-0:24:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:24:19):**  and the plant sap analysis that you guys are doing that says, the first thing you got to do is get  that plant, you know, tier one, by the way, I love that sort of Maslovian pyramid that you've made  of plant sort of tropic efficiencies, photosynthetic efficiencies, that graphic makes  
**[0:24:35-0:24:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:24:35):**  more sense than a lot of stuff I've seen. And when you show it to people, people instantly get it.  One of those, so hats off to you, that was just brilliant way of putting that. But what we've seen  with the medicinal, yeah, it's brilliant. What we saw in the medicinal plants is that tier one,  
**[0:24:52-0:24:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:24:52):**  the plant's struggling for survival. So of course it's all over the place. It's substituting ions  for different, you know, materials. It's doing a lot of substitution. And that's what I think they  were talking about with the lower brick. What's his name? We did all the bricks work up in Spokane,  
**[0:25:04-0:25:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:25:04):**  Washington. Bruce Taneo? Bruce Taneo. Yeah. That was kind of the work that Bruce, you know,  figured out. That next level is it brings everything into balance first. And this is what  you're working on with the plant sap analysis is nevermind pushing the production of it, just get  
**[0:25:23-0:25:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:25:23):**  everything to balance first. Once it's in balance, it will go up those next two tiers together in  balance, but you have to get to the balance. So trophic level one, struggling to survive. Number  two is balance. And that's what we found. Number three is enhanced production of lipids and advanced  
**[0:25:41-0:25:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:25:41):**  proteins and things that are really difficult for the plants to produce until it's in balance.  And then of course, the highest level is a disease, insect resistant plant that's producing,  you know, really healthy offspring. And back to the original thing about winemaking, I think also  
**[0:26:00-0:26:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:26:00):**  transfers immune response and immune robustness to us is that we are connected to the ecosystem.  We're literally an extension of it. Greg, when you talk about bringing plants into balance,  are you referring to bringing them into balance from a mineral nutritional perspective or from  
**[0:26:18-0:26:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:26:18):**  a microbiome perspective? Well, both. And I'm glad you put it that way because over the years,  I've struggled with a lot of different, you know, I did some work with Phil Wheeler, a brilliant guy,  you know, very practical, read Arden's books. I kind of went through the whole acres library  
**[0:26:36-0:26:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:26:36):**  and struggled with sort of different systems, spent a couple of years studying with Elaine Ingham,  whose soil food web stuff is just brilliant. And she's also just a lovely, lovely person. But the  challenge I had with them is that you would have these kinds of theories and it was either like  
**[0:26:53-0:26:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:26:53):**  totally practical or totally theoretical. So, you know, Elaine is famous for saying,  you don't need to add anything to your soil. It's already there. You just need to step up the  biology. And eventually the plant biological relationship will kick in. And that's probably  
**[0:27:06-0:27:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:27:06):**  true. But the question is, how do you get there? If you just jump off the cliff and go after that,  you may or may not succeed. And I can't afford not to succeed. We have 240 employees here  and they all rely on me getting the grapes in so we can make wine. If I screw up, a lot of people  
**[0:27:23-0:27:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:27:23):**  lose their job. What I appreciate about your approach is it's very flexible in how you can  enter it. So we currently, I have 20 of my 100 acres in an experimental program using the  Advancing Echo Agriculture program. And we have a couple of control blocks, one that I'm doing my  
**[0:27:44-0:27:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:27:44):**  normal process with and one that I'm kind of not really doing much. I'm just letting it do its  thing. And the advantage of this program is it's very methodical. So we took a look at the soil  profile. I took a look at some initial petiole tests I saw. And then we sent some samples out  
**[0:27:59-0:28:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:27:59):**  and we developed a program and we're taking sap samples or actually leaf samples, two sap samples  every two weeks. And we're adjusting and we're trying to get the photosynthetic level up to that  point. I think the way this is going to work is step one, get the plant into mineral balance.  
**[0:28:16-0:28:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:28:16):**  Once it's in mineral balance, it'll jump up to that next tropic level. It'll start producing  more sugars and secondary metabolites that it's going to feed back into the soil and then start  feeding the soil biome, which is then going to feed more nutrients to the plant. And you start  
**[0:28:31-0:28:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:28:31):**  to go on that positive cycle instead of the negative cycle that we've been on, which is  spraying glyphosate, disking. And when I first came here, they used to spray glyphosate two to  three times a year and disc three times a year. And that was their weed control program. We had  
**[0:28:47-0:28:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:28:47):**  a block of old vine Chardonnay here, about 35 years old, and it was expressing red block symptoms  severely. And the first thing they asked me to do was to rip it out. And I said, give me a year.  And we just did compost, compost teas, and mainly stopped using glyphosate. Put in a cover crop.  
**[0:29:04-0:29:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:29:04):**  In one year, you can't see the symptoms of red blotch. Red blotch doesn't go away. I think it's  in there. It's just not expressed. It's amazing to me how resilient many of these plants and crops  are. And the situation you just described is something that we've observed similar situations  
**[0:29:19-0:29:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:29:19):**  on many different farms where trees are incredibly stressed and growers are ready to eliminate blocks  and sections. And they respond incredibly rapidly when given the right opportunity. It's just  amazing to me how quickly things can recover. Yeah. Yeah. I agree. I mean, one year. And,  
**[0:29:36-0:29:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:29:36):**  you know, these are perennial crops. And the program that I'm doing with you right now,  I am actually planning on this. I'm not really going to claim any absolute conclusions until  the second year, only because I think we're going to get much, much better results in the second  
**[0:29:51-0:29:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:29:51):**  year. Because the way that grape physiology is, is that right after it's done setting its fruit,  the apical cells for next year's fruits form on the secondary buds. And so the genetic potential  for next year is actually being set right now. And so I suspect that that following year where  
**[0:30:09-0:30:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:30:09):**  the genetics of the plant have been under the supervision of this plant sap analysis.  By the way, another comment about the plant sap analysis, I really am super pleased with the  results that we're getting out of this. I've been doing petiole analysis for years, and it just  
**[0:30:27-0:30:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:30:27):**  didn't quite seem to fit. One of the things that petiole analysis keeps telling me is I'm severely  lacking nitrogen, but I have no symptoms whatsoever of nitrogen deficiency. And when we make wine,  I have a pretty decent balance of nitrates, ammonia, and some complex amino acids that the  
**[0:30:43-0:30:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:30:43):**  yeast responds to. You can't fool the yeast, it knows what it wants to eat. So it just didn't  look like I had a nitrogen deficiency. When we started doing the NOVA prop analysis that you  guys do, it said, no, your nitrogen is really, really good. You mostly have trace mineral  
**[0:31:00-0:31:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:31:00):**  issues, you know, millennium, a little bit copper, there's some issues that we have with that. That  made a ton of sense to me. So it's nice to see analytical work line up with what I'm seeing in  the field. The other thing is, quite frankly, I am losing faith in petiole analysis, and I'm having  
**[0:31:17-0:31:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:31:17):**  a hard time recommending it to other growers. I think what you just described is that's the  pattern that emerges with almost all agronomists. You have between six and ten years of experience,  they look at things, and those that pay attention, all of a sudden you begin to realize that,  
**[0:31:34-0:31:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:31:34):**  you know what, the laboratory results and the field results are not corresponding. And as  William Albrecht said many years ago, he said, read books from steady nature, and when the two  of them don't agree, you throw out the books. Yeah, yeah, I've heard that before.  
**[0:31:50-0:31:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:31:50):**  Yeah, and I think that's equally true for laboratory analysis, which is actually what led us  to bringing the South analysis here to North America and to begin working with it. I'd like to,  there's an important topic that we were talking about though, and I'm not sure we've fully  
**[0:32:03-0:32:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:32:03):**  unwrapped it yet, and that is the understanding of plants expressing different chemical profiles,  different secondary metabolite profiles based on the nutritional environment and the microbial  environment. I think this is something that's very important for growers to understand because you  
**[0:32:19-0:32:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:32:19):**  are correct in that wine production and grape production is one of the few crops that actually  is compensated for that directly. But there are also, there are many other crops, particularly  fruit crops, where there is an indirect compensation. And the reality is there are so  
**[0:32:36-0:32:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:32:36):**  many people today who, and they have a desire to develop a quality standard for nutrition and  to demonstrate nutritional integrity and nutritional density of fruit. But you know,  there's something that consumers really care about. Every consumer cares about this for  
**[0:32:52-0:32:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:32:52):**  every fruit. They care about flavor and aroma. Everyone cares about flavor and aroma. And one  of the things that I've observed in the medicinal herb production world that I think transfers to  fruit and vegetable production is how or what types of environments these compounds can be  
**[0:33:13-0:33:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:33:13):**  optimized. So there's one school of thought, which indicates that if you want to produce high levels  of these aromatic compounds, then you need to stress the plants. You need to deprive them of  moisture or nitrogen, phosphorus, or some combination of all three in order to produce  
**[0:33:31-0:33:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:33:31):**  a lot of flavor. And on the other hand, the other opposite end of the spectrum is growing plants in  an optimal environment, a perfectly balanced nutrition, optimal microbiome to produce the  highest concentrations and quantities and quality of metabolites possible. I guarantee you that if  
**[0:33:49-0:33:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:33:49):**  you told any cannabis grower anywhere that they should stress their plants, they would  beat you out the door. So I'd love to hear your perspective on that. How does that fit in with  what you've been describing? This is a debate that's sort of raging in the wine world right now.  
**[0:34:06-0:34:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:34:06):**  Specifically, it's around deficit irrigation. And the generally, there's a lot of different theories,  but the standard theory is you give the plant virtually no stress until it's fruit set. And then  you start to stress it a little bit until verazion. And then from verazion on to harvest,  
**[0:34:22-0:34:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:34:22):**  you stress it quite a bit. And the theory being is that the plant isn't going to make these  secondary metabolites because it doesn't have to. It's too fat and happy. It's just fat and happy.  The other thing is it's said that you get smaller berry size, which changes the ratio between skin  
**[0:34:38-0:34:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:34:38):**  and pulp. And most of the qualities, especially a red wine, come from the pulp. I mean from the  skin, I'm sorry. They want that higher ratio. There's some guys up in the University of  Washington, I'm sorry I can't pull their name off the top of my head, but I'll send you a link if  
**[0:34:52-0:34:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:34:52):**  you're interested, that they took some blocks and they basically didn't stress them at all.  And they wound up getting larger yields, better ampicinidine content, better phenolic content,  better amino acid balance, better acid to Brix ratio. I mean, just all the parameters across the  
**[0:35:09-0:35:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:35:09):**  board were better, which goes against the dogma. But I think part of the reason it worked there,  and it hasn't worked in other places, is they lucked out and they did their research on the  Columbia Gorge in Washington state, which is pyroclastic volcanic soils. So they're probably  
**[0:35:26-0:35:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:35:26):**  starting with really good soils and pretty healthy plants. So they were just looking at water stress  and the water stress, it's kind of debunking all those original theories about why you stress  your vine. This is starting to come up. I intuitively think that the reason we have to  
**[0:35:43-0:35:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:35:43):**  stress our plants is the plants don't have enough of the micronutrients of what they need to produce  what they want to produce. And then if you stress it to the point where you think it's going to die,  the plant goes, okay, this is it. I'm cashing in all my chips and I'm going to produce one crop of  
**[0:36:00-0:36:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:36:00):**  seed that's going to get my progeny out there. And then of course, right after harvest, you give  it more nutrition and you pump it back up. You keep kind of tricking it year after year, but you  keep pulling from it's banks, you know, it's savings accounts. What I am anticipating is going  
**[0:36:14-0:36:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:36:14):**  to happen out of the work that you and I are doing together now is that I will be able to produce  any words from 40 to 60% higher crops at a much higher quality consistently year after year after  year. And if I can do that, I can change the economics of how grapes are grown in Southern  
**[0:36:32-0:36:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:36:32):**  California, which means that biological not only becomes less expensive, but it has all the benefits  of, you know, water purification and, you know, all the things that we, reasons we support biological  ag. So I don't think there's enough research on this now. There's a little bit happening.  
**[0:36:49-0:36:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:36:49):**  You know, the challenge with standard research is you're really only supposed to test one variable  at a time, but I don't know how you test the variable of water stress if the plant is also  nutritionally stressed. So if I was to design an experiment, what I would do is take out the  
**[0:37:05-0:37:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:37:05):**  nutritional stress variable, get the plants growing for a couple of years where they're,  you know, mineral and macro and micro nutrient balance, then experiment with the water a little  bit. That would give you good data, but I suspect that stress is stressed. Look, the plants want to  
**[0:37:21-0:37:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:37:21):**  produce great grapes. They want to make birds happy. So they spread the seed and I'm not even  totally not convinced that they might not want to make us happy. So we keep tending them in our  field and fussing with them. And, you know, we are doing the plant bidding for them. They give us a  
**[0:37:37-0:37:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:37:37):**  little bit of anthocyanins and alcohol and we're happy. Yeah, I tend to agree with that perspective.  But just on this point that we've been talking about, I've observed this phenomenon in sage  production and in mint production and other crops where I guess I would describe it kind of as a  
**[0:37:55-0:38:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:37:55):**  reverse bell curve. So what happens initially when plants are being grown and they're being deprived  of nutrients or water, then the result is that you get a relatively small amount of plant biomass  with a high concentration of these compounds that you're looking for, these medicinal compounds or  
**[0:38:14-0:38:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:38:14):**  aromatic compounds. That's like being a mint in sage grower too, yeah. Yeah. And then the thought  is that while you don't want to provide water or phosphorus and nitrogen, if you do, and I've  seen, I've observed this to happen where we remove the nutrient in the water deprivation, now you get  
**[0:38:31-0:38:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:38:31):**  a tremendous amount of biomass. Your biomass might be four or five times more, but your quantities of  metabolites being produced are proportionally smaller. Right, 8% oil. Exactly. But that isn't,  and historically the thought process has been, well, that's the end of the conversation. That's  
**[0:38:50-0:38:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:38:50):**  where the discussion stops. But I think the point that you were making is there's one piece that  hasn't been considered yet, which is what's the nutritional integrity and the nutritional profile  of the plant that has a larger biomass? What if you were to grow that plant in an optimal  
**[0:39:04-0:39:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:39:04):**  environment? And here's what I can say that we've observed so far. There's more homework that needs  to be done on this, but what we've observed so far is when you grow a plant in an optimal  environment, an optimal from a water perspective and also from a nutrient perspective, not just  
**[0:39:19-0:39:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:39:19):**  nitrogen and phosphorus, but you're also addressing all the trace and ultra-trace minerals,  now you're producing a plant that has a large amount of plant biomass and also has high  concentrations, in many cases even higher concentrations than the stress plant of these  
**[0:39:35-0:39:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:39:35):**  secondary metabolites. And the perfect example of this is cannabis production, where  cannabis growers are keeping their plants in an optimal environment from a lighting perspective,  moisture, humidity, temperature, and also nutritionally. And when they balance the  
**[0:39:52-0:39:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:39:52):**  nutrition in correspondence with the environment, they can produce levels of  cannabinoids that are one, two, three, as much as four times higher in terms of grams per plant  production than any stressed plant ever could begin to produce. Right. Yeah, I mean that just  
**[0:40:09-0:40:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:40:09):**  makes sense. I mean, I agree the first step is to balance the macro-micro nutrients. And I think in  the standard agronomy world, the part that's totally ignored is the micronutrients. People  don't even talk about them. And what I'm learning, especially this year, now that I have really good  
**[0:40:24-0:40:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:40:24):**  data from you guys, is how important those are. Is my macros are pretty good. My micros are off.  And it's just keeping the whole process from maximizing. There might, once you get a plant  to that level, there might be a few things. So for example, I prune and do my canopy management  
**[0:40:41-0:40:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:40:41):**  in a way that I try and get a little bit of direct sunlight actually on the berries. Plus there's  actually a physiological reaction of the plant producing berries that has to have some sunlight  hitting it. It's the natural mechanism when a vine is growing in the forest and it gets to the top of  
**[0:40:56-0:41:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:40:56):**  the canopy. That's what triggers its fruit. But also it triggers a little bit of the anthocyanin  in production. I suspect in oil crops, mid-stage, if you had a really healthy plant and you gave it  just a little bit of drought stress, that it would respond by producing higher levels of oils to  
**[0:41:13-0:41:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:41:13):**  protect it from drought. But it has the reserves at that point. I think this is the part that we've missed.  Exactly. Have the reserves to respond. It doesn't respond because you're stressing it. You know,  athletes spend most of their time training mildly, exercising, developing their capacity, resting,  
**[0:41:30-0:41:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:41:30):**  eating well, and then they run a marathon. Well, the reason they can run a marathon is they did all  that stuff before that. If you just pull somebody off the street and go, here run a marathon and I  know you're going to do good because I stressed you, you're not going to be happy with the results.  
**[0:41:46-0:41:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:41:46):**  Yeah, neither is the athlete.  Right, you're going to be really unhappy with the results. And you know, and so the modern  agriculture approach to that would be, oh, well give them a chemical that can perform. So you  
**[0:41:57-0:42:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:41:57):**  have them smurf some cocaine and off he goes and then he dies and you go, well, what happened?  Greg, you have a way with the knowledge. You hit that one pretty good. So Greg, in the  journey that you've been on, all the different things that you've worked on,  
**[0:42:11-0:42:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:42:11):**  what has been something that really surprised you that was very unexpected?  I think sort of as a general surprise is I'm sort of shocked at how much the land  grant university system, which was supposed to be set up to create an unbiased, scientifically  
**[0:42:26-0:42:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:42:26):**  driven system to support US agriculture, food supply, and all that, how much it's been co-op  by specific interests. The example I think about specifically is sort of the corporate line on  genetically modified organisms. I was at a local meeting and there was a really sweet,  
**[0:42:45-0:42:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:42:45):**  you know, young student who is, she's looking at different bridles for heat stress and just out of  the blue, she starts sort of doing the corporate line about how genetically genetic modification  is no different than breeding. And we've been breeding for years and years and years. And I  
**[0:43:00-0:43:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:43:00):**  didn't want to say anything because I didn't want to embarrass her, but I see this all the time and  you don't have to dig very deep into the science to find out it's, you know, it's malarkey. And  having been in the pharmaceutical world, you know, we came up with really inexpensive cures for  
**[0:43:17-0:43:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:43:17):**  things like acid reflux, for diabetes, but they're all based on natural products that you couldn't  patent. And so we were told, you know, don't touch this or you'll wind up dead in the ditch somewhere.  So what surprised me is that of how I believe it was Thomas Jefferson originally set the system up,  
**[0:43:35-0:43:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:43:35):**  how much that's become kind of co-op. You know, Don Huber talks about this all the time. He gets  away with this because he's got a great reputation. He's ready to retire. If he was a young researcher,  he couldn't be this vocal. Elaine Ingham was booted out of the University of Oregon because  
**[0:43:51-0:43:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:43:51):**  she spoke out against the microbiological effects of glyphosate and genetically modified organisms.  And so it surprised me how integrated that's gotten in and how pervasive it is, even to the  point of getting people whom I respect, like Neil Degrasse Tyson, doubting how great GMOs are. And  
**[0:44:09-0:44:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:44:09):**  it's like, Neil, come on, you're a smart guy, man. Read the research. You can't be tricked this  easily. So I've been really surprised by that. I think it's the co-opting has happened largely by  funding and funding resources. Universities today give a lot of their funding from agribusiness and  
**[0:44:27-0:44:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:44:27):**  from industry rather than from the government. Right. Right. Yeah, I agree. We've mentioned a  couple of different pieces, but I'm curious what more you have that we haven't spoken about. What  is something that you believe to be true about modern agriculture that many other people don't  
**[0:44:44-0:44:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:44:44):**  believe to be true? That's very different from the mainstream view. I believe that the whole idea  that we are kind of, quote unquote, stewards or managers of the ecosystem isn't really true. I  think we are the ecosystem. The ecosystem is us, microbiome, next to all of us. I think we can stop  
**[0:45:05-0:45:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:45:05):**  looking at ourselves as somehow being separate, but being an expression of everything that's out  there. The responsibility of having to manage an unbelievably complex ecosystem, quite frankly,  scares me. But being able to just go out in the vineyard with a glass of wine and get a sense of  
**[0:45:23-0:45:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:45:23):**  what's going on and feel like the more I shut down my, not shut it down, but if I can quiet my  rational mind and just learn to listen and be a servant and then apply the insights I get from  that with my rational mind, the more benefits you'll get, including just being happy. One of  
**[0:45:39-0:45:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:45:39):**  the things I love about what you often talk about is you ask people, are you having fun?  If they're not, why not? Go do something else. Go make wine. I'd highly recommend it.  No, I think that's a fascinating thought though, Greg, in that we are not stewards of the ecosystem.  
**[0:46:00-0:46:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:46:00):**  We are the ecosystem. I think if you really stop and think about that, that can strike pretty  deeply. Yeah. Then suddenly doing things like spraying Roundup is defensive. Why does that  make sense? You would never do that yourself, but you are when you're doing that. When we use the  
**[0:46:19-0:46:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:46:19):**  word, we are the ecosystem in the collective sense, particularly on the human side, and then  we look at the human population and we look at the decline in human health, the rapid rise in  degenerative illnesses, et cetera, et cetera. You say, oh, we are the ecosystem. We are an  
**[0:46:38-0:46:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:46:38):**  expression of this ecosystem. That gives you another perspective on thinking about agricultural  soil health and the management systems that we've adopted. Yeah. I guess a quick funny story. I was  giving a presentation to some of our staff members and our wine club members about this new work that  
**[0:46:55-0:47:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:46:55):**  we're doing with Advancing EcoAg. I showed them all the results and how we're adjusting all these  things and the plant sap analysis. One of the women up front kind of said, and I go, what's  wrong? Is this bothering you? She goes, no, it's just dawned on me. Your plants eat way better than  
**[0:47:11-0:47:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:47:11):**  I do. That's incredible. It's probably true. Maybe she'll start eating better. Yeah. One of my mentors  many years ago, Gary Zimmer with Midwestern BioAg, where they did a lot of dairy ration work. He used  to make the comment that the cows that we feed eat better than 95% of the American population.  
**[0:47:36-0:47:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:47:36):**  Yeah, that's probably true. Yeah, even that's a pretty low bar, unfortunately.  But that's part of it to talk about is food is medicine. This is real. It's not only real,  it's incredibly important. I think the work that you and you're really helping this community come  
**[0:47:52-0:47:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:47:52):**  together and pull these dispersion pieces of information together, if not makes the most  important work to be done, it's right up there. The future of civilization rides on it. Absolutely.  Agriculture has the capacity to have the biggest detrimental impact on the planet and on people,  
**[0:48:08-0:48:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:48:08):**  or the biggest positive impact. It's up to us and how we participate in that ecosystem. Yeah,  I agree. Greg, what is a book or resource that you recommend most often? Well, I have a lot because  I teach a fair amount. I have sort of different levels of books. One that I'm actually handing out  
**[0:48:25-0:48:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:48:25):**  to my students a lot as an intro, I used to hand out the Acres USA Primer. It's a little preachy,  some people took it well, some of us didn't. I now hand out The Farm as an Ecosystem by Jerry  Granetti. It's a great overview. It's a great introduction to things, very accessible. People  
**[0:48:41-0:48:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:48:41):**  tend to really like it. If people find meaning in that, I'll usually move them on to Science  and Agriculture with Arden Anderson, another brilliant book. Arden, of course, I just think  the world of Arden. He's just one of those great human beings. Speaking of great human beings,  
**[0:48:52-0:48:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:48:52):**  Don Huber, Mineral Nutrition and Plant Disease is another great one. If I want to blow their minds,  I'll give them a copy of Tuning into Nature by Phil Callahan. That will do it. Yeah, that will do  it. Actually, this is a book I've been able to give to a lot of conventional farmers that for  
**[0:49:09-0:49:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:49:09):**  some reason really resonates with them. It's Nutrition Rules by Graham Tate. I think that's  how you pronounce his last name. Yes, Graham Tate. Full introduction to all the characters  for the series of this. Certain ones will connect with people and they'll get interested in it.  
**[0:49:25-0:49:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:49:25):**  For anyone who's actually interested in where winemaking is going, I'd recommend a book called  Postmodern Winemaking by Clark Smith. What else is interesting? To some of my students who want  to get into Ag, I realized a lot of these students have zero background in chemistry. Not that you  
**[0:49:42-0:49:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:49:42):**  have to be a chemist, but you really need a functional knowledge. There's a great book  called Chemistry Made Simple by John Moore, I think. It's simple. I'll often supplement that  with Khan Academy, KAHN. He has a chemistry series that's online. It's accurate. It's good chemistry.  
**[0:49:59-0:50:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:49:59):**  It's fun to watch. Of course, Acres USA is a good subscription. Acres is a lot of divergent points  there, but it's a great way of getting exposed to stuff. There's some great resources. Thanks for  sharing those, Greg. Acres is where the seeds were planted that started me down the pathway that  
**[0:50:17-0:50:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:50:17):**  I am on today, for sure. Same here. If it wasn't for Acres, it would have been hard for me to navigate all this.  Some of the stuff in there is pretty good. Some of it isn't stuff that I would do,  but it's all in the right vein and it'll all lead you towards something quite a bit better.  
**[0:50:34-0:50:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:50:34):**  Greg, we've discussed a number of different topics and I know there's so much more that we could talk  about. What is the question that you wish I would have asked? Two things. We didn't get a chance.  I'm doing some interesting student work. Last year, we had a mealybug outbreak and we had no  
**[0:50:50-0:50:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:50:50):**  funding for monitoring through the state. I just organized students and we organized a small  growers co-op. I got the small growers together. I meet with them once a month and we've gone from  six members to 220 members in one year. Wow. These guys are really interested in kind of this  
**[0:51:09-0:51:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:51:09):**  cutting-edge stuff. Specifically with the mealybug monitoring, I suddenly had 100 volunteers  and I taught them all how to set mealybug traps. I cheated a little bit. I said if you  bring your trap back every two weeks on time, you can exchange your trap for a free glass of wine.  
**[0:51:24-0:51:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:51:24):**  That really helps. That's an awesome incentive. We got really good compliance.  What the state had spent five years ago on doing glassy-winged shark shooter, it cost them over  $200,000 to do it in one year by hiring entomologists to go out. We did the whole  
**[0:51:43-0:51:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:51:43):**  program for $5,000 and got better data. It shows the power of kind of citizen science,  which I'm a real fan of now. The other thing that spun out of that is I do a program where we  teach autistic kids kind of vineyard skills. When I took them out and we started doing field  
**[0:52:01-0:52:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:52:01):**  scouting, these guys are incredible. It turned me around on how I look at kids on the autistic  spectrum in that it's not that they have less capacity. They actually have more capacity.  It's just highly focused. If you can help them focus on that, they're incredibly productive,  
**[0:52:18-0:52:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:52:18):**  incredibly happy. They're really nice people. I've been teaching them some of the concepts of  biological agriculture. One of them asked for the book, What's Making Our Children, I think it's the  name of it. He came back and said, it's interesting that we're going to be working to help correct the  
**[0:52:39-0:52:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:52:39):**  problem that probably caused my autistic. That just blew me away to say that this kid understood  that and no malice about it at all. I got dealt kind of a crappy hand. Let's turn it around so  this doesn't happen to anyone else. That's incredible. The other one you didn't ask about  
**[0:52:55-0:53:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:52:55):**  the books, right? You never asked about what music would I recommend. Here's my two expectations.  If you want to get a sense musically of that sense of elation when you kind of connect all the dots,  it's Beethoven's 9th Symphony, otherwise known as the Ode to Joy. When I connect the dots,  
**[0:53:15-0:53:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:53:15):**  I literally hear that in the back of my head. If I feel like I'm overwhelmed and this isn't going  to work, I'll just crank up the stereo and listen to the Ode to Joy and I'm back on course. The  other one is if you got to clean out your barn, Led Zeppelin, Whole Lotta Love really helps.  
**[0:53:32-0:53:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:53:32):**  Greg, sometime soon I'm going to come visit the vineyard and I'm going to expect to hear the Ode  to Joy in the background. Yes, we will make that happen. I hope you can come out too. It's an  interesting area. Actually, if you ever get a chance, I'd love to have you address the Small  
**[0:53:50-0:53:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:53:50):**  Growers Group because quite frankly, they're the innovators in the area and they would be blown  away by the work that you're doing. Always happy to share. Greg, thank you so much for being on.  I really enjoyed this conversation and wish you success in the work that you're doing in your  
**[0:54:05-0:54:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:54:05):**  vineyard and I'm sure we'll talk again soon. Yeah, thanks John. Same here. I always enjoy talking to  you and I appreciate how you are really helping to sort of pull us all together at this critical  inflection point. I think we're at that point and you have identified that and you're playing  
**[0:54:21-0:54:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:54:21):**  a key role and really appreciate having you out there. Thank you. You're welcome. This podcast was  brought to you by a great company that I work for, AEA, Advancing Eco-Agriculture, the leader  in regenerative agriculture since 2006. At AEA, we believe in challenging the status quo to find  
**[0:54:41-0:54:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:54:41):**  more profitable and regenerative ways to grow crops. We also believe that healthy plants are  resistant to pests and disease and that to grow healthy plants, we must first think differently  about agriculture, about empowering life instead of suppressing life, about regeneration instead  
**[0:54:59-0:55:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/microbial-influences-on-crop-quality-with-greg-pennyroyal/#t=0:54:59):**  of degeneration. To achieve this, we formulate and sell products that help growers produce higher  quality yield with less risk of crop failure. In short, we help growers make more money  with less risk. Thank you for listening.  