---
title: Plant And Insect Communications In Biological Cropping Systems With Larry Phelan
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### Regenerative Agriculture Podcast  (2018-05-18)  
### Author(s): John Kempf  

**[0:00:00-0:00:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:00:00):**  Hi friends, I'm Jon Kempf hosting this podcast. I am passionate about developing regenerative  agriculture systems that improve soil health, produce crops that are completely resistant to  diseases and insects, and produce fruit of such an exceptional quality that we can have a legitimate  
**[0:00:16-0:00:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:00:16):**  conversation about growing food as medicine. I've discovered that there are many people with  incredible knowledge and information about soil and plant systems and how to develop regenerative  agriculture systems. However, much of this knowledge and this information is scattered,  
**[0:00:33-0:00:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:00:33):**  it's found all over the place. Some of it has been published in peer-reviewed publications,  but there are many incredible stories and a lot of knowledge that has not been published and that  hasn't been shared with many people. I started Advancing Eco-Agriculture in 2006 to bring this  
**[0:00:49-0:00:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:00:49):**  knowledge together in a more coherent fashion and incorporate it into products and growing systems  that growers can easily put into practice. It's my personal mission to have these regenerative  agricultural systems become adopted globally and become the mainstream, the status quo against  
**[0:01:07-0:01:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:01:07):**  which all other growing systems are compared. To help achieve this goal, I want to share the  knowledge that we have learned in the last decade and make it available to everyone. While we have  developed products at AEA that embody the principles of regenerative agriculture systems  
**[0:01:22-0:01:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:01:22):**  and make them easier for growers to apply, this knowledge and these principles can be applied  anywhere and when they are applied properly, they will always increase farm profitability  and resilience to climate stress. If you have any questions, suggestions, comments, or ideas,  
**[0:01:40-0:01:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:01:40):**  topics that you would like for me to discuss, please connect on LinkedIn or on Twitter,  where my username is at visionbuilder7 or you can also email me at john at johnkempf.com.  I would very much like to hear from you and to hear your feedback. Be sure to subscribe to this  
**[0:01:58-0:02:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:01:58):**  podcast and thank you very much for listening. Enjoy the show. Greetings friends and welcome to  the Regenerative Agriculture podcast. On this podcast, we explore the science and the practical  application of regenerative agriculture ecosystems, how to regenerate soil health,  
**[0:02:16-0:02:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:02:16):**  regenerate crop health and quality, and how to increase overall farm profitability. Our goal is  to give you clear, easy to understand, and actionable information that you can implement  on your operation. In this episode, I'm very excited to welcome Dr. Larry Phelan, currently  
**[0:02:33-0:02:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:02:33):**  from Ohio State University, on to the show. Larry has done some intriguing research over the years,  looking at plant and insect communication systems and what might increase plant susceptibility to  various insect pests, as well as looking at the concept of biological buffering and the capacity  
**[0:02:56-0:03:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:02:56):**  of plants to absorb nutrients from the soil profile in the form of microbial metabolites.  Larry, we're very excited to have you on the show. Thank you so much for joining us.  Well, the pleasure is all mine. Thank you. Larry, you've done some fascinating work over the years,  
**[0:03:11-0:03:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:03:11):**  looking at many different aspects of soil and plant ecosystems. What are some of your most  memorable moments that have led you to where you are today and led you to some of the projects that  you were working on? Well, first of all, I want to start off by saying that all that we do is  
**[0:03:31-0:03:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:03:31):**  generated by the observations and the experiences of farmers. And so I actually, when I, this area  of research represented a pretty significant career change for me. I was actually trained as  what's called a chemical ecologist, which means we would identify pheromones and plant attractants  
**[0:03:54-0:04:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:03:54):**  for insects as possible alternatives to pesticides. But as I was doing this and started talking to  organic farmers, one of the things that kept coming up was that they had fewer problems with  insect pests than their conventional neighbors. This was not true necessarily of all crops,  
**[0:04:14-0:04:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:04:14):**  but these were field crops that I was talking about here. And I was really intrigued by that  and found that there was not that much known about that in the literature. And so talking to them,  we basically formulated hypotheses to try to understand what it was that they were observing.  
**[0:04:36-0:04:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:04:36):**  So first of all, we did document that what they were saying was actually true. And pretty  consistently we're seeing lower levels of insect damage. And so yeah, that just really changed  the direction of my research. And so now we, about 20, 25 years ago, I switched and we started  
**[0:05:01-0:05:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:05:01):**  focusing on the soil and the microbial community and nutrient cycling and all kinds of things that  I really didn't know that much about at the time. But you kind of have to go where the data takes  you. With some of the original research that you did comparing the insect pressure on the  
**[0:05:20-0:05:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:05:20):**  organic farms versus the non-organic farms, this is actually something that I often hear these  stories from organic growers, but I haven't uncovered a lot of research where people have  actually tried to do a comparison and evaluate the differences. So what were, I guess the question  
**[0:05:40-0:05:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:05:40):**  I would have for you is what were the differences that you were seeing? What really stood out for  you? Well again, keeping in context that this was 20, 25 years ago, there's been a lot more  research in organic systems now, but at the time organic farming was considered very unscientific  
**[0:05:57-0:06:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:05:57):**  and more new age and not amenable to large scale production and all of that. And so I was working  with a lot of organic farmers that were basically doing their own research, you know, not necessarily  replicated research like we would do at the university, but trying different things and  
**[0:06:19-0:06:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:06:19):**  seeing what worked on their farm. And so this is the context in which we got started. And so I  actually received a lot of criticism at the time that what I was doing was not very productive or  not the direction that I should be going as an untenured faculty member particularly. So,  
**[0:06:39-0:06:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:06:39):**  but what we did was we went to these, in this case these were corn soybean farmers and the  organic producers were, I think all the ones we worked with also raised animals, had animals  integrated into their system as well. And first of all, just did census of using, looking at their  
**[0:07:01-0:07:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:07:01):**  corn, looking at the levels of European corn borer damage in their fields versus their conventional  neighbors. And as I'm sure you and many of your listeners have already often heard, I kept hearing  this idea that if we have a healthy soil then we're going to have a healthy plant and insects  
**[0:07:23-0:07:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:07:23):**  don't like healthy plants. And so that's why they don't see the damage. And so again, I saw that as,  although that in itself is not a very scientific statement, we could reformulate that as a  hypothesis that we could test empirically. And so what we did was to collect soils from these  
**[0:07:41-0:07:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:07:41):**  organic farms and then go right across the street to a conventional neighbor, collect their soils,  brought these soils into the greenhouse and planted them to corn and either fertilized each  of them either with an organic fertilizer like manure or compost or with a chemical fertilizer.  
**[0:08:02-0:08:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:08:02):**  And so what we were interested in figuring out was first of all, whether the insects could tell  a difference in these plants and if they could tell a difference, was it associated with that  what I would call the short-term effect of the type of fertilizer you use or that long-term  
**[0:08:20-0:08:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:08:20):**  effect of that history of management and how that impacted the soil community. And so after  setting these plants up and letting them grow to a certain stage, we then released European  corn borer females that had been mated into the greenhouse. And again, all of this was replicated  
**[0:08:40-0:08:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:08:40):**  and randomized and we just let them loose and see where they would lay their eggs. And what we  found very consistently, we actually repeated this experiment I think with four or five different  pairs of farms or soils from farms, consistently we found if the plant was growing in a soil from  
**[0:09:00-0:09:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:09:00):**  an organic farm, irrespective of the fertilizer we applied, they received relatively few eggs.  Whereas if that plant was growing in a plant or a soil from a conventional farm, sometimes they  would receive a lot of eggs and sometimes they would receive only a few eggs. And so this gave  
**[0:09:19-0:09:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:09:19):**  rise to this concept that I call biological buffering. So the way we envisioned this and this  is kind of our working hypothesis, was in that in those organic systems where you have a recurring  influx of organic matter either in in terms of cover crops or plant manures or animal manures  
**[0:09:39-0:09:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:09:39):**  into those soils, you create this soil community which is beneficial to the plant.  And so when nutrients then go into that system, they get absorbed by this microbial community  and then they release those nutrients very slowly over time. And as a result, we hypothesize that  
**[0:10:04-0:10:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:10:04):**  those plants are in better mineral balance than when you're putting down high levels of nutrients.  Why this would be important is that plants are almost always limited by nitrogen levels and so  they don't have mechanisms for dampening the levels of nitrogen that they take up. They're  
**[0:10:28-0:10:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:10:28):**  going to take up whatever they can get and in this context of putting down inorganic  highly soluble nitrogen sources, often these plants are taking up much higher levels of nitrogen  than they are really set up to deal with. And so we then hypothesize that in that situation  
**[0:10:54-0:11:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:10:54):**  those plants would tend to accumulate the simple compounds. And so as you have an imbalance of  nutrients, when you have an imbalance of nutrients, let's say nitrogen to potassium, if you think about  those two elements, nitrogen of course is very important in terms of protein synthesis and  
**[0:11:13-0:11:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:11:13):**  potassium is also important in terms of converting amino acids into protein. So if you have an  imbalance, you have too much nitrogen relative to potassium, what happens is you get the buildup of  free amino acids in those plants and insects love free amino acids. That's a very  
**[0:11:34-0:11:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:11:34):**  digestible source of nutrients for them because they're also highly limited by nitrogen. And so  in those situations where you have these imbalances, that plant becomes very nutritious for  the insect, whereas in the plant that is in better mineral balance where they're getting their  
**[0:11:53-0:12:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:11:53):**  nutrients relatively slowly, that metabolic machinery of the plant is able to act more  efficiently. And so as amino acids and sugars are produced in the plant, they're more immediately  converted to the less digestible and more complex building blocks of the plant like proteins  
**[0:12:18-0:12:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:12:18):**  and starches and cellulose and that sort of thing.  Larry, you've mentioned a couple of fascinating pieces that I'd love to unravel a little bit more.  The idea of biological buffering, what you're describing in essence, if I'm  
**[0:12:34-0:12:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:12:34):**  understanding you correctly, is the capacity of biology in the soil to absorb large amounts of  nutrients that are applied and contain those nutrients within their cells and then release  them over a period of time. Is that what you're describing?  
**[0:12:51-0:12:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:12:51):**  Yes. So even in this artificial situation that we created where we put inorganic fertilizer  into a soil that had an organic history, even in that situation, that organic soil, that soil from  that organic farm had enough carbon lying around where those microbes could actually use that  
**[0:13:12-0:13:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:13:12):**  inorganic form of nitrogen and then in combination with the carbon that was there and then  bring that into that microbial community. And then as they then die off and you have  other organisms that are feeding on those microbes, they then allow for the mineralization  
**[0:13:37-0:13:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:13:37):**  of some of these compounds, these nitrogenous compounds, and then it becomes available to the plant.  And so we did, to follow up on this, we studied the dynamics of nitrogen across the growing season  in these organic and conventional corn fields, just as we would have expected. When you look at  
**[0:13:59-0:14:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:13:59):**  a conventional system where you have in the spring the farmers putting down relatively high levels  of soluble fertilizer and really not much carbon other than maybe some plant residue, you see huge  fluctuations in terms of the availability of those, of that nitrogen. So of course before  
**[0:14:20-0:14:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:14:20):**  fertilization, nitrogen levels are very low, the farmer applies the fertilizer, now they shoot way up  well above what the plant can use, and then over the course of the growing season that  nitrogen then declines. But if you look at that same pattern in an organic system, what we found  
**[0:14:40-0:14:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:14:40):**  was that the levels of nitrogen, of soluble nitrogen in the soil solution generally were lower  overall and they also didn't vary much during the course of the year. And so that plant was getting  this kind of constant supply, steady supply of nitrogen throughout the growing season.  
**[0:15:02-0:15:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:15:02):**  And really what we found when we compared these farms was that overall there was no difference  in terms of the production at the end of the year between the organic and conventional farms.  I'd also love to understand the insect attraction piece a bit better. You mentioned that when you  
**[0:15:26-0:15:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:15:26):**  have this surge of nitrogen supply on the non-organic farms from the nutrient application  period, you have an increased attraction because you have a nutrient rich food source.  Why are insects, why can insects not utilize plants as a food source that don't contain as  
**[0:15:47-0:15:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:15:47):**  high levels of amino acids? Because they would also contain some level of amino acids, no?  Yes, yeah all plants are going to have some levels of free amino acids and they can also digest  protein. Let's keep that in mind too. But that protein, it's going to take energy for that insect  
**[0:16:08-0:16:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:16:08):**  to digest that protein. Furthermore, a lot of plants have defenses that involve the inhibition  of enzymes that break down protein in the insect. These are called protease inhibitors.  And this is actually in terms of what we call inducible defenses. This is one of the mechanisms  
**[0:16:30-0:16:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:16:30):**  of many or the responses of many plants to insect attack. They start the production of these  protease inhibitors in order to reduce the insect's ability to digest that protein. It basically  knocks out those proteases in the insect. And so the insect doesn't necessarily starve, but it  
**[0:16:55-0:17:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:16:55):**  slows their development way down. Well in that situation, if you've also given that plant much,  you know, these high levels of nitrogen and it's accumulating these free amino acids,  that now short circuits that plant defense system. So in other words, the insect doesn't need those  
**[0:17:14-0:17:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:17:14):**  proteases as much because it has, it's getting these free amino acids that it doesn't have to  break down. Got it. That was a piece that I had always not fully understood because I've heard  it described that insects don't have the capacity to digest complete proteins and that they're  
**[0:17:34-0:17:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:17:34):**  dependent on soluble amino acids as a food source. And that never quite made sense to me. It made  sense from a theoretical perspective, but it didn't make sense to me that plants might have  no amino acids versus one plant having very high levels of amino acids. Yeah, it's a matter of  
**[0:17:57-0:18:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:17:57):**  degree. And even proteins, they vary in terms of their digestibility for insects too. And of  course, insects evolve enzymes that are going to be most effective at digesting the proteins  they're likely to encounter, you know, depending on what host plant they feed on. As you were  
**[0:18:19-0:18:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:18:19):**  looking at these plant insect and dynamics in the field and developing your hypothesis of biological  buffering, what was something that surprised you? That's a good question. I don't know that this  was necessarily a surprise. Maybe I'll think of something that was more surprising later, but  
**[0:18:41-0:18:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:18:41):**  the one thing that was particularly exciting to us is when we took the next step and we tested  this idea that mineral balance resulting from this biological buffering of organic matter,  we started growing plants hydroponically so that we could vary the proportions of different  
**[0:19:00-0:19:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:19:00):**  nutrients. And the idea is that if the hypothesis we were testing was actually that when the plant  was in good mineral balance, you would get both good growth, but also resistance to insect attack.  And then as the plant moved out of balance nutritionally, you would see plant growth go down  
**[0:19:27-0:19:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:19:27):**  and insect performance actually go up. And then ultimately, as the plant was way out of balance  nutritionally, then we expected that the plant, you know, wouldn't grow very well. And then  ultimately the insects wouldn't do very well either because it was just such a poor host plant.  
**[0:19:44-0:19:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:19:44):**  And so we tested this with a number of different combinations of nutrients. And the one that was  most dramatic that actually supported this prediction was looking at soybeans in which we  varied the ratios of ammonia to nitrate to the plant. So we provided it all the nutrients that  
**[0:20:06-0:20:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:20:06):**  it needed in constant levels for all the plants. But what we were testing was different ratios  between these two different forms of nitrogen. And what we found was that as we increased the  amount of ammonia up to about 30%, that is where we saw the best plant growth. So that ratio of 30%  
**[0:20:28-0:20:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:20:28):**  ammonia, 70% nitrate is where we got the best plant growth. And then when we looked at insects,  so what we did was to pluck the leaves off these plants and then feed them to insects and see how  the insects grew. And this particular insect we were working with was the Mexican bean beetle.  
**[0:20:48-0:20:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:20:48):**  And when we fed these leaves to the Mexican bean beetle, we saw just the opposite response. So in  other words, where the plant was out of balance nutritionally, not growing very well, that's where  the insects did the largest. And that's where we saw the best survivorship. But as we move towards  
**[0:21:05-0:21:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:21:05):**  that 30% ammonia where the plants were growing their biggest, insect survivorship, larval  survivorship dropped from about 90% down to about 30% or 40%. So it was a very dramatic effect. And  actually even more dramatic than what we were expecting. And then when we followed up on this,  
**[0:21:27-0:21:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:21:27):**  and we measured the levels of free amino acids in these plants, it was consistent with prediction.  So then in other words, those plants that were not growing as well, that were out of balance in terms  of this ratio, they had much higher levels of free amino acids relative to that 30% ammonia plant.  
**[0:21:46-0:21:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:21:46):**  When you were looking at these various ratios between ammonium and nitrate, what was the  total nitrogen rate being applied? Well, in this case, again, we are growing these hydroponically,  so as there wouldn't be really, don't know that would be relevant to the field setting.  
**[0:22:05-0:22:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:22:05):**  We actually tried, we ran this experiment with three different total levels of nitrogen  in solution and saw the most dramatic effect was with the highest level of nitrogen overall,  and that's where we got the best plant growth. Absolutely fascinating. It's fascinating research.  
**[0:22:27-0:22:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:22:27):**  So going back to the discussion regarding biological buffering and the things that you  observed with insect attraction or desirability, what is, if you were to extend that out and  the additional research that you've done over the years, what is the practical take-home message  
**[0:22:47-0:22:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:22:47):**  that a grower should consider thinking about or implementing on his farm? How do we take this  information and put it into practical application? Well, in the all the studies that we've done and  different things that we've looked at, this message just keeps recurring, that of denoting the  
**[0:23:09-0:23:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:23:09):**  demonstrating the importance of organic matter addition to the soil. And so, you know, as I've  said before, the mineral balance is part of the picture. That's really important, but the dynamics  of the nutrient availability can be, is also important. And so other words, we need that  
**[0:23:31-0:23:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:23:31):**  influx of active organic matter going into that system in order to sustain this beneficial  microbial community. And that has the effect not only of balancing those nutrients, but it also  enhances this other completely different group of microbes that I'm sure you're already familiar  
**[0:23:54-0:23:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:23:54):**  with. And these are the ones that live in the rhizosphere, including what we call the plant  growth promoting rhizobacteria and rhizofungi. They are also enhanced in a system where you have  relatively low nutrient availability, but being made available to the plant in a sustained rate.  
**[0:24:15-0:24:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:24:15):**  So you have a number of benefits that flow from that influx of organic matter. And imagine you're,  most of your listeners are already familiar with this distinction, but when we talk about organic  matter, it's important that we distinguish between old organic matter and biologically active  
**[0:24:35-0:24:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:24:35):**  organic matter. So when you get your soil test, most of that organic matter in your soil test is  what we call recalcitrant or this organic matter or organic matter that's, you know, hundreds or  thousands of years old. And it's now in a stable form that microbes can no longer utilize and  
**[0:24:53-0:24:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:24:53):**  break down any further. And so now this has, this provides the benefits that we're all familiar with  in terms of tension of moisture and buffering of pH and that sort of thing. And that's actually  where this concept of biological buffering came from, is we already knew these chemical and  
**[0:25:13-0:25:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:25:13):**  physical benefits of soil organic matter. And what I was trying to do was extend this concept  to the biological realm of the soil and show how this organic matter also could buffer biological  interactions between the plant and its environment. And so what we need to measure and focus on is  
**[0:25:34-0:25:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:25:34):**  that active organic matter. So this is the relatively young organic matter that's going  into the system, either as like I say, plant manures or animal newers, you know, plowing down  of cover crops and that sort of thing, different sources of that. That to me is, I think, really  
**[0:25:53-0:25:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:25:53):**  key to a successful ecological based agriculture.  When you use the terminology of biological buffering, kind of the extended implication is  that when you are buffering something, you're buffering something that has the  
**[0:26:13-0:26:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:26:13):**  potential to have a negative impact. I think in this case, perhaps referring to nutrient  applications that contain high concentrations of soluble ions that are serving as an electrolyte,  which might have a damaging effect on soil biology. What did you find the impact to be  
**[0:26:31-0:26:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:26:31):**  of the, say a nitrogen application on the soil's biological profile?  Well, we haven't actually measured that directly. Before we started the podcast here,  I mentioned to you a project that we're doing now in Cleveland, looking at the impact of industrial  
**[0:26:50-0:27:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:26:50):**  legacy of Cleveland's soils and its history of lead smelting and metalworks and in whether,  to what degree, or organic farming could improve those soils. And so we are starting to look at,  for the first time, my group, not others, others have done this, but our group is for the first  
**[0:27:12-0:27:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:27:12):**  time is actually starting to identify the microbes that are living there. And we're certainly seeing  differences in terms of those communities, depending on the levels of nitrogen that are  present. But we, in that study, we're not comparing, say organic farms to conventional farms.  
**[0:27:34-0:27:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:27:34):**  We're comparing unmanaged soils to organically managed soils. So we don't expect to see the same  differences we'd see if we're doing this study out in the rural setting where we're comparing  farms that have high levels of organic matter going in versus those that are not using organic  
**[0:27:54-0:28:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:27:54):**  matter. But so I can't specifically tell you what the differences are. I can tell you it definitely  has an impact in the soil community and in terms of the plant response, and this gets us into a  different realm, but the plant is in control in terms of this rhizosphere community. So  
**[0:28:18-0:28:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:28:18):**  it is pumping out high levels of carbon into the soil. Some people have estimated the amount of  photosynthate that it's produced, it's pumping out as much as 40 percent of that into the soil. And  that's a huge amount of investment. So that tells us that that plant is, must be getting something  
**[0:28:43-0:28:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:28:43):**  from the soil community. But more recent studies, very recent studies have demonstrated not only is  it pumping out, the plant pumping out the things like sugars and alcohols, poly alcohols, but it  can actually change the soup that it sends out depending on what it needs. So it's actively  
**[0:29:07-0:29:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:29:07):**  recruiting a microbial community, it appears, depending on what the stress is or what the  deficiency is. And likewise, if you put in high levels of nutrients, that plant is not going to  pay that microbial community to say harvest phosphorus from the soil for it, for the plant,  
**[0:29:33-0:29:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:29:33):**  because the plant can get it for free. It's just lying around there where it's very readily  available. And so it will shut down those exudates and close itself off from infection by  mycorrhizae and beneficial microbes. But this has other effects too because those beneficial  
**[0:29:58-0:30:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:29:58):**  microbes and those mycorrhizae provide other benefits to the plant, including increasing the  surface area of the root system. So to gather water, for example. So you can imagine in a  situation, and I think we commonly see this, that in the spring, if you're putting down high levels  
**[0:30:17-0:30:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:30:17):**  of nutrients, that plant not only closes out these or shuts out these mycorrhizae, it also  tends to grow a relatively shallow root system. And because, again, it's getting all the nitrogen  it needs here, all the nutrients it needs. And so it's going to invest more in growth above the  
**[0:30:39-0:30:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:30:39):**  ground. Well, what happens when you come to July and then now the rain stops and we start to have  a drought? That plant is in trouble because it doesn't have the root system to deal with  trying to gather the water from a larger area. Whereas when you had this symbiotic system  
**[0:31:02-0:31:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:31:02):**  with the mycorrhizae and they are stretching out further into the soil, you now have help in that  regard. So those are the sort of things that I guess I would point to as evidence of buffering  of these extremes. So the idea is that you want to create a system, manage your soil to create this  
**[0:31:26-0:31:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:31:26):**  environment where the plant doesn't encounter the extremes, either in terms of outbreaks of  pathogens or outbreaks of insects, but also in terms of its resilience to abiotic stress like  drought or heat. Larry, this is a fascinating conversation. I'm smiling quite widely because  
**[0:31:49-0:31:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:31:49):**  you have pointed out a couple of pieces that we have observed in the field. To your first point  regarding mycorrhizae, we have absolutely observed that when growers apply soluble phosphorus at  planting or at transplanting for a vegetable crop, that there is a chance that they will be able to  
**[0:32:08-0:32:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:32:08):**  transplanting for a vegetable crop that there is very limited or perhaps no mycorrhizae association,  not just for a period shortly after planting, but in many cases for the duration of that plant's  life, particularly for annual plants. And I certainly have observed that. But I think the  
**[0:32:28-0:32:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:32:28):**  piece that has really caught my attention is what you're describing in essence is the idea of  putting on soluble fertilizers at planting as a row starter on broadacre crops is perhaps the  exact and precise wrong thing to do because you are limiting the development of the root system  
**[0:32:48-0:32:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:32:48):**  and limiting the development of the microbial community in the rhizosphere is essentially what  you're describing. Yeah, and I think that that stems from, and I have to say that I'm not a  field agronomist here, so I don't want to step too far out of the bounds of what I really know.  
**[0:33:06-0:33:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:33:06):**  But I would say that my impression is that that starts from the idea that we all want to get  those those plants up and moving. And so I can see the appeal of putting down a little starter  fertilizer so you can get those plants growing quickly. But again, one of the things that we  
**[0:33:25-0:33:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:33:25):**  observe in terms of this organic conventional comparisons that we did 20 years ago was the  difference in the growth pattern. So when we're comparing these paired farms, you know, early in  the spring I was looking at these, you know, go to the conventional field and I see these plants  
**[0:33:45-0:33:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:33:45):**  that are very dark green and rich and they're up to my knees and I go over to the organic farm and  the plants are kind of scrawny looking and not very tall and I'm thinking, man, this farmer  is going to get hammered in terms of yield. There's no way this organic field is going to yield.  
**[0:34:04-0:34:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:34:04):**  And yet what happens we would find was those conventional plants would grow very quickly  and then they would stall out. And then the, kind of like the tortoise and hare, so but the organic  plants they would grow slowly but they would eventually make it up to the same point in terms  
**[0:34:22-0:34:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:34:22):**  of plant growth. And as I said, overall across these three pairs of farms that we looked at over  two years, we saw no difference in yield. This is really intriguing for me because  everything that we have been taught in mainstream agronomy is that you absolutely, it would be  
**[0:34:44-0:34:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:34:44):**  absolute heresy to consider not applying soluble nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium in the furrow  at planting. And yet I have, we have a handful of growers that we've been working with for several  years both directly within at AEA and then also some of the colleagues that I work with who insist  
**[0:35:05-0:35:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:35:05):**  that they've been doing this for a number of years on applying only in-salt. So they still apply  an in-furrow application but there is no nitrogen, no phosphorus, or excuse me, I should say no soluble  phosphorus, only insoluble phosphorus in the rock phosphate form and no potassium and along with  
**[0:35:26-0:35:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:35:26):**  calcium and magnesium and trace minerals. So they are applying an in-furrow solution but it does not  contain any appreciable quantities of NPK. And it's been really intriguing for me because these  growers, and I'm thinking of several corn producers in particular, have had the largest root systems  
**[0:35:46-0:35:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:35:46):**  of any corn plants that I have ever observed. And when we were using SAP analysis, in spite of there  being no phosphorus applications, these corn seedlings at a very early stage had higher phosphorus  concentrations than those areas where phosphorus was being applied. And I kind of suspected  
**[0:36:06-0:36:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:36:06):**  that there was this microbial interaction going on that was contributing to that but I never  anticipated that it could be coined that and think of a response. It was absolutely fascinating.  Yeah we did early on with these in this idea of biological buffering another study we did was when  
**[0:36:25-0:36:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:36:25):**  we're growing plants in the conventional and organic soil with the different forms of  fertilizer, we did mineral profiles of the corn leaves. And one of the things that was really  interesting there is when we compared the the mineral profile of a leaf of a corn leaf in the  
**[0:36:44-0:36:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:36:44):**  from a conventional soil that had been given ammonium nitrate, it's nutrient profile  was hugely different from a plant that received no fertilizer. But in the organics soils,  when we grew plants there and we added either manure or ammonium nitrate, those mineral  
**[0:37:09-0:37:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:37:09):**  profiles of those leaves were not that much different from the unamended plants. And again,  all of those plants grew very well and they were, it was not that they were all small,  but they were all actually pretty large. And so that kind of gets back to this idea of the  
**[0:37:29-0:37:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:37:29):**  buffering system. So even in the short term without the influx of soluble fertilizers in  that organic system with that active microbial food web, they can provide nutrients to the plant  enough for it to grow as it needs to grow. You've looked at agriculture ecosystems  
**[0:37:51-0:37:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:37:51):**  from a higher level, perhaps a more macro perspective. What is something that you believe  to be true about modern agriculture that is different from the mainstream view?  Well I guess my maybe most heretical statement would be that I think that the use of soluble  
**[0:38:09-0:38:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:38:09):**  fertilizers has been one of the most disruptive practices for mainstream farming in terms of  looking at that soil, looking at that field, looking at that farm as an ecosystem. And for  many of the reasons we've already discussed here, we have another of the things that really struck  
**[0:38:29-0:38:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:38:29):**  me as I started working with organic farmers was the difference in the way they viewed what they  did and whether they were successful or not. So for the organic farmer, let me start with the  conventional farmer, in terms of the way we've designed the farming system, it's much more  
**[0:38:47-0:38:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:38:47):**  of what we would call a prescriptive approach where you have a problem and then you apply a  product or you buy some material or you have some practice to solve that problem. And so it's  reactive or anticipating a problem. Whereas in the organic system, it's a much more systems  
**[0:39:09-0:39:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:39:09):**  perspective that these farmers were taking. And so they often didn't even know what their yields  were. They couldn't tell you what they were. All they knew was they had enough for their animals  and that their animals were healthy. And so they were looking at the whole system. So that was  
**[0:39:27-0:39:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:39:27):**  their indicator that things were working well, that they had a good balance between their animals  and their crop production, their forage production, whatever, and that the dairy cows were  producing well. So that was their metric. And so in that case, and this kind of gets back to  
**[0:39:50-0:39:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:39:50):**  another difference in terms of the way maybe a more conventional agronomist would look at organic  matter as a fertilizer, most people would say, well, the problem with organic matter as a  fertility system is so much of that nitrogen is tied up, would be the phrase that I would hear.  
**[0:40:08-0:40:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:40:08):**  Well, I don't see that as a negative. I see that actually as a positive when you think about this  over the long term, because yes, it's tied up in the sense that it's not immediately available to  the plant, not all of it's immediately available to the plant, but you've got money in the bank  
**[0:40:26-0:40:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:40:26):**  there for the next year. And so the idea is to build as you're converting to maybe a more  ecological approach or an organic system, you are building that bank account, if you will,  and so that now, I can extend the analogy, now that bank can start to give you interest,  
**[0:40:49-0:40:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:40:49):**  and you can start to live on the interest rather than to be always living on the principle.  Larry, what is a book or a resource that you would recommend that more growers and agronomists  should read or pay attention to?  
**[0:41:04-0:41:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:41:04):**  Oh boy. Well, I think there are a lot, like I say, there's been some great advances, I think,  now in terms of organic research, and so I think there are a lot of books and some of them not,  some of them relatively small, but very informative books that have been put out  
**[0:41:26-0:41:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:41:26):**  that are very practical in terms of talking about cover crops, talking about different  sources of fertility, of organic fertility, and so I would recommend, you know, people maybe go to  ATRA or ORFR or even the National Conservation Service. There's been a real shift in the attitude  
**[0:41:58-0:42:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:41:58):**  of scientists in this regard, so like I say, when we first started, it was considered unscientific.  Now people have recognized the observations of these pioneer farmers or farmers that really have  been our mentors and the mentors of some other scientists as well, and now have a better  
**[0:42:20-0:42:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:42:20):**  understanding maybe of what's going on there and why these systems work. So I think there are a  number, I don't know that there's a specific book that I would point to, but yeah, a number of  books and guides are available now for organic fertility and organic soil management.  
**[0:42:39-0:42:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:42:39):**  You know, we have a lot of resources today that weren't available even five years ago.  Yes. What is the question that you wish I would have asked?  Well, I think you've done a pretty good job of covering. Maybe, I guess I'm, because it's so  
**[0:42:53-0:42:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:42:53):**  recent and we're just finding some neat things out in these urban soils, if you know mine,  I'd like to talk a little bit about that. Please, look, learn more about what you're doing.  Yeah, so the, you know, the idea is that in this, the work that we've done so far, we recognize that  
**[0:43:11-0:43:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:43:11):**  the importance of this soil community in terms of producing a healthy plant, right, and so  now when we have this situation where this, the soil and these urban centers like Cleveland,  where we have huge numbers of buildings being torn down, we have something like 20, 25,000  
**[0:43:34-0:43:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:43:34):**  vacant lots now available in Cleveland, and we have all this open land that the city is looking  for ways to best utilize for the benefit of the community, and one of the possibilities I see is,  is urban farming and bring healthy food into those neighborhoods, but if given that legacy of,  
**[0:43:57-0:44:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:43:57):**  like I say, outfall from smokestacks and, and we know that the, in many areas there are elevated  levels of lead and other heavy metals, we wanted to know to what degree has that impacted,  that legacy, has that impacted that soil community, and if we, if the community converted  
**[0:44:19-0:44:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:44:19):**  some of these lots to food production and particularly using organic methods, could they  rejuvenate that soil to bring it back to create a healthy environment again, or are those soils  just lost and we should recommend that they just be planted to green space or something like that,  
**[0:44:37-0:44:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:44:37):**  some other purpose other than farming, and so one of the, and so what we did, what we're doing is  comparing the various aspects, the chemical, the physical, and the biological community of these  soils from these vacant lots that have this insult of heavy metals and, and petroleum contaminants,  
**[0:44:57-0:45:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:44:57):**  compare this to some organic farms in, in Cleveland, and then compare that to the  metro park soils, so these are soils that are kind of what we would consider the proxy for what the  community would have been like before Cleveland settled there and disturbed the soils, and then  
**[0:45:17-0:45:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:45:17):**  also rural organic farms, so we wanted to know do these, these organic urban farms, are they able to  improve the soils in the city and to, are they able to improve it to the degree that we see in  the rural setting, and we've found some really interesting things, for example, most striking,  
**[0:45:41-0:45:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:45:41):**  and we haven't even published this yet, we've just, just found this out, and that with the influx of  organic matter in these organic farms, it's not only reducing the levels of lead that are in the  soil there, but also the lead that is fit there, it's reducing the bioavailability of that lead,  
**[0:46:04-0:46:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:46:04):**  and so now we're real excited about that, and so this suggests maybe an avenue through which  some of these cities can improve their soils and reduce the, the danger of lead in the soil by,  you know, improve, increasing the amount of organic matter going in, and the type of organic  
**[0:46:26-0:46:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:46:26):**  matter going in. So if you're able to effectively bioremediate lead and some of these other toxic  elements, and in essence what you're describing is that they're not being absorbed by the, the  plants, which is really powerful. That's correct, yeah, so that's, that's really, a lot of research  
**[0:46:46-0:46:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:46:46):**  is moving in that direction, you know, because, you know, elements like lead, they're not going to  break down, you know, you can't get rid of them, they're going to be there, so somehow you've got  to pull them out, so you have to remove all that soil and bring in new soil, which obviously is  
**[0:47:01-0:47:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:47:01):**  extremely expensive, or you reduce the, the availability of it, and so you have to, you know,  reduce the availability of it, and so in that case, if it's not available, you could, a human could  eat this material, this, this form of, say, lead, and it would just pass through the system without  
**[0:47:22-0:47:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:47:22):**  any harm to the human or to the animal or whatever, or to the plant for that matter. So yeah, that's  the way things are kind of moving towards trying to see, are there ways to reduce that  availability of that, those heavy metals, rather than actually try to remove them from the system.  
**[0:47:39-0:47:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:47:39):**  I think that actually can be a very important piece that we may need to consider, not just for  the legacy of urban regions, but also we have many pollutants that have been applied in agricultural  areas as well. For example, historically, a, one of the historical pesticides that was used in apple  
**[0:48:00-0:48:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:48:00):**  orchards was lead arsenic, and so we have that, we have that legacy in some agricultural soils of  having some fairly toxic elements in quite substantial concentrations that need to be  remediated. Yeah, I hadn't actually thought about that. That's, that's certainly true. That would be  
**[0:48:17-0:48:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:48:17):**  interesting to look at. Absolutely. I think there's a very, there's a need for that, and for looking at  reclaiming some of these soils, and one of the pieces that we actually see quite a bit of, perhaps  more in orchards and regions where there were historical orchards than anywhere else, is the  
**[0:48:35-0:48:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:48:35):**  damaging impacts on soil biology of chronic pesticide use and pesticide exposure. So often,  when, when we talk about the, some of the potential damaging consequences of, say,  glyphosate or certain fungicides or whatever it is we might be discussing, kind of the immediate  
**[0:48:58-0:49:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:48:58):**  area that many people jump to is thinking about large-scale, broad-acre crop production, corn,  beans, small grains, and so forth. And certainly there is, there is substantial pesticide use in  some of those areas, although it's spread out over very large acres. But I think where it's  
**[0:49:14-0:49:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:49:14):**  highly concentrated is in these fruit production areas where orchards, and the same is true to some  degree of vegetable production as well, but orchards get chronic year after year applications  of very intense herbicide, insecticide, and fungicide applications that we see having a  
**[0:49:32-0:49:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:49:32):**  very detrimental effect on soil biology. So it's a major area that I think we need to look at.  Yeah, I think that's a, that's a good point. Yeah, I mean these, particularly with the high-value  crops, there's a high incentive to protect that crop, and so even if you don't know if there's  
**[0:49:50-0:49:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:49:50):**  a problem, I think there's a tendency to just be on the safe side and, and spray. So I could see  where, yeah, you could have accumulation of high levels of compounds that are disruptive to the  ecosystem there. Yep, Larry, thank you so much for joining us on this podcast and for sharing  
**[0:50:10-0:50:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:50:10):**  your wisdom and your experience. We very much enjoyed this discussion and conversation. I'm  sure that our listeners have as well, and I look forward to continuing this conversation with you  and having you back on the podcast at some point in the future. Thank you very much for being here.  
**[0:50:24-0:50:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:50:24):**  Well, thank you, John. This podcast was brought to you by a great company that I work for,  AEA, Advancing Eco-Agriculture, the leader in regenerative agriculture since 2006. At AEA,  we believe in challenging the status quo to find more profitable and regenerative ways to grow  
**[0:50:41-0:50:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:50:41):**  crops. We also believe that healthy plants are resistant to pests and disease, and that to grow  healthy plants, we must first think different about agriculture, about empowering life instead  of suppressing life, about regeneration versus degeneration. To achieve this, we formulate and  
**[0:50:56-0:51:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/plant-and-insect-communications-in-biological-cropping-systems-with-larry-phelan/#t=0:50:56):**  sell products that help growers produce higher quality yield with less risk of crop failure.  In short, we help growers make more money with less risk. Thank you for listening.  