### Regenerative Agriculture Podcast  (2019-22-17)
**[0:00:00-0:00:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:00:00):**  Hi friends, this is John.  I'm passionate about developing regenerative agriculture systems that improve soil health,  produce crops that are completely resistant to diseases and insects, and produce food  of such an exceptional quality that we can have a legitimate conversation about growing  food as medicine.  
**[0:00:18-0:00:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:00:18):**  I've been fortunate to meet many people with incredible knowledge and information about  soil and plant systems.  However, much of this knowledge and information is scattered all over the place.  I founded Advancing Eco-Agriculture in 2006 to bring this knowledge together in a more  coherent fashion and incorporate it into products and growing systems that growers can easily  
**[0:00:38-0:00:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:00:38):**  put into practice.  It's my personal mission to have these regenerative agriculture systems become the mainstream  globally, the status quo against which all other growing systems are compared.  To achieve this goal, I want to share the knowledge that we have learned in the last  decade and make it available to everyone.  
**[0:00:55-0:01:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:00:55):**  If you have any questions, suggestions, comments, or topics that you would like for me to discuss,  please connect on social media or email me, john at regenerativeagriculturepodcast.com.  Be sure to sign up for our email list at regenerativeagriculturepodcast.com.  Hope you enjoy and thank you for listening.  Our community impact spot for this episode is No-Till on the Plains, a non-profit organization  
**[0:01:21-0:01:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:01:21):**  that provides education, networking, and inspiration for growers with a focus on soil health.  Their annual winter conference is in Wichita, Kansas in January where I will be presenting  a workshop on regenerative agricultural systems.  Here's Steve Swafford describing the event.  Founded in 1992, No-Till on the Plains is a non-profit educational organization that  
**[0:01:43-0:01:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:01:43):**  provides information to farmers about adopting systems-based production methods.  Our goal is to educate and demonstrate to producers the principles of soil health that  create successful economic, environmental, and integrated crop and livestock production  systems.  Each year, No-Till on the Plains hosts summer and fall field days, local bus tours, and  
**[0:02:05-0:02:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:02:05):**  observations at demonstration plots across the Great Plains.  These events showcase how individual farmers have tailored the application of soil health  principles to the conditions on their farms.  The culmination of the year is the annual No-Till on the Plains Winter Conference.  In 2020, the two-day Soil Health Conference is being held in Wichita, Kansas, January  
**[0:02:27-0:02:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:02:27):**  28th and 29th.  Registration for the conference will open August 15th, 2019.  See more information at www.notill.org.  I hope you'll look into the work that No-Till on the Plains is doing and can attend their  winter conference.  
**[0:02:44-0:02:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:02:44):**  We look forward to seeing you there.  Hi friends.  Welcome to the Regenerative Agriculture Podcast.  I am very honored and excited to introduce you to Pierre Vail, who is a French agronomist  who created a feed company in 1992 in French Brittany with the intention of producing health-oriented  
**[0:03:06-0:03:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:03:06):**  animal nutrition.  From the work that Pierre has done with growers throughout France, he then went on to co-found  a nonprofit association called Blue Blancour, which connects all of the actors involved  in the food chain to help producers and consumers connect the dots between food and reducing  disease and the quality of the production in the field.  
**[0:03:30-0:03:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:03:30):**  I've been really intrigued by the opportunities you have found to document the medicinal impact  or the health impact of the quality of the food producers.  We speak a lot in the area of regenerative agriculture about how we can produce healthier,  higher quality food for consumers.  But I think one of the challenges is that there historically hasn't been very much research  
**[0:03:55-0:03:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:03:55):**  to make that claim.  There are often missing dots in the research chain.  So we may be able to identify that we can produce fruits and berries with a higher nutrient  content, a higher phytoalexin content that we believe has an impact.  And then in some cases, there is research that describes how some foods can have a nutritional  
**[0:04:21-0:04:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:04:21):**  value and medicinal value such as blueberries and raspberries and so forth.  But there often isn't research that connects the dots from the way the food was grown to  the health impacts that it can have on people.  And I think this is something that you have done.  Can you tell us a little bit about the research that you've done and what you learned?  
**[0:04:38-0:04:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:04:38):**  Okay, thank you.  Thank you for inviting me to talk about this.  Maybe I can tell some things that connect your interest for a new agriculture, regenerative  agriculture and what we've done on human health.  We did six clinical trials with human people and some were healthy volunteers, some were  
**[0:05:00-0:05:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:05:00):**  diabetic people, obese volunteers, etc.  And the common point that in all the cases with two groups, control group and the experimental  group, and the people of each group ate exactly the same thing.  Sometimes it's during two months, sometimes it's during four months, sometimes they are  healthy, sometimes not.  
**[0:05:19-0:05:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:05:19):**  But in all the cases, they eat the same quantity of product.  It's only the way the products are produced, the producer's behavior and not the consumer's  behavior that is the factor we try to measure.  So we did the proof of concept because it's bigger than the lipid nutrition or omega-3,  omega-6 nutrition.  
**[0:05:42-0:05:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:05:42):**  But omega-3, omega-6 nutrition is very interesting proof of concept.  On the one hand, omega-6 and omega-3 drives all the inflammatory process.  It's quite easy to measure in the blood, in the red blood cells, and also some parameters  of inflammation.  So we feed animals, cows, hens, pigs, etc. in a conventional way, which means basically  
**[0:06:07-0:06:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:06:07):**  based on a corn and soybean.  Or we fed animals, the same animals, to produce the same eggs, milk, etc.  But in a different way, with first a variety of product of forages or seeds.  And in these forages of seeds, we wanted to reach an optimal ratio for omega-6 on omega-3.  Which means more grass for ruminants, more flax for mono-gastric animals, etc. and various  
**[0:06:37-0:06:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:06:37):**  protein seeds.  And after only two weeks, we can measure a change in the serum of the volunteers.  They eat the same thing, but animals were fed differently.  And we found a very significant difference, which means for instance, this ratio omega-6  and omega-3, which is supposed to be healthy at a level of five, and to be pro-inflammatory  
**[0:07:01-0:07:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:07:01):**  at a level of 10.  It was 15 in the control group, and only five in the experimental group.  And the only things that changed was the composition of the diet of the animals.  So this was the proof of concept.  There is a link between the way you feed the animals, the way you produce the food, and  
**[0:07:22-0:07:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:07:22):**  the human health.  And after, there is, I think, a lot of things still to do in other fields, that inflammation  and lipid nutrition, other things like antioxidant, etc. for fruits, for legumes, for grain, a  lot of things still to do.  But we did the basic proof of concept with this clinical trial that was published from  
**[0:07:47-0:07:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:07:47):**  2002.  The first one in the analysis of nutrition and metabolism.  And the last one, the last trial, just a few words about it.  I love the design of the trial.  It's in the big hospital of the city nearest in Brittany.  
**[0:08:05-0:08:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:08:05):**  It's pregnant women in two groups.  So we'll have, like again, a diet of animals or not.  And we check the impact on the composition of the milk, of the breast milk, of the muscles,  but also the impact on the immunity of the children.  So I have no results, no data, but it was designed to prove that food chain, the term  
**[0:08:32-0:08:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:08:32):**  chain is absolutely important.  If feeding animals, if choosing the foragers can have an impact, not only on the quality  of the breast milk, but also on the immunity of the baby, it will be something tremendous.  It's important to prove our responsibility at all the steps of the food chain, but it's  also to prove that the farmer is the number one actor of human health.  
**[0:08:58-0:09:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:08:58):**  The research you're conducting is exciting.  And I'm looking forward to those results because I think you are correct in that farmers, growers,  particularly of the food products that we consume directly, such as fruits and vegetables  and animal products, they can have a bigger impact on our health than doctors and hospitals  can because they have the capacity to prevent us from becoming ill.  
**[0:09:22-0:09:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:09:22):**  And I just wanted to clarify, you spoke about reducing inflammation, and inflammation is  at the foundation of many of our degenerative illnesses that we have today that are just  exploding within the population.  So how much did you see inflammation decrease when you fed livestock a different diet, and  then people consumed those animal products?  
**[0:09:46-0:09:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:09:46):**  First of all, inflammation is an absolutely natural process.  The genes of inflammation, the genes provoke inflammation, one of the big difference between  men and the big apes, our ancestors, something like that.  But it's truly a difference because inflammation is a way of fighting against aggression, all  kinds of aggression.  
**[0:10:13-0:10:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:10:13):**  But too much inflammation is not good because too much inflammation, our body is attacking  its own cells.  So inflammation is like oxidation, oxidation, you need oxidation to live, to have energy,  etc.  But too much per oxidation, that's not good because you have too much free radicals.  
**[0:10:35-0:10:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:10:35):**  Free radicals, it's a kind of weapon to fight against the aggressors, but too much free  radicals will damage your body.  And oxidation plus inflammation are naturally processed.  But the balance between too much and not enough is very, very important.  We adapted ourselves to our environment for a long, long time.  
**[0:11:02-0:11:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:11:02):**  This may be less than one century, we completely changed the ratio between pro-inflammatory  process and anti-inflammatory process, and also the ratio between pro-oxidation and anti-oxidation  process.  It's very important to understand that for me, food is not a medicine.  Food will prevent, will avoid any trouble in this inflammation and peroxidation process.  
**[0:11:32-0:11:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:11:32):**  Inflammation and oxidation are probably the mother diseases.  All the what we call civilization diseases, which means diabetes, obesity, cancer, even  depression and these new neurodegenerative diseases, the scientists call them low-grade  inflammation diseases, low-grade inflammation disease, which means we live to have a good  balance between pro-inflammation, omega-6, absolutely pro-inflammation.  
**[0:12:03-0:12:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:12:03):**  Omega-6 is mainly in seeds like corn, soybeans, sunflower, etc.  Or anti-inflammation molecules like omega-3, which comes from grass, from alfalfa, from  clover, and also from flax, which is a very original seed.  All the seeds are rich in omega-6, only flax is rich in omega-3.  Once you understand, we cannot synthesize ourselves omega-6 and omega-3, we must find  
**[0:12:34-0:12:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:12:34):**  it in our plate and mainly in animal products, fish and terrestrial animals.  So the balance between, for instance, grass and corn is also a balance between omega-6  and omega-3, and it's also a balance between pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory processes.  So we prevent, we don't heal.  I think maybe we need chemical drugs to, when I'm sick, I can take for a few days aspirin,  
**[0:13:12-0:13:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:13:12):**  something like that.  But aspirin and most of the called blockbuster drugs are anti-inflammatory drugs.  So if we can prevent in the fields, we will not need to buy and eat this, so much anti-inflammatory  drugs.  If we can prevent the inflammation from occurring in the beginning from the foods that we eat,  
**[0:13:37-0:13:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:13:37):**  that certainly seems to be the way the system would be designed to work.  We don't become ill because we have an aspirin deficiency, but because of the food choices  that we make or because of other factors in the environment.  Yeah, there is an American scientist, his name is William Lams.  William Lams, I think he's 85 or something like that, years old.  
**[0:13:59-0:14:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:13:59):**  He was the senior nutritionist of the NIH for a long time, National Institute for Health  at Washington.  I had the chance to meet him and discuss with him.  And he wrote a book in 86, I think, or 83, something like that.  The name of the book was Omega-3 Fish, Omega-3 and Health, or something like that.  
**[0:14:23-0:14:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:14:23):**  And in this book he wrote, we have to change now in the fields.  If we don't change in the fields now, we'll have to find a solution, a chemical solution  in two decades.  And he was describing the process of this too simple food chain we were building at  this time with a lot of monoculture of palm, corn, soybean, et cetera.  
**[0:14:47-0:14:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:14:47):**  We cannot say corn or palm is good or no good, but if we feed the soil, the animals, the  people with the same three or five monoculture, it will not be good.  And I love this sentence of Bill Lams who wrote, if we don't change in the fields, we'll  have to find chemical solution in two decades.  So chemical, maybe not bad if I'm sick, but if I can prevent, it's like just add something  
**[0:15:18-0:15:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:15:18):**  and very new for me, I realized that I come from the animal nutrition.  I went to soil nutrition, trying to develop flax, lupine, et cetera, et cetera.  Then I go to human nutrition and then I realized that all my life I fed the microbes, microbes  of the rumen, microbes of the guts, microbes of the soils.  There is a link between the soil, the man, the rumen, the guts, et cetera.  
**[0:15:53-0:15:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:15:53):**  Agronomists say a healthy soil will produce healthy plants.  If men have a healthy body, if they have healthy food, they will have healthy body.  We have to prevent.  The first way of making people healthy is to prepare the soil.  That's what I realize now.  
**[0:16:12-0:16:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:16:12):**  Pierre, you've mentioned so many different pieces that I wanted to unwrap, but before  I lose sight of it, I want to go back and better understand how you began feeding livestock  differently.  Many of our listeners here on the podcast are producers and farmers, and I would like  to better understand how did you begin feeding livestock differently?  
**[0:16:40-0:16:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:16:40):**  I think for the ruminant animals, it's fairly easy to understand that omega-3s are coming  from grasses and forages that are not yet at the reproductive stage and that we need  more of those in our diet.  I guess one question is, are you an advocate for 100% grass-fed ruminant animals?  Then the second question is, how did you begin incorporating other seeds into monogastric  
**[0:17:05-0:17:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:17:05):**  animal diets?  How much is necessary?  What are the parameters that you are looking for?  Okay, first of all, I think I answered the question by, let's say, personal thoughts  about my experience.  
**[0:17:19-0:17:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:17:19):**  I'm 65 now.  When I began my career, I was an advisor in an animal nutrition company.  I didn't like so much what I did in the end of the 80s because in France, it was the period  when the diets of animals changed so much with the arrival of the corn in our field  and also with the end of the local protein seeds with a lot of soybean coming from Brazil,  
**[0:17:52-0:17:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:17:52):**  mainly from South America in France.  And I had two thoughts about it.  First, it's maybe not good.  My grandmother told me, if you want to be healthy, you have to eat a lot of things in  small quantities.  
**[0:18:07-0:18:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:18:07):**  And if I feed animals only with two seeds, it will be difficult to be healthy.  And I saw that from my eyes.  I saw that the job I was doing to be a nutritionist for animals is to make complex diets with  complex or not complex, with a variety of seeds, cakes, etc.  But at this time, things changed because the common diet with corn and soy was the cheaper  
**[0:18:34-0:18:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:18:34):**  one.  And my boss at this time asked me to say, okay, animals have metabolic diseases.  So we'll take the money from selling additives, antibiotics, anti acidosis for the cow or  things like that.  And then I didn't like it.  
**[0:18:51-0:18:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:18:51):**  I didn't like it.  And I wanted to go back to what I think is the real nutrition is making nutrition from  natural products that you prepare and you mix in good quantities, etc.  So I created this company with five friends that had the same thoughts about animal nutrition.  We didn't like the chicken eating so many antibiotics, cows eating so many additives,  
**[0:19:18-0:19:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:19:18):**  etc.  So we tried to go back to the basis of nutrition.  And then we asked farmers in our area to produce for us lupine seed, which is a local protein  seed to produce flax.  And then when I discussed to the farmers, they said, well, when we sell flax, when we  
**[0:19:36-0:19:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:19:36):**  sell lupine or horsebean, maybe we don't make the best margin on only one year.  But if we make the calculation in two, three years, maybe five years, it's good to have  a longer rotation.  Rotation is the good word.  And when we produce wheat after one year of flax, we have a better yield.  
**[0:19:58-0:20:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:19:58):**  When we produce wheat after lupine or horsebean a year, we have better yield, but we have  also less fertilizer, etc.  So this idea of balancing and adding variety in the fields and in the diets came through  with a lot of data.  And so from this data, we experienced that we have to go step by step.  
**[0:20:22-0:20:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:20:22):**  When we ask for BlaBlanc, for the animal producer to have a balance between omega-6 and omega-3  in the animal diet, which depends if it's a hen or if it's a cow, but which is between  three and five, omega-6 and omega-3.  The current diet between 12 and 20, sometimes more, sometimes 30.  So the impact on the animal is quite visible.  
**[0:20:52-0:20:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:20:52):**  Chicken, pigs, cows, also inflammatory diseases.  From this data, from this observation, we wrote our specification.  And mainly the specifications are based on the omega-6 omega-3 ratio on the diet.  After, every farmer can make his choice.  If he's, as you said before, if he's a ruminant farmer, at least large part of the year, the  
**[0:21:18-0:21:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:21:18):**  best source of omega-3 is grass.  If you produce eggs, for instance, the best source of omega-3 is flax.  And it depends also the variety of flax, the way you cook it, etc.  But it depends.  And it's the farmer's choice.  
**[0:21:39-0:21:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:21:39):**  What we want is a ratio.  And a ratio, you can add more omega-3, but you can also have less omega-6.  If you decrease corn, it's a very good plant.  Soybean is a very good plant too.  But if you decrease corn, if you decrease soybean, if you add more variety, it's also  
**[0:21:58-0:22:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:21:58):**  in our specification.  We asked breeders to have, I don't remember exactly, but for instance, for all our hands,  to have at least five or six different seeds in the diet, not only two.  And this is important for us too.  I can explain it later.  
**[0:22:13-0:22:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:22:13):**  Is it okay, my answer?  Yes, that was a great answer.  Thank you.  You mentioned that the economics of growing these high omega-3 seeds, such as flax and  lupins and other seeds that have more seed diversity in the diet is while there are lower  
**[0:22:30-0:22:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:22:30):**  margins for that actual crop for the producers, there are ecosystem benefits where there is  an advantage when you look at the entire crop rotation because of higher yields.  Is there a similar economic benefit for the livestock production?  When you feed more seeds, more diverse seeds and a different omega-3 to omega-6 ratio diet  to poultry or pigs or dairy cows, what are the costs to the grower for that feed and  
**[0:23:04-0:23:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:23:04):**  what are the economic returns?  Okay.  The cost of the feed is higher, but I spoke of the human trials, but all together, we  publish in the scientific press something like between 350 and 400 scientific peer reviews  paper about the impact of this omega-6, omega-3 ratio on various diseases in the animals of  
**[0:23:31-0:23:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:23:31):**  the life expectancy of the cows, of the mortality in chicken and pigs, also on fertility for  cows and sows, etc.  By the way, it's one of the reasons of the environmental benefit because when you have  less mortality, better fertility, more life expectancy, the environmental cost is decreasing  too.  
**[0:23:56-0:24:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:23:56):**  But it's not only environmental, it's of course also economical.  If you raise a cow, first you have a cow, then a heifer, and then you try to make an  insemination.  Sometimes it works, sometimes no.  And the average number of lactation for a cow in France now, I think it's around two  
**[0:24:18-0:24:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:24:18):**  lactation for each cow.  When I was young, we had cows for six or eight lactations sometimes.  Sometimes there is a pressure, a genetic pressure on selection, so you choose the cows you don't  want to have in your head, but sometimes you don't choose.  You have problem of fertility, you have problem of diseases, of legs, etc.  
**[0:24:42-0:24:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:24:42):**  So this is all the economy around this is also published in, I'm quite proud of this  because it's, we call it meta-analyses and epidemiologic data.  We did epidemiologic data on men, for instance, the Japanese, we eat a lot of omega-3, less  cancer or less cardiovascular diseases that Europeans eat more omega-6, etc.  It's statistics, but with high level of technicity, you can find something, some data very interesting.  
**[0:25:23-0:25:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:25:23):**  So we did it with cows about, I don't know how many, a few thousand of herds about France  that have this good ratio between omega-6 and omega-3.  And we made all the correlation with fertility, also with diseases, also with the, with the  hayfills, with the daughters of the cows that ate a good diet or not.  And we have fantastic results.  
**[0:25:51-0:25:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:25:51):**  It was published last year in the Journal of Dairy Science.  It was the first time.  So we have all this data.  If once you have the data, you can put economical parameter behind and see if it's economical  or not.  
**[0:26:06-0:26:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:26:06):**  It's not, it's very economical based to say there is a benefit, but it's more difficult  to prove because it's long-term study, but we really did it.  And secondly, we developed quite well now the Bleublanc-Kerr association and the products  issued from these farms arrived on the market.  It can be seeds, but in most of the case now it's animal products, butter, cheese, ham,  
**[0:26:39-0:26:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:26:39):**  meat, eggs, etc.  And of course the farmer received premium for it.  And this is a calculation.  For instance, just give the data quickly on pig.  We know that to feed the pig in this Bleublanc-Kerr way with this omega-6, omega-3 ratio, the  
**[0:26:59-0:27:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:26:59):**  other cost is two euro per pig.  And we control the premium that is given to the farmer.  This is also the role of the association and the premium is four euro per pig.  So if the cost is two and if the premium is four, you gain something.  I'm very impressed with what you just said in two regards.  
**[0:27:24-0:27:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:27:24):**  One is I'm surprised that the cost is not greater than two euros per pig.  I was going to ask you for what is the bottom line for growers?  Can they be more profitable?  Can they be more successful and that you have found a way to compensate growers for the  additional quality that they are producing?  
**[0:27:47-0:27:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:27:47):**  So I have again two questions.  The first is what are the bottom line economics for the livestock producers?  Are they able to be more profitable or to at least be as profitable even without the  additional incentives that are provided from your association?  And then I'd love for you to tell us a bit more about the scope of the work that you  
**[0:28:12-0:28:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:28:12):**  are doing with Bleublanc-Kerr and how that has impacted growers.  Okay, so in terms of economics, I think there is a three way on return on investment.  The first is the technical benefits related to the kind of production.  If it's a cow, you can have return on investment, on fertility, on life expectancy, on disease,  diseases, etc.  
**[0:28:35-0:28:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:28:35):**  If it's a 40 days chicken, it will be more difficult to see something.  Maybe a little less antibiotics, maybe less mortality, but it's very difficult to prove.  But anyway, the zootecnical benefit does exist, but it's proven, especially on fertility and  for the animals who have a long life expectancy on diseases and mortality.  The second is the premium that the farmer receives if they produce Bleublanc-Kerr products.  
**[0:29:09-0:29:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:29:09):**  I will stay on the example for pigs because in France today, 10% of all the French pigs  are produced with the Bleublanc-Kerr specifications.  Two and a half million of pigs every year and it's still growing.  When I say it costs two euro and the premium is four, well, it can change depending on  the price of the flax, the price of the soybean, the price of wheat, corn, etc.  
**[0:29:37-0:29:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:29:37):**  But it's between two and 2.5.  Let's talk of two.  It's not my view.  Inside the association, the farmers, the people from animal nutrition, the people from the  public institute for research on pigs, they meet every month and every month they publish  
**[0:29:58-0:29:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:29:58):**  the overcost.  This is the overcost.  Then we go to the slaughterhouse and the retailer and we say, okay, if the overcost is two euro,  cannot give two euro for the farmer.  He does the job.  
**[0:30:13-0:30:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:30:13):**  It's his job to produce healthy food.  So he need to have a premium.  So this farmer who sells this two and a half million of pig, each one receives this premium,  which is over the cost.  Of course, it's an average.  
**[0:30:30-0:30:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:30:30):**  Some farmers have very low cost of diet and the overcost is more expensive than two, but  some are expensive diets.  It's an average, but it's the way we do to be sure.  We call it an incentive.  We say there is another cost and it must be an incentive.  
**[0:30:50-0:30:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:30:50):**  If the farmers are the first actor of public health, so they need to be paid for it.  If they do the things well, they don't produce only pigs or meat.  They also produce reduction of diseases, better health for the people and they must be paid  for it.  That's the way we do it.  
**[0:31:09-0:31:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:31:09):**  It's not on a daily basis.  It's a battle every day because the retailer doesn't want to pay.  That way the farmers have the key.  If the consumer wants it, that's the job of the association.  We created the demand.  
**[0:31:26-0:31:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:31:26):**  We explained to the consumer, to the eater, that if they want to be healthy, they have  to choose products that come from healthy farms, etc.  If there is a demand, consumers will pay.  If they pay, there will be a premium for an incentive for the farmers.  By the way, if you realize that for euro, it's something like $4.4 or something like  
**[0:31:53-0:32:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:31:53):**  that, for a pig of, let's say, 100 kilos, to be simple, the other cost per kilo of meat  is very low.  It's 4 centimes per kilo.  It's almost nothing.  There can't really be an argument to say that this is too expensive to produce because there  
**[0:32:15-0:32:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:32:15):**  would not be significant additional costs when you look at the entire supply chain.  That's another key factor we realized during this Bloemblencare 20 years process.  Accessibility is the key.  You can produce fantastic things, but if you sell them only to the rich people that will  have rich food, it has no meanings.  
**[0:32:43-0:32:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:32:43):**  Accessibility is really the key.  People who are more exposed, have more risk about this civilization, diseases, are not  the rich of people.  It's the opposite.  It's the poor people.  
**[0:32:58-0:32:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:32:58):**  Accessibility was always the key.  We adapt the specification to have the major impact with the lower cost.  This is really difficult engineering, but we did it like that.  More and more now Bloemblencare begins to be well known and people accept to buy it.  Every year we meet with the people of the association and we make the specification  
**[0:33:22-0:33:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:33:22):**  a little more tough.  For instance, things about not only omega-6, omega-3, but no palm, no imported protein,  no antibiotics, but all this has a cost.  We have to go step by step.  The final decision is the consumer ability to pay, but all the time we have in mind accessibility.  
**[0:33:50-0:33:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:33:50):**  Because if you want an impact on the both side of the food chain, on the eater side,  on the producer side, you really need to address everybody.  Pierre, I am very, as I've said this several times, I'm very intrigued and impressed by  the scope of the work that you have accomplished in the last two decades and the number of  people that you're working with, the impact that you've had and the conversations that  
**[0:34:19-0:34:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:34:19):**  you've had about improving quality and reducing disease in the human population.  I think it's a very, very impressive story.  And of course, the heart of the story is your organization Bloemblencare.  Can you tell us a little bit about how the organization works?  And when you pay a premium to growers for their production and the quality of their  
**[0:34:42-0:34:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:34:42):**  production, where does that premium come from?  How is it funded and how have you been able to connect all the dots?  Okay.  So I talked previously of how it started.  So it started from Valorex and after Valorex funded with the National Research Institute  
**[0:35:04-0:35:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:35:04):**  and the Purovik Hospital, we funded the first clinical trial.  Then when we get the results, it was a surprise.  It was very good surprise, but you see that after only 15 days, we have such an impact  of the way of feeding the animals and the composition of the serum and the redwood cells.  It was really a surprise for me, for the scientists, the public health, for the physician, everybody  
**[0:35:28-0:35:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:35:28):**  was surprised.  So I go back to my friends, shareholders of the Valorex company and I said, I'm optimistic.  I think, I hope it will remain my characteristic.  I'm optimistic because it's such a new field for agriculture, health-oriented agriculture.  There is such a need in terms of civilization diseases that we cannot run this process inside  
**[0:35:57-0:35:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:35:57):**  the private company.  So we decided to create a non-profitable association.  It was in August, well today it's maybe exactly 19 years ago.  So we had a physician, we had consumers union, we had farmers, we had breeders, we have processors  and one retailer.  
**[0:36:19-0:36:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:36:19):**  And all together we created the basis and the rules of an association.  We were seven sectors in the status.  We have four sectors.  One sector is one person elected in the board and one voice at the election.  And the majority was people from the upper food chain, which means the farmer, what we  
**[0:36:42-0:36:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:36:42):**  call the grower.  People who produce flax, lupine, etc., alfalfa, they had one voice.  The breeders had one voice.  What we call the on-farm processor, it's also farmer but produce cheese or ham in the farm,  they had one voice.  
**[0:37:04-0:37:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:37:04):**  And the people from animal nutrition had one voice.  Four people and the other were people from the lower side of the food chain, which means  retailers, processors and consumers.  So we had the power to say, we will not put the blah, blah, blah brand on the products  if the farmer don't receive a correct premium.  
**[0:37:27-0:37:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:37:27):**  After it's, I cannot tell, after it's a daily basis to evaluate what is the cost, what is  the premium, how to measure it, etc.  But we really did like this.  And today in the association, we have three pillars.  One is these seven sectors, economical sector, farmers, processors, retailer, consumers union.  
**[0:37:56-0:38:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:37:56):**  The second one is what we call the communities, because health-oriented agriculture has to  deal with all the actions of food consumption and health.  And here we have four colleges, the physicians, they are 1600 now.  So they elect two people to the board, the farmers individually.  They also elect two people as the chef, people from the restaurant, it's quite important  
**[0:38:26-0:38:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:38:26):**  in France.  They also elect one people.  And the last one, I don't remember now, consumers, of course consumers.  So this is the second pillar, the communities.  And the third pillar is the scientists.  
**[0:38:40-0:38:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:38:40):**  So the scientists are also members of the board.  Some are elected and some are designated by the president of the National Research Institute  for Agriculture.  So the science, the community, and the economic.  This is now the three pillars of the governance.  
**[0:38:58-0:39:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:38:58):**  And I think this is the key of the success.  It's not a private arm brand, it's a brand that belongs to a non-profitable association.  And this non-profitable association managed, write the specification and to give an idea,  now it's the major quality branch in France for animal products.  10% of the pigs, 6% of the eggs, 4% of the milk, et cetera, is bigger than organic.  
**[0:39:38-0:39:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:39:38):**  Of course, we have linked with the organic movement and some farmers are organic and  blah, blah, blah.  Some are not, majority is not organic, but some of them are.  Because we have this culture of obligation of results, analysis of the product, not only  obligation of means.  
**[0:39:57-0:40:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:39:57):**  Do you also measure the quality of the products that the farmers are actually producing?  Are the omega-3 to omega-6 ratios of the eggs and the meat and the milk actually measured?  Or do you only measure the inputs that are going onto the farms and that are being fed  to the livestock?  No, I forgot.  
**[0:40:18-0:40:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:40:18):**  It's the most important thing.  Thank you.  Of course, we measure the quality of the eggs, the quality of the milk, et cetera.  It's measured.  We developed also quick spectrometric way of measurement, but the key is the obligation  
**[0:40:34-0:40:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:40:34):**  of results.  If you take an egg in the market in France, even organic egg, it's organic soy and organic  corn, but most of the laying hands are fed this way.  If you take an egg in a supermarket and go to analyze this, you will have a ratio between  omega-6 and omega-3.  
**[0:40:54-0:40:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:40:54):**  That will be between 20 and 30.  It's a lot.  It's a lot.  It's really pro-inflammatory.  Some physicians write that the usual eggs are pro-inflammatory bombs, and the developmental  
**[0:41:06-0:41:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:41:06):**  eggs has a ratio below five.  If not, the company or the farmer will have to either make some improvements, and if not,  it will be excluded.  Of course, the measurement and the results is the key.  This is the proof of concept, I think we'll continue and we'll grow in other sectors,  
**[0:41:30-0:41:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:41:30):**  animal sectors, but I'm so convinced that healthy soy produces healthy plants, healthy  plants make healthy animals, and healthy animals make healthy eggs, et cetera, that we will  measure this.  Omega-3 was a very easy proof of concept because it's only plant that synthesize omega-3, not  animals.  
**[0:41:53-0:42:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:41:53):**  So if you analyze an egg, you really know the composition, the lipid composition of  an egg or a milk or a meat is a kind of memory of his way of production.  You know what I have.  It's like me when I make a blood sample and I analyze glucose or cholesterol or triglycerides,  and I go to my physician or say, yeah, maybe you have eaten too much sugar or too much  
**[0:42:21-0:42:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:42:21):**  saturated fat or so simply you ate too much.  If you analyze, you know what you have eaten, the results of your diet.  So of course, we have the analysis and the measurement is really the basis of the blood  blood count.  That's imperative and I'm excited that you are doing that because yes, you have to measure  
**[0:42:41-0:42:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:42:41):**  the final result and the final outcome.  Now I think a new field of research that you started and we'll probably hope do things  together is on the fruits and vegetables and the quantity of polyphenols, antioxidant,  etc.  Because this is the second leg of health, inflammation and oxidation.  
**[0:43:10-0:43:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:43:10):**  They will prove together in the close future that healthy soil will produce vegetables  and fruits with high level of antioxidant nutrients.  And this is really beneficial.  Some people in France buy vegetables because the government, the state, say it's good to  eat from five to 10 different vegetables and fruits every day.  
**[0:43:41-0:43:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:43:41):**  And this is because the basis is the composition in antioxidants.  But the variation from one tomato to another in lycopene or other antioxidant nutrients.  Dan told me yesterday, it can go from one to 100.  So measurement must be the basis and inflammatory nutrients, pro anti-inflammatory, pro antioxidant  nutrients are the key of health.  
**[0:44:12-0:44:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:44:12):**  But it's also a memory of the way of production.  Pierre, one of the pieces that we haven't spoken about yet is how do you pay for the  premiums?  Where does the funding come from to compensate growers for the quality they're producing?  When I spoke of the battles on a daily basis, the association doesn't buy the product.  
**[0:44:35-0:44:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:44:35):**  We only organize things and we have 20 people working in the Blue Block of Association.  We also need money for communication, etc.  And every time a farmer receives a premium, 10%, not the overcost, just the incentive,  10% go to the association.  But who's paying the premium?  
**[0:45:04-0:45:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:45:04):**  It's the company who buy the milk, who buy the eggs, who buy the meat.  And where the money of the company comes from is from the retailer.  So in the majority of the cases, we discuss with retailer, we discuss with industry people,  dairy, eggs, etc.  And they pay the farmer according to the premium we ask to give.  
**[0:45:31-0:45:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:45:31):**  Saying that, I'm talking like a book in on a daily basis.  It's really complicated because...  But at the end, we have the brand and if the consumer want to buy a product with the brand,  the discussion are easier for us when you say you have to pay this.  If not, you will not have the brand.  
**[0:45:57-0:46:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:45:57):**  It's the way we did and it works.  It works like this.  Yeah.  I'm very excited by the possibilities of also measuring the quality of the fruits and vegetables  that are produced and then compensating growers for quality because there we can have a tremendous  
**[0:46:16-0:46:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:46:16):**  antioxidant effect.  And as you described, also have significant health impacts, I believe, for the entire  community.  One of the pieces that I've also been intrigued by is that you have found a way not only to  measure and compensate producers for quality, but also to compensate them for environmental  
**[0:46:40-0:46:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:46:40):**  services.  Can you tell us a little bit about your work in this area and how that has evolved?  So in this area, the proof of concept was about methane and dairy cows.  If you want to know more about it, you can Google Greener Cow because Greener Cow on  Google and you will find what we've done 10 years ago with Stonyfield Company in Germany.  
**[0:47:04-0:47:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:47:04):**  Very nice field.  So I said it's a proof of concept because it's so interesting that if you feed the cows  with Omega-3, there is a biochemical process in the rumen they call hydrogenation.  And hydrogenation of Omega-3 produces some molecules that inhibit the methane synthesis  in the rumen.  
**[0:47:32-0:47:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:47:32):**  So this has an impact on greenhouse gas and global warming.  So we measured that with the National Research Institute.  We had a patent on the way of measuring methane emissions through analysis of the milk.  And this was recognized by the UNFCCC, United Nations Framework for Convention Against Climate  Change as efficient and true.  
**[0:48:01-0:48:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:48:01):**  So once you can measure, again, it's like for nutrition, once you can measure, you can  work to reduce the methane emission of the cow.  So it's depending on various factors, but you can measure it.  And some farmers that feed the cows this way are not in the sell their milk to a dairy  company that is not involved in BlaBlanca.  
**[0:48:32-0:48:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:48:32):**  I said, okay, we do nice things for health and the environment, but we are not paid for  it.  So in the first period, we used the carbon compensation model and we sell this carbon  reduction in the market.  But it was interesting, but it's quite complicated.  
**[0:48:55-0:49:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:48:55):**  It's not pure small farmer and you make fantastic efforts to reduce methane and you will not  have a lot of tons of reduction because you don't have a lot of cows, etc. etc.  The principle of carbon compensation, they call it additionality.  It means it's only reduction.  So if you work very well before, you cannot reduce so much, etc.  
**[0:49:21-0:49:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:49:21):**  So we decided to, it took time.  The recognition by the UN was in 2012 and we only arrived with a solution two years  ago.  And the solution was to ask the French state to have a reduction in taxes for people, donators  who give money as an incentive for the farmer.  
**[0:49:45-0:49:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:49:45):**  They don't buy the CO2 reduction.  They just give a premium according to the number of tons and the importance of the reduction.  So donators know it's banks, it's telephone orange, a company like this.  And it's also a public donators like a city, two cities, a real, also sometimes, but at  the less extent, individual people.  
**[0:50:13-0:50:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:50:13):**  So this money is collected by the association.  And then we give the money to the farmer according to the quantity and the importance of the  methane emission reduction.  So we call it the payment for environmental service.  Once again, you don't sell only milk or fat, protein in milk.  
**[0:50:38-0:50:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:50:38):**  But if you do this way and you're a dairy farmer, you can also sell environmental benefits.  Does this work quite at a small scale?  It's only maybe 800 dairy farmers now.  They don't receive huge amount of money.  They receive something like 1,000 euro per year or something like that.  
**[0:51:01-0:51:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:51:01):**  But we start something.  We start something.  A direct relationship between the society and the farmer.  Again, the farmer is the first actor of health.  He's also the, maybe not the first, but one of the major actor of environment.  
**[0:51:18-0:51:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:51:18):**  If he does things to solve society's problem, he must be paid for it.  He must be encouraged at least for it, etc., etc.  I believe it's a very exciting time to be in the farming world and to be a farmer, to  be a producer.  It's also a very challenging time, of course, very challenging for many growers from an  
**[0:51:43-0:51:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:51:43):**  economical perspective.  And farmers do hold to the solutions to carbon sequestration and to improving hydrology in  the landscape, improving water, improving rainfall environments.  We can have a tremendous impact on the environment as a whole.  And I believe incentivizing that can certainly lead to faster results, the results that we're  
**[0:52:08-0:52:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:52:08):**  looking for collectively as a society.  And this then also leads to a question that I have for you, Pierre, is what should the  role of the producer be?  And what is the role of the producer in your organization generally and in taking responsibility  for the shifts and the changes that they want to see happening?  
**[0:52:31-0:52:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:52:31):**  Well, first of all, the health and environment, as you explained, is a link between the society's  demands and the farmer's responsibility.  Sometimes the farm, the society's demand is very heavy and it's maybe too heavy for its  suppression of the farmer.  So in our association, if you come and see what is a meeting of the board of the association,  
**[0:53:02-0:53:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:53:02):**  it's very interesting.  The consumer wants everything.  They want farmers to produce without chemicals, without GMO, good products, et cetera.  And the farmer say, OK, well, I can't do that, but I must be paid for it.  So as we said before, there are different ways to have an economic revenue.  
**[0:53:26-0:53:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:53:26):**  It's first return on investment from the technical point of view, but it's not enough compared  to the very strong pressure from the society.  So the role of the farmers in our organization, in this board, in this government, is to explain  things.  It's not enough for them to explain.  
**[0:53:50-0:53:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:53:50):**  In our society, I don't know how it is in the US, but in France, if you're a car producer,  for instance, or a television producer, you're happy because nobody will explain you how  to do.  But if you're a farmer, everybody has an idea of how you must do the job.  And for us, the role of the organization, the farmer in the organization is to say,  
**[0:54:13-0:54:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:54:13):**  OK, tell me what you do.  And I will try to implement in the ways that is interesting for you and me.  But don't tell me how I must cultivate my soil and how I must feed my pigs.  So it's really interesting in terms of sociology.  I say it in a funny way, but we do things in such a way that we can understand the society's  
**[0:54:39-0:54:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:54:39):**  demand, but we must be responsible of the way we answer to this demand in such a way  that it's technically and economically feasible for the farmer.  I think this is such an important piece.  And I'm very glad that I asked this question because you're absolutely correct.  We have a similar situation here in the States and also in other countries around the world  
**[0:55:02-0:55:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:55:02):**  that we have worked in where consumers do place very heavy demands on producers and  then don't really understand the costs that are associated with that.  And it's unfortunate here in the US, we have had a cheap food policy for a number of decades  now.  And that has really had a significant impact, I believe, on the quality of the food supply  
**[0:55:30-0:55:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:55:30):**  chain, where I know from personal observation experience that many growers deliberately  choose, or I shouldn't say many, but some growers deliberately choose to produce higher  yields of lower quality fruit because that is what the market is willing to pay for.  They could produce much higher quality and slightly lower yields, but there are not the  economic incentives for them to do so.  
**[0:55:54-0:56:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:55:54):**  Yes, I think it's important to say that like this, I was not like this 30 years ago, but  I think the only process will be a step by step process.  It's difficult to, in some consumers' view, they are good farmers and bad farmers.  Organic are generally the good ones and the hazard conventional are the bad ones.  This is absolutely not the situation.  
**[0:56:25-0:56:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:56:25):**  And to change things, it will not change the way of production.  You cannot do it diving in a new way and completely forget what you did before.  But it is a step by step process.  And this premium for healthy food, this premium for environmental services are little tools  to change things, but every farm is different, every soil is different, etc.  
**[0:56:55-0:56:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:56:55):**  So you have to go step by step.  And I think what we do is only to provide tools for a new model, the change from the  intensive way of production.  That's probably good reasons to exist.  We didn't know what will be the negative impact of the chemical agriculture a couple of decades  
**[0:57:19-0:57:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:57:19):**  ago.  Now we can see that the problem of the soil is the problem of environment, etc.  So we have to do it in another way.  This is very personal, but I really think if you want to do it at a large scale, and  we need to do it at a large scale, we absolutely need to do it step by step, see a progress,  
**[0:57:39-0:57:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:57:39):**  able to measure it, and then do another one, etc.  That's my answer, my observation.  Pierre, you've had a fascinating journey in the professional work that you've done.  It's now been 20 years that you've engaged, or 19 years that you've engaged with this  work on a very large scale within France.  
**[0:57:58-0:58:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:57:58):**  What are some of the highlights, what are some of the memorable moments that led you  to where you are today and the work?  What produced some of the shifts for you in thinking?  Well, the most memorable moment, of course, John, is yesterday when I met you.  But there are some others.  
**[0:58:17-0:58:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:58:17):**  Perhaps, perhaps, what's the most memorable, what's the most recent?  But I don't know when I saw the first, well, the first clinical trial was such an important  moment because we, now it's well admitted in the scientific communities.  I read a paper from American and New Zealand scientists in health about, don't say animal  products are good or bad, they are absolutely depending on the way of production.  
**[0:58:56-0:59:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:58:56):**  And now it's well admitted, but at this time it was very new.  You still read yesterday in the IPCC report that animal production is a problem.  Animal production is not a problem for animals.  But the way you produce and feed the animal is a problem or is a part of this solution.  So these first clinical trials that we really proved that you cannot say it's good or it's  
**[0:59:27-0:59:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:59:27):**  bad, but only it really depends on the way of production of the farmers work, etc.  This was really fantastic.  By the way, it's just funny that we did this trial 20 years ago.  And I was thinking of that yesterday because we were in New York and we were supposed to  present the results at the Health Congress in New York on September 11, 2001.  
**[0:59:58-1:00:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=0:59:58):**  So we didn't because of other events.  But the first congresses where we present the results of this study were fantastic.  And then, of course, the starting point of the association in August 2000.  And then the first product with the brand in the supermarket.  Yeah, it was very, very nice.  
**[1:00:21-1:00:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=1:00:21):**  And we had also good, I forget all the bad events, the bad moments we had also.  But the recognition with the Ministry of Agriculture, the recognition with the UNFCCC is also a  very memorable moment because we really started from nothing.  You certainly had a lot of successes and I congratulate you for that.  What has been something that surprised you along the way?  
**[1:00:47-1:00:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=1:00:47):**  What was unexpected?  Well, I will give not a success, but something sometimes unsuccessful.  It's the communication.  The communication was very difficult to establish now.  We succeed because we built communities.  
**[1:01:08-1:01:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=1:01:08):**  But we hope when we talk the story to the journalists that they will relay the information,  say, oh, fantastic, the way of production.  But they didn't.  They didn't because they are still in a way of thinking of good, no good.  And this step by step progress was difficult to take in consideration for them.  
**[1:01:31-1:01:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=1:01:31):**  And the relationship with the press was not difficult, but it was not as good as we believed.  And in terms of communication, at the beginning, we talked to the consumers like we talked  to scientists.  We spoke of omega-3, of enzymes, of things like that.  And people don't, when you buy a cheese or a butter, you just buy food.  
**[1:01:57-1:02:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=1:01:57):**  You don't buy omega-3 or a waffle, you don't need acid or polyphenols, et cetera.  And then we changed and we realized that the people and journalists like easy to understand  story.  And this easy to understand story must be true stories.  That's our believing.  
**[1:02:20-1:02:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=1:02:20):**  So we really succeeded when we succeeded to tell the story in such a way that what everybody  understand that when you talk to somebody, you know, healthy soil produce healthy plant,  healthy plants produce healthy animals, healthy animals produce healthy eggs, and healthy  eggs produce healthy people.  Everybody know, yes, I know, it's evident, but to prove it, it's more difficult.  
**[1:02:43-1:02:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=1:02:43):**  So we realized that we really needed two different communication, one for the scientists, the  physician, et cetera, they say, okay, it's serious, you can go.  And another one to the consumer, to the eater, they say, okay, we rebalance your food by  the farmers, the producers, the behavior, responsibility.  And the best that's important for all of us, the best people to talk to the consumer is  
**[1:03:12-1:03:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=1:03:12):**  probably the producer.  The physician too, people have confidence in, they trust the physician, the health professional,  but they also have trust in the producer.  The producer is part of the success in communication is also the producer will talk to the consumer.  And we took a long time to understand this.  
**[1:03:37-1:03:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=1:03:37):**  Pierre, you've done innovative work looking at soil and plant health connections.  And one of the questions that I really enjoy getting people's perspectives on is what is  something that you believe to be true about modern agriculture that is different from  the mainstream view?  I think it's, I don't know to criticize everything in modern agriculture.  
**[1:04:09-1:04:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=1:04:09):**  We didn't know before, but when we see now what we've done to the soils, to what is issued  from the soil, we must say we cannot continue like this.  I think modern agriculture was based on very simple principle, soil uses and supports.  The plant will do the photosynthetize and will bring to the soil nitrogen, phosphorus  and potassium, and that's it.  
**[1:04:40-1:04:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=1:04:40):**  Now we realize it's really, really more complex.  The microbial life of the soil, everything is depending from the life of the soil, especially  fungus and microbes, et cetera.  So we don't have to feed the plant with a chemical fertilizer.  We have to feed the microbes with organic matters, with oxygen sometimes, with water,  
**[1:05:06-1:05:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=1:05:06):**  et cetera.  And this is the basis of the life of the soil.  I'm not an expert, but when I see the results of a better rotation, when we take more in  consideration the cover crop, the no till or small till, et cetera, I can see we can  do tremendous progress, keeping what modern agriculture brought to the best of what modern  
**[1:05:37-1:05:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=1:05:37):**  agriculture brought to us in terms of yield security, et cetera, but with a very better  comprehension of what's happened in the life of the soil.  And things are moving with people like you and others in Europe, but the better understanding  of the life of the soil is a key of the agriculture of tomorrow.  You're far better a specialist than I am to understand and to realize what are the key  
**[1:06:08-1:06:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=1:06:08):**  factors, the missing trace elements, et cetera, to maximize the ability of a soil to produce  and to store more carbon and for plants to transform more energy from the sun and chemical  energy through photosynthesis, et cetera, feeding the plant, but feeding also the microbes  of the soil.  It's a fantastic period with the knowledge, with the sense of observation of people like  
**[1:06:43-1:06:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=1:06:43):**  you.  I think we'll be able to feed the population.  It will be still very technical, very difficult, but the challenges are so important that we  cannot go on like we did before, and we really have to improve things in a biological way.  That's it.  
**[1:07:06-1:07:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=1:07:06):**  When I spoke of animal nutrition, there is a parallel.  Even 30 years ago, we did the cheapest diet and we realized there was a lot of technical  problems, health problems on animals, so we found a technical solution, but we didn't  think of the basics versus cultivating health.  That will be the challenge for agriculture of tomorrow.  
**[1:07:31-1:07:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=1:07:31):**  I think it certainly is an exciting time because while we still do need more information and  there is more research that needs to be done, that always remains the case regardless of  where we are in our evolution.  We do already have enough.  We have enough knowledge and enough information that we know how to implement regenerative  
**[1:07:54-1:07:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=1:07:54):**  systems and to produce healthy food that can prevent disease in people.  So I'm very excited by the conversation that we have had.  Pierre, you've published, as you mentioned, hundreds of white papers and we will link  to some of those that are relevant for growers and producers in our show notes.  I'm sure that there is a tremendous body of work that you have participated in developing.  
**[1:08:19-1:08:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=1:08:19):**  In addition to that, what are some common resources or books that you would recommend  to growers?  Well, most of the books I read are in French, sorry.  I published myself three books.  One of them is translated in English.  
**[1:08:37-1:08:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=1:08:37):**  But I read an American book in English because it was not translated in French.  The name is Omnivore's Dilemma from Michael Pollan.  Do you know his book?  Yes, I do.  And then you have written several books of your own, including one which has been translated  
**[1:09:00-1:09:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=1:09:00):**  into English with the title of Fat Planet, which I would recommend and subject to our  listeners as well.  Pierre, it's been a delight to have this conversation.  I'm very interested and very excited about the work that you are doing in France.  And I am looking forward to the day when similar efforts develop and evolve to a comparative  
**[1:09:24-1:09:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=1:09:24):**  scale here in North America as what you've been able to achieve there in Europe.  So thank you very much for this conversation and I look forward to meeting with you and  speaking with you again very soon.  Thank you, Pierre.  The team at AEA and I are dedicated to bringing this show to you because we believe that knowledge  
**[1:09:44-1:09:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=1:09:44):**  and information is the foundation of successful regenerative systems.  At AEA, we believe that growing better quality food and making more money from your crops  is possible.  And since 2006, we've worked with leading professional growers to help them do just  that.  
**[1:10:01-1:10:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=1:10:01):**  At AEA, we don't guess, we test, we analyze, and we provide recommendations based on scientific  data, knowledge and experience.  We've developed products that are uniquely positioned to help growers make more money  with regenerative agriculture.  If you are a professional grower who believes in testing instead of guessing, someone who  
**[1:10:20-1:10:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/providing-affordable-food-as-medicine-at-scale-with-pierre-weill/#t=1:10:20):**  believes in a better, more regenerative way to grow, visit advancingecoag.com and contact  us to see if AEA is right for you.  Thank you for listening and we look forward to working with you.  