### Regenerative Agriculture Podcast  (2019-10-15)  
### Author(s): John Kempf  

**[0:00:00-0:00:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:00:00):**  Hi friends, this is John.  I'm passionate about developing regenerative agriculture systems that improve soil health,  produce crops that are completely resistant to diseases and insects, and produce food  
**[0:00:12-0:00:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:00:12):**  of such an exceptional quality that we can have a legitimate conversation about growing  food as medicine.  I've been fortunate to meet many people with incredible knowledge and information about  
**[0:00:22-0:00:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:00:22):**  soil and plant systems.  However, much of this knowledge and information is scattered all over the place.  I founded Advancing Eco-Agriculture in 2006 to bring this knowledge together in a more  
**[0:00:33-0:00:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:00:33):**  coherent fashion and incorporate it into products and growing systems that growers can easily  put into practice.  It's my personal mission to have these regenerative agriculture systems become the mainstream  
**[0:00:45-0:00:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:00:45):**  globally, the status quo against which all other growing systems are compared.  To achieve this goal, I want to share the knowledge that we have learned in the last  decade and make it available to everyone.  
**[0:00:55-0:01:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:00:55):**  If you have any questions, suggestions, comments, or topics that you would like for me to discuss,  please connect on social media or email me, john at regenerativeagriculturepodcast.com.  Be sure to sign up for our email list at regenerativeagriculturepodcast.com.  
**[0:01:12-0:01:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:01:12):**  Hope you enjoy and thank you for listening.  How can we grow food humanely and sustainably, regenerate our soils, and reverse climate  change? Learn practical and cutting edge solutions to these issues and more at the 40th Annual  
**[0:01:28-0:01:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:01:28):**  EcoFarm Conference, January 22nd through the 25th in Pacific Grove, California.  EcoFarm is an essential networking and educational hub for ecologically minded farmers, ranchers,  and all who work to support their success in growing a healthy food system and world.  
**[0:01:46-0:01:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:01:46):**  There are over 70 workshops, keynote speakers, farm tours, an exhibitor marketplace, seed  swaps, live entertainment, and organic culinary fair.  If you care about sustainable farming and our food system, you don't want to miss  
**[0:02:00-0:02:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:02:00):**  EcoFarm. This event is a benefit for the Ecological Farming Association. To learn more and to register,  visit eco-farm.org.  Hi friends, I'm delighted to introduce Walter Yanny. Walter and I have been trying to connect  
**[0:02:19-0:02:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:02:19):**  for some time. We live in a very interesting world from a climactic perspective. All of  us get to experience and observe how the climate is shifting and changing on our own farms  and on our own operations. And Walter has developed a very unique perspective on the  
**[0:02:35-0:02:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:02:35):**  impact that we as farmers can have on the climate and how we can shift management of  our own farms to improve carbon sequestration and to do all these various things. We've  just in the last week had the most recent IPCC report release, which describes the impact  
**[0:02:54-0:02:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:02:54):**  that regenerative agriculture can have on improving the climate. But I think an important  element that Walter adds is one that is usually missed. The reason we want and need carbon  sequestration and the impact that we can have as growers, that the point is not to sequester  
**[0:03:12-0:03:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:03:12):**  carbon purely to remove carbon dioxide from the air, but instead to change the hydrological  landscape, to change the way water moves in the environment. And I know this is a very  important piece for all of us because obviously water is foundational to how we manage our  
**[0:03:28-0:03:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:03:28):**  farms and improving the yields of our farming landscapes. Walter, I'm very excited to have  you here. What led you to start looking at the impacts of water on atmospheric temperatures  and considering a different narrative rather than CO2 as the primary greenhouse gas?  
**[0:03:47-0:03:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:03:47):**  Right. Thank you very much, John. And thank you everybody for having me all the way from  down under Australia and delighted to be here. But look, your question very much to the point,  if I consider water, when I was first studying at the university in the 60s, climatology  
**[0:04:05-0:04:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:04:05):**  101 makes a very simple absolute point, undeniable water, governs 95% of the heat dynamics of  the blue planet and has done for the last 4.2 billion years. So really, it's the foundational  principle of atmospheric physics and the earth's climate. This is before of course we got captured  
**[0:04:30-0:04:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:04:30):**  into the CO2 greenhouse component, which I must stress is actually real. It's actually  real, but it represents less than 4% of the heat dynamics of the blue planet. Okay. So  nature has in a sense evolved a hydrological balance that is both warmed the planet and  
**[0:04:52-0:04:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:04:52):**  made it 33 degrees centigrade warmer than it would be if it was just an inert physical  body in space in this part of the solar system. Okay. So the natural greenhouse effect due  to water vapour makes it 33 degrees warmer, but it's also our disturbance of that 95%  
**[0:05:13-0:05:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:05:13):**  of the heat dynamic process that has now caused the abnormal warming in the last 250 odd years,  which of course was picked up then by Charles Keeling in 1958 when he sort of said, hey,  here's CO2 going up, but that CO2 rise, people make the mistake, they see that as that must  
**[0:05:34-0:05:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:05:34):**  be the cause. No, that is a symptom. Okay. That CO2 rise is the symptom of our disturbance  of the bio system from our excess oxidation of carbon from the bio system. It's simply  a symptom, but the actual thing that's driving the climate change is the effect of that land  
**[0:05:55-0:06:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:05:55):**  degradation on the hydrological dynamics of the planet. And so the challenge isn't just  to draw down the carbon dioxide or see it as a pollutant, which is just silly. The point  is it's our resource. That's the building block that we need to take to rebuild our  
**[0:06:14-0:06:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:06:14):**  landscape, our soils, so that we rebuild the hydrology that we've disturbed and in rebuilding  that hydrology, restabilise the climate, cool the climate safely and naturally in the next  10 years. Because if we leave it longer, it's very, very serious, dangerous and damaging.  
**[0:06:36-0:06:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:06:36):**  As farmers and growers, we love to have higher CO2 because we get better plant growth and  we get higher yields. So I've been particularly intrigued by the conversation that you have  led and your contribution to the dialogue. One of the questions that I have is we do  
**[0:06:52-0:06:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:06:52):**  see these climate variabilities and these intense climate events across the countryside.  How can we stabilise the climate and how can we cool the climate without reducing CO2?  Okay, important here that we sort of clarify that, right? We will have to reduce CO2 for  
**[0:07:13-0:07:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:07:13):**  the simple reason that we have to rebuild the earth's soil carbon sponge. And that's  the one simple message that this is all about, regenerating the earth's soil carbon sponge.  Because that's where the bridge between carbon management and hydrology management really  
**[0:07:36-0:07:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:07:36):**  hits the ground. That's our unique point of agency. That's what we've destroyed. We've  destroyed the soil carbon sponge. And in that process, we put CO2 in the atmosphere. We've  also then a redified and reduced the amount of water available. Just not picking you up,  
**[0:07:56-0:08:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:07:56):**  but just clarifying you say you like actually CO2 because absolutely, you get a fertiliser  effect. But only John, only John if you have soil water.  Exactly.  
**[0:08:07-0:08:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:08:07):**  The most landscapes around this world and your central valley in California, they'll  tell you that as well. Without water, whatever CO2 is up there is no use whatsoever, right?  Absolutely.  
**[0:08:21-0:08:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:08:21):**  Basically, without water, there is no life. And therefore it's the sponge. And so what  we're really saying is that here is a symptom, the CO2 has gone up because we've oxidised,  degraded the landscape, we've got to take that CO2 as a resource as the actual cement  
**[0:08:41-0:08:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:08:41):**  to rebuild the healthy soil structures to rebuild the cathedrals of voids and surfaces  in healthy soils, because it's a void and the surfaces in soil is where the water is  able to be infiltrated, retained. And that's where productivity, that's where resilience  
**[0:09:02-0:09:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:09:02):**  comes from, right? The actual cathedrals of voids, the space in those healthy soil structures  that we have to rebuild.  As far as the dangerous hydrological climate extremes and variability that we're facing,  
**[0:09:18-0:09:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:09:18):**  and this is again fundamental, that's absolutely correct. We're not going to die from CO2.  Submariners die when CO2 in their subs gets to 10,000 parts per million. It's 400 parts  per million now. When you and I breathe out, we breathe out air that's got 1000 parts per  
**[0:09:39-0:09:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:09:39):**  million CO2. So we're not going to die from CO2, but we are going to die if we are ridded  by and don't have the water for life or for the planet and the food that we need to produce.  So it's a sponge and really CO2 needs to be seen as our resource and building block to  
**[0:09:58-0:10:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:09:58):**  rebuild healthy soil structures.  Okay, so that CO2 is a resource to build the sponge. And then the point of the sponge is  that is a thing that's critical to buffer the extremes, right? It's in a sense the sponge  
**[0:10:16-0:10:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:10:16):**  that allows us to infiltrate water into soil to minimise the flood peaks, to minimise the  erosion storm damage, and basically it's also the source where we can sustain the longevity  of green growth. So when there are dry periods, it's only the sponge and the water in our  
**[0:10:35-0:10:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:10:35):**  sponges and our in-soil reservoirs that allow life to extend over those dry periods. So  with climate change, we're not just warm the planet three watts per square metre or roughly  1% of incident solar radiation extra that we're retaining, but we've triggered this  
**[0:10:56-0:11:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:10:56):**  extreme variation, dangerous extremes. They're all hydrological and really the sponge is  the point of agency in nature and now our only point of agency to rebuffer and stabilise  these extreme. It's extremes that are going to actually destroy us and destroy fire systems  
**[0:11:20-0:11:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:11:20):**  and kill people because whether they are hurricanes, whether they're floods, whether they're erosion,  whether they're a ratification, droughts, wildfires, it's these extremes and they're  all hydrological and they're all prevented by buffering through the sponge.  
**[0:11:40-0:11:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:11:40):**  One of the considerations for the soil carbon sponges that I've spoken of in the past is  not only the capacity to store water, which I think is obviously very important, but also  the capacity to deliver water to plants when they need it. It's not just soil water holding  
**[0:11:56-0:11:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:11:56):**  capacity, it's also water release capacity.  Absolutely, John. And actually let's take that one extension. It's the longevity of  green growth that governs the whole health of the biosystem, our food production. You  
**[0:12:11-0:12:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:12:11):**  see it's a capacity to sustain over time enough water supplied from the soil to maintain that  crop finishing, that pasture growing. If we have a sponge and we get to say one inch of  rain, then we can say that water infiltrates and will be made available slowly over just  
**[0:12:33-0:12:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:12:33):**  say 100 days. If we concrete that catchment and degrade that sponge and we have a hard  compacted soil, it basically runs out of water after five to 10 days or less. It just runs  off the roads. So we have in a sense a 1000% increase in productivity, a 10 fold increase  
**[0:12:56-0:13:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:12:56):**  in longevity of green growth from maintaining a sponge. And I was a scientist involved with  the green revolution, I mean more from a nutrition point of view. But at those days or anything  in the green revolution, if we could get a 30% growth response, we thought that was a  
**[0:13:14-0:13:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:13:14):**  world shattering good news story. But here we are, the sponge will give you 1000%, a  10 fold longevity of green. And in a sense, your community has been doing this wonderfully  for centuries. But that's the message we've got to get across wider. We've got to build  
**[0:13:33-0:13:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:13:33):**  resilience, longevity, healthy biosystems, not just short term fast growth dependent  on fertiliser inputs, irrigation and these inputs.  Yes, I believe the general regenerative and biological agriculture community has certainly  
**[0:13:53-0:13:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:13:53):**  on some level understood the importance of developing the soil carbon sponge and building  organic matter and improving soil water holding capacity, etc. But I think you can contribute  to the conversation that is not well understood is how does that improvement in soil water  
**[0:14:12-0:14:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:14:12):**  holding capacity then contribute to a stable climate and to a cooler climate? So from an  atmospheric perspective, what is different today than what existed, let's say 100 years  ago or 50 years ago?  
**[0:14:28-0:14:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:14:28):**  Okay, and this is in a sense where we step into the atmospheric physics or the atmospheric  heat dynamics. And these are quite, I mean, they're totally natural, totally proven in  nature, but new concepts to a lot of the climate scientists who sit in front of computer screens  
**[0:14:46-0:14:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:14:46):**  and model away. Okay, every time a tree or plant transpires longevity of green, right?  And it takes water from the soil and turns it from a liquid into a gas water vapour that  transpires. And to do that, every gram of water needs 590 calories of heat energy to  
**[0:15:10-0:15:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:15:10):**  make that transformation from liquid to gas, called the latent heat of vaporization. And  that heat of course comes from the surface soil and the surface environment. And so every  gram, every cubic centimetre of water that's transpired, cools the surface 590 calories  
**[0:15:31-0:15:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:15:31):**  of heat energy. And of course, you understand there's vast quantities of transpiration taking  water up into the air over long periods of time. So this is a massive natural safe cooling  effect. But we by degrading our landscape, in a sense, concreting catchment so the water  
**[0:15:52-0:15:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:15:52):**  isn't in the soil, limiting the longevity of green growth, we're limiting that natural  air conditioning cooling effect of the planet. Okay, and so immediately, simply shortening  productive green growth results in a warmer surface because we don't have this latent  
**[0:16:11-0:16:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:16:11):**  heat transpiration cooling. Globally, some 25% of the incident solar radiation coming  from the sun is naturally transferred from the surface back up into the atmosphere through  these transpirational latent heat fluxes. So globally, it's yet 25 a quarter of the  
**[0:16:35-0:16:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:16:35):**  global cooling balance is driven by green transpiration. And so the message is simple.  If we increased the quantity and the longevity of green transpiration by some four to 5%,  we would offset the abnormal warming that we've induced today.  
**[0:16:55-0:17:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:16:55):**  That's not a significant amount. So how much would we be able to cool the planet? What  temperature reduction would we be able to observe if we increased that transpiration?  Okay, so yes, so that would cool the planet, basically that 1%, the three watts per square  
**[0:17:14-0:17:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:17:14):**  meter that is abnormally warm. There's no danger that we would over cool the planet,  because as in nature, the planet is heat buffered and regulated, right? If we cooled it too  much, transpiration and photosynthesis would slow down and would self-regulate, right?  
**[0:17:32-0:17:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:17:32):**  So there's no danger of doing this to turn an ice age on, none at all, because photosynthesis  would slow down, transpiration would slow down, right? And we'd be still back in natural  homeostasis. But to offset the abnormal warming, the one three watts per square meter abnormal  
**[0:17:50-0:17:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:17:50):**  warming, we could simply increase transpiration by four to 5%, and that would be the offset.  Now let's caution here, it's not quite that simple. I mean, the facts are there, the maths  are there, but the natural hydrological process is a bit more complicated. So it's not just  
**[0:18:09-0:18:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:18:09):**  one single magic bullet that we're proposing, but we're just trying to illustrate this is  part of that whole dynamic. There's another part, again, it gets not complicated, but  there's more parts to it. For example, clouds, right? High albedo reflective clouds, again,  
**[0:18:26-0:18:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:18:26):**  they reflect up to third of the incident solar radiation back out to space so that heat doesn't  even get to the earth. And so a 2% increase in cloudiness in a cloud density and reflectance  would again offset the abnormal warming that we have induced today, okay? And so that's  
**[0:18:47-0:18:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:18:47):**  again doable, but only if we have the sponge, because without the sponge, we don't have  the water to transpire into the air to form clouds to drive these cooling processes. So  if we concrete the catchment, we end up like Mars, and we don't have any of these cooling  
**[0:19:05-0:19:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:19:05):**  capabilities.  Walter, it's my understanding that to really have the cooling capabilities and to cool  the entire planet down on a global landscape scale, what I've understood from our conversations  
**[0:19:19-0:19:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:19:19):**  in the past is that we need three things. One is we need the carbon sponge, we need  the holding capacity to hold the water. And then two, we need the capacity to change the  way water behaves in the atmosphere. And water in the atmosphere, as I understand it, behaves  
**[0:19:35-0:19:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:19:35):**  differently today from what it has in the past because of the way we've impacted aerosols  and other things in the atmosphere. Can you tell us a little bit about that?  Of course, John. And again, thank you. This is a very next chapter in a way. And again,  
**[0:19:49-0:19:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:19:49):**  it's elegantly balanced and you really have to be on your knees to nature. But again,  let's explain it, right? Basically, nature has governed the temperature balance of this  planet through evolving to very sophisticated opposing processes that either warm the planet  
**[0:20:10-0:20:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:20:10):**  or cool the planet. So we've talked about the water vapour going up from the trees,  which cools the surface. But that water when it then goes into the atmosphere condenses  and releases that energy, most of which or a lot of which transmits back out to space,  
**[0:20:27-0:20:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:20:27):**  but then forms haze micro droplets. And we see these as mists and hazes in the air. And  of course, we see them because they are micro droplets. We can't see water vapour, but we  can see droplets. And of course, the hazes are billions, trillions of these micro droplets.  
**[0:20:47-0:20:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:20:47):**  And to form a micro droplet, water in a sense has to condense onto some an aerosol particle.  And in nature, and this is James Lovelock work from the 1960s in nature, we produce  or nature produces a lot of these aerosols from plants and vegetation, the dimethyl sulfide  
**[0:21:09-0:21:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:21:09):**  from marine algae, the isoprenes from forest, the pine seeds, the terpenes again from forests,  so that nature is producing a lot of these aerosols. And they actually create the hazes.  And they actually provide a natural warming effect in the atmosphere. But what's happened  
**[0:21:30-0:21:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:21:30):**  is we have massively increased the amount of these aerosols that are now in the atmosphere  abnormally. Let's go through some of them. We have created 5 billion hectares of manmade  desert and wasteland on this planet. There's only 14 billion hectares of land in total.  
**[0:21:50-0:21:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:21:50):**  So 40% of the land surface is now desert and wasteland, which produces some four to 5 billion  tons of dust, clay dust particles entering the air every year. And these are acting as  haze particulate. And so the amount of haze has increased enormously. Every year we burn  
**[0:22:12-0:22:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:22:12):**  400 million hectares of forest and some 2 billion hectares of grassland on this planet.  And of course, the carbon particulates from that fire is going into the atmosphere and  again increasing hazes. Every year we burn 8 billion tons of fossil fuels and again a  
**[0:22:33-0:22:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:22:33):**  whole lot of carbon particulates and polyaromatic hydrocarbons entering the air. So we have  created a massive increase in this aerosol release and as a consequence, the level and  density of these humid hazes and their warming effect. We have a pollutant brown haze that  
**[0:22:56-0:23:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:22:56):**  now stretches from Cairo to Beijing and in a sense people are suffering under that with  all sorts of pollutant effects and also heat effects because these humid hazes heat that  area. For example, in the Middle East, the Persian Gulf now in summer, it's 50 degrees  
**[0:23:14-0:23:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:23:14):**  centigrade temperature, 95% relative humidity, well exceeding the capacity for mammals, including  humans to survive because we can't perspire, we can't cool ourselves. So this is as dangerous  human humid heat, you know, health impact. So we are really cooking ourselves, right,  
**[0:23:37-0:23:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:23:37):**  sauntering ourselves. So that's the heating component and then nature to offset that and  to balance that has actually evolved another even more exquisite process and these are  the hygroscopic precipitation nuclei. Now they're scientific words, but what it is nature  
**[0:23:57-0:24:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:23:57):**  puts as again molecules in the air which absorb and coalesce about a million of these haze  droplets to make a cloud droplet. Okay. And so nature says, right, I can regulate hazes,  but I can also coalesce hazes into dense high albedo clouds. And as we've talked about,  
**[0:24:19-0:24:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:24:19):**  these clouds reflect sunlight and actually cool the planet. So through this simple matter  of coalescing hazes into clouds, nature can switch it from a warming to a cooling process.  And it's through this balance of these microbial hygroscopic nuclei that nature has regulated  
**[0:24:40-0:24:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:24:40):**  the temperature of the atmosphere. But if I just add these three components that cause  this hygroscopic removal of hazes into cooling clouds, and they are ice crystals, and of  course they're critically important at high altitudes, high latitudes and cold fronts.  
**[0:24:59-0:25:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:24:59):**  And basically they're forming those clouds. Over the oceans we've got salt, sodium chloride,  which creates most of the clouds over the oceans. Of course we use salts like silver  iodide in all our research on cloud seeding, which my institute was involved with very  
**[0:25:18-0:25:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:25:18):**  significantly in the 60s and 70s. But the most important precipitation nuclei that is  produced in nature and drives over half of the rainfall and cloud formation, particularly  in tropics and inland areas, are bacteria. Bacteria produced in the stomatal cavity of  
**[0:25:38-0:25:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:25:38):**  certain trees, which then go up into the air as part of the transpiration stream, actually  nucleate these hazes to form dense clouds and then rain and basically drive the whole  hydrological cycle. Because it's one thing to put water vapour or hazes into the air,  
**[0:26:01-0:26:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:26:01):**  but of course nature has had to evolve a way to bring it back down through clouds and then  rain because only then has it got regulation. So it's these bacterial, hygroscopic bacterial  precipitation nuclei that become fundamental in that regulation. And again, they're produced  
**[0:26:21-0:26:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:26:21):**  by certain forests and of course us destroying those forests again has a massive effect.  We've got lots and lots of hard evidence whereby forest destruction has now crashed rainfalls  in regions, even though there's still other vegetation there, but remove the forest, you  
**[0:26:41-0:26:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:26:41):**  lose the rainfall, you have rid of those regions. So rebuilding this balance between haze nuclei  or haze formation through aerosols and then the removal via these precipitation nuclei  is a fundamental balance that we have to restore.  
**[0:27:01-0:27:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:27:01):**  Walter, what is missing to restoring that rebalance? We're obviously, it seems to me  that we are producing a tremendous amount of hazes in the environment because as you  described, we experience many days now where we have very warm temperatures and 95% humidity  
**[0:27:20-0:27:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:27:20):**  here in the Midwest. That didn't used to be the case, even in my very short memory, it  was very unusual to have a large number of days during the summer with 95% humidity.  It would happen occasionally, but not that frequently.  
**[0:27:33-0:27:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:27:33):**  Okay. And this is getting wonderful. This is getting to the practicality of the case.  So we want to reduce the hazes and here are the really practical, very rapid sort of ways  that we can and must do this. The first thing of course is you're already doing it in a  
**[0:27:50-0:27:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:27:50):**  way. First of all, we maintain soil cover, right? We maintain vegetation protective cover  on soil as nature had because it's basically when we have bare exposed soil to heat, to  wind that we get dust and there's 4 billion tonnes of dust aerosols that we can then reduce  
**[0:28:10-0:28:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:28:10):**  on the planet. Obviously we can't reduce it everywhere. The desert for the time being  are deserts, but the more ground cover, the more ground insulation, yes, we can do that  practically everywhere. Secondly, we can stop some of these fires, right? We have these  
**[0:28:27-0:28:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:28:27):**  massive fires. They put up more carbon dioxide into the air than our burning of fossil fuels,  but we've never accounted for them because we deem them to be mother nature's problem,  right? Well, it's wrong because it's us that regulates fires in how we manage our forests  
**[0:28:46-0:28:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:28:46):**  and landscapes and manage this biodegradation of the fuel in the fires. And so if we can  limit these wildfires, we can again massively limit the carbon particulates in the air.  Obviously we've got to keep on trying to reduce fossil fuel use and that goes without saying.  
**[0:29:04-0:29:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:29:04):**  And of course the polyaromatic hydrocarbons and things like that coming from there. So  we've got a massive capacity to reduce the hazes by limiting the aerosols that create  them. On the other side of the equation, yes, we can't change ice crystal formation readily  
**[0:29:23-0:29:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:29:23):**  and as it gets warmer, there's going to be less of them. So be careful. We are triggering  a ridification, right? Because there's less ice nuclei. We can play around with putting  salts in the air as we do with cloud seeding, silver iodide, but again, very expensive and  
**[0:29:40-0:29:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:29:40):**  it's a bit hubristic in a way, but also very limited in scale. But what we can do is we  can say, okay, how do we restore these natural forests that are producing up to a billion  tons of bacteria, protoplasm content that's going to every year acting as these hydroscopic  
**[0:30:01-0:30:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:30:01):**  precipitation nuclei. If we look at the scale on that, we used to have 8 billion hectares  of primary forest on this planet 10,000 years ago. We have cut 6.3 billion hectares of that  forest. Some of it is regenerated. So now we've got 3.5 billion hectares of forest.  
**[0:30:21-0:30:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:30:21):**  Basically, we have massively, massively disturbed and reduced the amount of these hydroscopic  precipitation nuclei that were naturally produced by forest. And of course, in that we've changed  the cloud formation capacity, but more seriously, we've changed the rainfall induction because  
**[0:30:43-0:30:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:30:43):**  what happens is these hydroscopic precipitation nuclei form first clouds, but then they continue  to coalesce cloud droplets into rain droplets that are big enough and heavy enough and over  half of the rainfall, over half of the rainfall on this planet is driven by these hydroscopic  
**[0:31:01-0:31:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:31:01):**  bacterial nuclei effectively in a symbiotic process. We all know that trees and plants  need rain, but now the question is nature, rain needs trees.  Walter, how large a forest or how many trees are needed to release these bacterial nucleating  
**[0:31:23-0:31:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:31:23):**  nucleations into the atmosphere and produce rainfall from a very practical level if we  consider the possibilities of increasing or moderating rainfall in the Midwest, let's  say. For us as a collective group of farmers in the Midwest, how much forest and how many  
**[0:31:41-0:31:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:31:41):**  trees need to be present to moderate rainfall in the local environment?  Well, John, you win the prize because absolutely you asked the really important question. And  the honest answer is I don't have a precise answer because we haven't ever given ourselves  
**[0:31:58-0:32:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:31:58):**  the space and time to research and to get that information. Basically we have enormous  amount of detail on this thing. These bacteria, they're called aerobacter orogenes were described  by Louis Pasteur in the 1870s in some of his fundamental groundbreaking work. He then went  
**[0:32:18-0:32:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:32:18):**  looking, sampling in the air, climbed to the top of Mount Blanc, the highest mountain in  Europe, opened a jar, collected the air, looked at the bacteria and they're everywhere. But  your critical question of what forest, what species, what age, what density, what area  
**[0:32:38-0:32:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:32:38):**  is needed to have what rainfall effect, I'm afraid we need that data, we can get that  data, but no, we don't have that data because quite frankly, we have through this discussion  we're having and what we're doing, we have just opened a door into a whole new paradigm  
**[0:32:57-0:33:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:32:57):**  of the hydrological ecology of the atmosphere is driven by microbes and vegetation. And  that's earth shattering because everybody said, hey, no, the atmosphere is all about  atmospheric physics, dead stuff. And we're saying, no, no, this microbiology drives so  
**[0:33:17-0:33:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:33:17):**  much of the climate. So look, it's frontier stuff. I don't have a precise answer, but  I do have an answer. Right. So it's always that paradox. As I said, Louis Pasteur, 1870,  defined this, Charles Darwin and Hooker, who was a president of the Royal Society in Britain,  
**[0:33:37-0:33:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:33:37):**  basically said, we need to do an experiment in 1880. Right. So this is 140 years ago.  And on Ascension Island in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean, in Sotolina, another little  island, basically the British had had a naval outpost, reef supply depot, had put goats  
**[0:33:57-0:34:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:33:57):**  on the island. You know exactly what happened to the vegetation on those islands because  the goats and they sort of said, we've got to revegetate these islands. And they had  two mountains on Ascension Island, one they call Bald Mountain and the other they call  
**[0:34:11-0:34:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:34:11):**  Green Mountain. Green Mountain, of course, is where they revegetated forest 140 years  ago. And Green Mountain now gets 20% more rainfall than Bald Mountain. They're 20 kilometers  apart, not 20 actually, that would be 10 kilometers apart. Okay. So here we have, there's plenty  
**[0:34:31-0:34:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:34:31):**  of evidence, direct experimental reality that yes, restoring forests create rain.  Yeah. And I've, there's a lot of, as you described, a lot of anecdotal evidence on smaller scales.  I'm thinking of Las Gaviotas in Colombia. And there are other stories of regenerative  
**[0:34:52-0:34:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:34:52):**  farms that have significantly changed rainfall in the local environment with relatively small  amounts of trees, a few square kilometers or less, in many cases, quite a bit less.  Okay, but can I pull you up there? Please, please don't say this is not hard. This is  
**[0:35:10-0:35:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:35:10):**  reality, right? That's nature. That's reality. So don't let anyone bluff you that that isn't  evidence. That is nothing is more solid as evidence as nature. Okay, so just because  it's not in somebody's computer model, you know, don't ever doubt nature, back nature,  
**[0:35:27-0:35:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:35:27):**  because that is reality. That is what nature is doing. There. That's where the answers  are. So wonderful, because what you've just said there, john, is actually the proof. And  don't doubt yourself, because that's really where evidence is. It's not in somebody's  
**[0:35:44-0:35:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:35:44):**  assumptions and computer model on a Yeah, in an illusion that they're living in. And  that's in a sense, the problem we've got, because, you know, the conventional science  says not proven, not proven. Well, no, sorry, reality has been proved. Reality is reality.  
**[0:36:00-0:36:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:36:00):**  Yeah, I think just we we have enough experience. And I would say of the collective we we as  a human species, we have enough experience that even while the evidence may not yet all  have been quantified and published in the peer review literature, we are in a situation  
**[0:36:20-0:36:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:36:20):**  where we need to take the experience that we already have, and apply it, we can't afford  to take another 10 to 20 years to first quantify it and first validate it, we need to meet  begin immediately with what we already know. And we need to answer the set it is validated,  
**[0:36:38-0:36:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:36:38):**  there is nature, you're standing in it, you don't need some computer model to guess at  it, right. And so yeah, I'm 300% behind you backing you. And I mean, obviously, if you  have people who have documented Yes, we have reforested this area, we have had these hydrological  
**[0:36:56-0:37:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:36:56):**  effects, that is reality. And that is the evidence. So I mean, I'm just so passionate  about backing reality and backing those innovators in the field, because they are the that's  the frontline of knowledge, understanding, and actually saving this planet.  
**[0:37:13-0:37:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:37:13):**  So I think for all of us as growers and farmers around the countryside, we need to begin thinking  as Walter has described about regenerating the hydrological cycle that is, of course,  covering our soils, making sure that we have a longer green period with longer transpiration,  
**[0:37:30-0:37:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:37:30):**  but then also making sure that we have an adequate population of trees in the local  landscape, in the local environment, I believe that would significantly change the rainfall  patterns throughout much of the US Midwest and the Great Plains region if we were able  
**[0:37:45-0:37:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:37:45):**  to do that.  Absolutely. And in a sense, let's go further because I work in Australia and arid areas.  Of course, Australia is a pretty dry place. And first message is yes, you've got to put  
**[0:37:56-0:38:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:37:56):**  these trees back. But they are actually beneficial, beneficial, beneficial, because they stop  the desiccation, right, the evaporative desiccation, the wind speed, the scouring, which is where  you're losing at the moment 50 60% of the moisture you've got. Okay, so they're actually  
**[0:38:15-0:38:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:38:15):**  saving moisture. Don't let anyone tell you the trees take moisture away, because they  save more moisture. More than that, they create much, much more palatable vegetation under  them. So rather than having a pasture, for example, that is Sclarenchima, effectively  
**[0:38:35-0:38:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:38:35):**  cardboard, you've got palatable nutritious pasture. So while it might only be 80%, 90%  of the dry weight, it's got 400% palatability feed conversion value. The trees are pumping  out nutrients from depth and soil horizons that the pastures can't get nutrients from.  
**[0:38:55-0:39:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:38:55):**  And they're bringing those nutrients into the surface soil cycles, increasing the biofertility  of those pastures. So I mean, these trees integrated what we call shelter woods are  massively important, particularly in dry areas, and as regions desiccate, and they are desiccating.  
**[0:39:16-0:39:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:39:16):**  So really, that's one of our frontline lifeboats for regeneration, okay, integrating and it's  only need 50 trees per hectare, you know, 20, 30 trees per acre are really powerful  in building resilience, driving hydrology improvements, building nutritional improvements,  
**[0:39:37-0:39:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:39:37):**  and actually giving you a lifeboat that can survive.  Walter, I was going to ask you how you are using trees in Australia. Are they being planted  in shelter belts? Are they being scattered across the landscape? What do you find to  
**[0:39:49-0:39:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:39:49):**  be the most effective?  Right. Okay, very important question. Thank you again, john. Okay, basically, we've got  now recognition globally and people are talking about let's plant a billion trees and, you  
**[0:40:03-0:40:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:40:03):**  know, give them 100 marks for aspirations and five marks for reality, right? Because  planting a tree unless it's got water and this has got the right soil environment, the  probability it's going to be dead within three weeks, four weeks, right. And so that's the  
**[0:40:18-0:40:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:40:18):**  point, we've got to rebuild the sponge, we've got to rebuild the hydrology, because only  then will planted trees survive. But let's flip it around. If we rebuild the sponge and  the hydrology, then mostly, trees will naturally regenerate and seed from adjacent areas. So  
**[0:40:38-0:40:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:40:38):**  we can even avoid having to plant them. You know, trees will naturally reseed. If not,  we can plant them from seed. So yes, we can regenerate vast areas of degraded arid areas,  not by planting trees, but just by rebuilding the sponges we've discussed, and then allowing  
**[0:40:58-0:41:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:40:58):**  natural successional regeneration of trees and grasses and shrubs to move into that area.  If there's water there, life will follow, sure as eggs. Okay, no question. So that becomes  the issue, okay. How do we not just look at where we are above the surface and say, hey,  
**[0:41:18-0:41:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:41:18):**  we want this tree, because that's what we can see. It's actually respecting down under  what's in the soils, the hydrology, the nutrition, the microbial diversity, because once we have  that, trees come automatically.  
**[0:41:33-0:41:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:41:33):**  I think you make a very important point about trees coming automatically. Of course, in  order for that to happen, that means that we cannot have sterile fence rows. It means  we cannot have sterile borders between our fields, and we need to discontinue this ideal  
**[0:41:51-0:41:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:41:51):**  of having a completely clean field and clean field borders constantly being sprayed with  herbicides.  Totally, John. And in a sense, in Australia, because we are a bit drier, we're going to  
**[0:42:04-0:42:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:42:04):**  a whole new paradigm for agriculture. We've got a big project with the Australian Academy  of Science, it'll be middle of next year. How do we redesign agriculture for the future?  And no, we've got concepts like nomadism, right? We've got to stop. I mean, we've imprisoned  
**[0:42:20-0:42:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:42:20):**  ourselves in the 19th, 20th century in these fence lines, right? So we have four pegs,  this is our land, we put fences up, and we try to over exploit that land till we die.  We mostly will die if we stay there. But no, we've got to change that. We've got to get  
**[0:42:39-0:42:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:42:39):**  this whole concept of fences may have to go where we have to say we have to be nomadic.  Not that we actually individual move, but this nomadism, right? This new concept of  agriculture where we opportunistically pasture crop where the seasons are. So with us, we're  
**[0:42:56-0:43:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:42:56):**  going right back to the wisdom of First Nations people. They've worked in the ecology of these  systems. And we have to respect and then look at how do we apply that wisdom, particularly  in an eritifying climate like Australia. But I agree the idea of fence lines and spraying  
**[0:43:16-0:43:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:43:16):**  and killing. No, no, we've got to foster life. We've got to foster diversity and flexibility.  Walter, this has been a fascinating conversation. I know that you're a wealth of knowledge and  we could continue to have a delightful discussion for hours. But I want to be considerate of  
**[0:43:34-0:43:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:43:34):**  your time and our listeners time as well. I'd like to ask one final question. In addition  to all the pieces we've spoken about, what is an additional highlight or very important  point that you think growers and farmers need to be aware of in managing this in the landscape?  
**[0:43:50-0:43:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:43:50):**  Okay, simple take home messages, simple yet, the sponge, the sponge, the sponge, right?  Just take the carbon and build the sponge. And of course, it's as simple as maximizing  photosynthesis, just maximizing plant growth as best you can, minimizing oxidative inputs,  
**[0:44:12-0:44:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:44:12):**  the excess of cultivation, the excess fertilizers, the biocides, the bare fallows, and then just  understanding that that organic debris is turned into humates and glomalin by soil microbes.  And so if we just do that, maximize photosynthesis, minimize that destructive effect, let nature  
**[0:44:33-0:44:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:44:33):**  and microbes build that soil carbon sponge for us. The other key point, and we might  have a future discussion on this is really the nutritional integrity of the food we're  growing depends again on the sponge and the nutrient availability on all those soil surfaces  
**[0:44:51-0:44:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:44:51):**  created in the sponge. We've massively compromised the nutritional integrity of the food we now  eat, and our preventative health has crashed because of that. We have got exponential increases  in all sorts of diet induced diseases, totally unsustainable. And so down the track, it will  
**[0:45:10-0:45:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:45:10):**  be actually consumers demanding healthy food from healthy soils to keep people healthy.  And in a sense, that's the forefront for the paradigm change, the tipping point, and actually  our only way to feed and look after and maintain stable communities into the future.  
**[0:45:32-0:45:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:45:32):**  Thank you, Walter. Excellent closing comments. And I will actually build on your point about  the importance of the sponge, the sponge as you described it, you'll hear me speaking  much more in the future about soil compaction. It is impossible to build a deep soil carbon  
**[0:45:51-0:45:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:45:51):**  sponge when you are farming only four inches deep. I believe compaction is a significantly  underestimated challenge in our production agriculture across the Midwest and across  the country in North America. So you'll hear me speaking much more about that in the future.  
**[0:46:07-0:46:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:46:07):**  Walter, thank you so much for sharing your wisdom and your knowledge. And I look forward  to having more conversations with you in the future. Thank you for being here.  Thank you very much, John. Thank you. And goodbye to everybody. And yes, thank you.  
**[0:46:23-0:46:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:46:23):**  The team at AEA and I are dedicated to bringing this show to you because we believe that knowledge  and information is the foundation of successful regenerative systems. At AEA, we believe that  growing better quality food and making more money from your crops is possible. And since  
**[0:46:40-0:46:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:46:40):**  2006, we've worked with leading professional growers to help them do just that. At AEA,  we don't guess, we test, we analyze, and we provide recommendations based on scientific  data, knowledge and experience. We've developed products that are uniquely positioned to help  
**[0:46:56-0:47:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:46:56):**  growers make more money with regenerative agriculture. If you are a professional grower  who believes in testing instead of guessing, someone who believes in a better, more regenerative  way to grow, visit advancingecoag.com and contact us to see if AEA is right for you.  
**[0:47:13-0:47:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rebuilding-the-soil-carbon-sponge-and-cooling-the-climate-fast-with-walter-jehne/#t=0:47:13):**  Thank you for listening and we look forward to working with you.  