<script src="https://cdn.podlove.org/web-player/embed.js"></script>
    <script>
        document.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', function () {
          if (document.readyState === 'interactive' || document.readyState === 'complete') {
            podlovePlayer('#player', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/Regenerative Agriculture Podcast/Rebuilding-rural-economies-with-ancient-grain-and-regenerative-practices-with-bob-quinn.json', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/Regenerative Agriculture Podcast/config.json').then(registerExternalEvents('player'))
          }
        })
  </script>---
title: Rebuilding Rural Economies With Ancient Grain And Regenerative Practices With Bob Quinn
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### Regenerative Agriculture Podcast  (2020-09-15)  
### Author(s): John Kempf  

**[0:00:00-0:00:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:00:00):**  Hi friends, this is John and this is the Regenerative Agriculture Podcast,  where we talk about the agronomic science and cultural management practices that regenerate  plant health and that regenerate soil health, and ultimately that regenerate public health.  
**[0:00:15-0:00:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:00:15):**  I've been looking forward to having this guest join us for a while, Bob Quinn, an organic farmer  from Montana, who is becoming a bit more famous and should become a lot more famous soon, I hope.  Bob, I've been really impressed with the work that you're doing with Chemut and all the work  
**[0:00:34-0:00:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:00:34):**  that you've done. I've been looking forward to having you here, so thank you for joining me.  Well, John, it's a thrill for me and a real honor, so I'm looking forward to our visit.  Bob, a month or so ago, in the middle of July, we had a field day in Iowa that you contributed to  
**[0:00:52-0:01:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:00:52):**  in a very significant way, even though you weren't there. You know, often when you're at an all-day  conference, you have a really good lunch with desserts and pie and ice cream and potatoes and  beef and chicken or whatever it might be, and after an hour-long lunch, you're going back into  
**[0:01:09-0:01:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:01:09):**  the conference and you want to take a nap because you have all that food sitting in your stomach.  And I've always felt that this is a real downside and that we should specifically try to,  for both the presenters' benefit but also for the people who put in the time and the effort  
**[0:01:28-0:01:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:01:28):**  and spent the money to be there, if they're there to learn, you can't really learn very well when  you're half asleep. And so we spent some time trying to specifically design a menu that would  make people feel good and give them energy instead of putting them to sleep. And we specifically  
**[0:01:46-0:02:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:01:46):**  requested that all the buns for our grass-fed burgers be made with kamut flour. And we had  a lot of conversations about the buns and kamut grain at the event. You know the best part? This  was a two-day event, two lunches. I didn't see a single person take a nap either day.  
**[0:02:07-0:02:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:02:07):**  Wow. Well, we know it's high-energy grain, but I haven't had that kind of a testimonial before.  Thanks a lot. That's very interesting. Well, it was just one piece of many, I'm sure,  but it was a very important piece because I think a lot of grains do give people a sugar flush that  
**[0:02:25-0:02:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:02:25):**  can put them to sleep very easily. Well, this is an ancient wheat that we have been studying for  about 30 years and intensively for probably the last 15, doing a lot of laboratory research,  a lot of research with medical research hospitals studying chronic disease. And we find there's a  
**[0:02:45-0:03:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:02:45):**  huge difference between what we started with, these ancient grains, and what we have now with  modern wheat and what it does to the body and what it does to the system. And giving people more  energy. Athletes can notice this and several teams in Italy, several soccer teams, I should say, are  
**[0:03:03-0:03:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:03:03):**  eating exclusively kamuthi and their pastas and their breads and everything rather than any  modern wheat of any kind. And they find more energy and much quicker rebound after hard  practices. It reduces inflammation. So even inflammation in your muscles when you're  
**[0:03:19-0:03:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:03:19):**  exercising hard, that is also reduced besides inflammation that are tied to chronic disease.  So there's something very different and special about it. And I have an idea that most seeds  that we started with, that were created for us, started out this way. And when we started changing  
**[0:03:37-0:03:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:03:37):**  them, just for the only benefit of making more money through more yields and cheaper  prices for the farmer, which is a little bit of a downer, we have unintended consequences that  we're just now beginning to understand and see.  
**[0:03:49-0:04:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:03:49):**  James, the nutritional value, we've changed the way that it interacts with our bodies. There's  been lots of different changes. And of course, we'd like to think that we've increased yields,  but that may have come at a cost. Many people don't know your story and your background. Bob,  
**[0:04:08-0:04:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:04:08):**  tell us a little bit about your story as a farmer and as it relates to the story of kamuthi and what  brought you to the work that you're doing today? What has been your pathway?  Well, I was raised in north central Montana on a 2,400 acre wheat and cattle ranch that  
**[0:04:25-0:04:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:04:25):**  my grandfather started in 1920. So my father was raised here. I was raised here and I raised all  my kids here. This year we celebrated a hundred years since my grandfather began our farm,  just after the homesteaders were going out. They had come to this part of Montana about 1916.  
**[0:04:42-0:05:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:04:42):**  And by 1920, many of them were going broke already. So my grandfather came in at that point  after World War I. And my upbringing here was typical of the age, I guess you could say. I was,  however, more interested in plants than I was in animals. So my passion was gardening and science.  
**[0:05:03-0:05:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:05:03):**  When I got to school, I went to the local schools in Big Sandy, which is a small town of  a thousand then. It's down to 600 now. And graduated and went on to Montana State University,  where I studied botany and plant pathology. I love plants and I love science. So that's how I put  
**[0:05:19-0:05:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:05:19):**  them together. And I just kept on going when I finished a master's at Bozeman at Montana State  and went on to UC Davis and finished a PhD in plant biochemistry. I was a little disillusioned  with the way university was working at that point and seemed to be more focused on getting grants  
**[0:05:38-0:05:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:05:38):**  than there was on cooperating with each other to test science. And I decided to come home and join  with my father in farming. And soon our whole farm became my laboratory. I was doing experiments,  done experiments for 40 years as we farmed here. After my father retired, I started experimenting  
**[0:05:58-0:06:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:05:58):**  with regenerative organic systems. We didn't call it regenerative in those days, but that's what it  was. We were using legumes to build our soils and then once every other year and then the off years  we would grow our cash crop. So we were trying to build our soils and focus on the soils. And we  
**[0:06:16-0:06:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:06:16):**  started that in about 86. So we've been 34 years organic. And at about the same time, realizing  that, a couple years before that, realizing that the 5,400 acre farm when it first came back wasn't  big enough to support two families, even though it supported one very nicely, I started looking for  
**[0:06:36-0:06:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:06:36):**  other ways that we could add value to the farm and found a cousin in California who was interested in  available to sell my grain to whole grain bakers in Southern California. We had very immediate  success with that and formed a company. My end was Montana Flower and Grain. He took care of sales  
**[0:06:56-0:07:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:06:56):**  and customer relations and I took care of grain procurement and when our farm didn't produce a  high enough quality, I found grain that was suitable. The second year that we were in business,  they asked for organic grain and that was my first introduction to organic. And I finally  
**[0:07:12-0:07:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:07:12):**  met some organic farmers and got acquainted that way and then they wanted to sell them stone ground  flowers. So I got a stone mill and put that in our cleaning plant and we were installing milling  the best which I didn't know anything about, but we just learned as we went and added one customer  
**[0:07:31-0:07:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:07:31):**  to another until it became quite successful. And then we added this ancient grain to the mix in  about 1988 and it took off and we registered a trademark, which was kamut, which is an ancient  word for wheat in Egyptian. Using that trademark, we marketed this grain as something that was  
**[0:07:51-0:08:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:07:51):**  always guaranteed to customers, always organic, pure, never adulterated, never genetically modified  or mixed with modern wheat in any way. So that was kind of the launch and it just kind of went  from there, John, into areas that I would have never expected. Our business grew in Europe much  
**[0:08:08-0:08:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:08:08):**  more than in this country where they were really interested in ancient wheat and now 75 percent of  everything we grow goes to Italy. They make several thousand, probably 2,500 or 3,000 different  products there. Another 10 percent goes the rest of Europe, about 10 percent to the U.S. and 10  
**[0:08:24-0:08:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:08:24):**  percent to a little bit less to Canada. So it's taken me all over the world. I've done experiments  all over almost every country where wheat has grown. I've been there to experiment with this  ancient wheat and see how it compares. So it's been a great experience and I've learned a lot  
**[0:08:43-0:09:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:08:43):**  and made lots of friends all over the world. There are so many aspects of the  Camut story that I've heard about from other people and that I've read about in your book  that I want to unwrap. So you chose to trademark the name. What was the inspiration for  
**[0:09:01-0:09:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:09:01):**  trademarking rather than doing some other type of variety protection and how has that worked out?  Well, what we saw with spelt, for example, spelt was starting to gain popularity about the same  time. But what people were doing with it was breeding it, crossing it with modern wheat so  
**[0:09:21-0:09:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:09:21):**  they could get higher yields. All these ancient grains don't really yield very much, John,  compared to, well I shouldn't say very much. They have a lower yield potential than modern wheat  that's really been bred for high inputs and high yields. The ancient grains and seeds that have  
**[0:09:38-0:09:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:09:38):**  never been bred that way or selected for that don't really have that as much. What we saw with  spelt is people were crossing with modern wheat but they still called it spelt. Because spelt is  a generic name, it could mean almost anything. When I saw that, I thought, well that's not what  
**[0:09:55-0:10:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:09:55):**  we want. We wanted a mechanism to protect it and to make a guarantee to the public that it is pure  and unadulterated and that's why we chose to market and sell it under a trademark. A trademark  is just a guarantee to our customers that it comes with certain promises which we make and  
**[0:10:15-0:10:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:10:15):**  guarantees to them, which I've mentioned to you already like being raised organic and never mixed  with other grains. But it doesn't mean that we have any ownership or control over the seed. The  seed we look at is a gift from our maker and it's available to everybody and they can do what they  
**[0:10:30-0:10:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:10:30):**  want with it. But if they're going to go to the market and they want to call it kamuth, then they  need to be part of our program and follow the rules. If they want to call it something else,  they can do whatever they want. So that was our reasoning and our mechanism by which we started  
**[0:10:45-0:11:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:10:45):**  this whole kamuth project. I find it interesting that increasingly trademarks are being used to  protect and to market specific fruit varieties, particularly apples. We now have Cosmic Crisp  being marketed very intensely and we've had Honeycrisp historically and more and more I see  
**[0:11:03-0:11:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:11:03):**  different varieties that are being protected with a trademark. I know there are many people who are  thinking about ways to develop markets for unique products. How has that trademarking process worked  out for you? Has that been able to produce the outcomes you were hoping for? Yes, very much so.  
**[0:11:22-0:11:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:11:22):**  So the trademark has been a great success for us. We've had people who have tried to sell kamuth,  they called something kamuth and it was completely out of our program and the quality was poor and we  were able to stop that. We had complaints from our customers saying, well, your grain has corn in it  
**[0:11:41-0:11:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:11:41):**  and all kinds of other impurities. And we said, well, that's impossible because we don't grow it,  where corn is grown and so it's not clean where corn is even clean. And so we knew that something  was wrong and we traced it back to someone who was licensed to use our trademark but was actually  
**[0:11:59-0:12:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:11:59):**  contracting with farmers clear outside our region that we normally grow it. And it was much inferior  and it was of course causing customer complaints. And that's exactly the reason that we have  for registering and using a trademark in the first place so that we could guarantee quality.  
**[0:12:15-0:12:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:12:15):**  And we were able to do it with a trademark and we said to him, you can't ever do that again. And if  you do, you're out of the program. And we didn't stick our lawyers on him or anything. We just told  him that that was his, he used up his last chance to not tell the truth. And if he was going to come  
**[0:12:34-0:12:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:12:34):**  stay with us and tell the truth and allow us to audit him every year, we would still welcome them.  But those are the kinds of incidents we've had. There's been a couple others where they just  opted to just go on their own way. And that's fine. I mean, it's their choice. But what we  
**[0:12:49-0:13:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:12:49):**  want to guarantee is quality, John, and so that the people get what they're paying for because  the farmers are paid much more for this and the customers pay more. But what they're getting is  a higher value for their increased cost of their end product or even the grain. And that's, we want  
**[0:13:05-0:13:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:13:05):**  to make sure that that's guaranteed. Let's talk about the business side of it a little bit. What  is the scale that you're operating on? How many acres have you been able to impact? And how were  you able to bring about that scale of production? Well, we just went from one year to another.  
**[0:13:25-0:13:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:13:25):**  My philosophy in doing business is start small and build on your success. I don't have a big  pile of money, so I can't go out and just try great big experiments. I try small experiments.  And if they're successful, then I build on those. And that's what we did. We started with a half an  
**[0:13:40-0:14:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:13:40):**  acre, which is all the seeds that we had in 1988 when we first planted it in the field at that  rate. Thirty years later, we were contracting with 250 regenerative organic farmers in Montana,  Alberta, and Saskatchewan for over 100,000 acres of this stuff. So that really, really made an  
**[0:14:01-0:14:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:14:01):**  impact on organic farming in the upper Great Plains because we only, well, we require that  our farmers not plant more than 20% of their farm, of their crop acres to this grain, even though  it's probably the most valuable crop they can grow so that we do not disturb their rotations.  
**[0:14:19-0:14:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:14:19):**  So they have ample opportunities to have a four or five or six year rotation, which works best with  regenerative organic agriculture. And we also require them to plant a soil building legume,  preferably a legume crop or some mixed cover crop with legumes in it the year before  
**[0:14:39-0:14:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:14:39):**  they plant their cash crop of kalut brand wheat. And by doing that, we know they're going to have  good quality to build their soil, so it turns into good quality. And so we are making sure that our  growers really are using regenerative practices. They're not certified that way, but they are under  
**[0:14:57-0:15:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:14:57):**  contract to at least for that one year that they're going for us to follow or to appreciate  it with a soil building practice. I really believe in the regenerative organic agriculture and try to  promote it every way I can. And this is a good way that we've been able to promote it and then help  
**[0:15:13-0:15:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:15:13):**  those that have made the jump and made the commitment to do it themselves. So if you are  contracting 20% of their acres and 100,000 acres total, that means you're impacting half a million  acres, which is a very significant impact. There's not many people here in North America at this  
**[0:15:29-0:15:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:15:29):**  stage, I don't believe that have impacted that number of acres and facilitating a transition.  That leads me to ask the question, how did you bring that about? And from conversations we've  had in the past, I believe the answer is pricing and economic incentives. So how have you priced  
**[0:15:45-0:16:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:15:45):**  the production of this grain? And then also how does that connect to the marketing?  Well, as I mentioned, John, I'm a long-term farmer and I know that farmers are preyed upon by  buyers most of the time and never can get enough to really advance profitably in their farms. They're  
**[0:16:06-0:16:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:16:06):**  always living on the edge. And so when we started this whole grain project, I wanted something that  people could make a profit from and be happy with and have some satisfaction financially from  growing it and putting the effort in. So we decided to just arbitrarily set the price of  
**[0:16:24-0:16:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:16:24):**  the grain that we were buying at three times the highest market for non-organic grain it was for  wheat at that time, which is about $3 about 30 years ago. And so we set the price at $9 a bushel  and the growers were very excited about that. Most of the organic grain was going for about twice  
**[0:16:46-0:17:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:16:46):**  the price of non-organic wheat in those days. So this is a significant jump even over the organic  prices. And as we went, we were able to increase that even more. And so now it's been as much as  five times. And that has come a little bit in the consequence of competing for acres. When we  
**[0:17:06-0:17:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:17:06):**  started to grow and require more acres and there are other demands on wheat, we found that we  sometimes ended up in a bidding war with farmers. And as long as our end users were able to make it  work for them, because it has to work for everybody. The other part of my business  
**[0:17:22-0:17:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:17:22):**  philosophy is that everybody wins. And if the customer can't sell it, if it's overpriced,  so he can't sell it, then he can't win either. So it won't go on. It won't be sustainable.  And we worked very closely with our buyers and manufacturers and helped them with understanding  
**[0:17:40-0:17:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:17:40):**  the higher value that this grain had. And a lot of people who couldn't eat modern wheat  found they could eat it. So they understood immediately the higher value it had. And  many of them that ate it could feel the difference in their bodies, just as you were mentioning  
**[0:17:54-0:18:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:17:54):**  with people not going to sleep. People could feel the higher energy. People could notice right away  that there wasn't any problem with digestion or cramps or something to say that many have with  sensitivities to modern wheat. So that was something that wasn't just smoke mirrors or fancy  
**[0:18:14-0:18:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:18:14):**  marketing. It was just explaining to people what we had discovered and then asking them to try it  themselves and see if they could feel the difference and taste the difference. It also is  very tasty, has a great flavor and aromas. And that was also a help to us. How did the economics  
**[0:18:31-0:18:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:18:31):**  end up working out for the growers? You mentioned that you're today at five times the price, if I  understood correctly, the commodity wheat price. You also mentioned a bit ago in our conversation  that the yields are smaller with these ancient grains and they don't have the same yield  
**[0:18:47-0:19:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:18:47):**  potential. So how do the economics end up working out for the farmer at the end of the day on a per  acre profitability potential? Generally the average in the Durham growing, it grows best  down where Durham goes best. And so where there's a good history of Durham being successful,  
**[0:19:06-0:19:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:19:06):**  like in Northeast Montana, South Central and Southeast Saskatchewan, the yields are not so  much different. Maybe five, ten percent and maybe some years it's just even and even a little bit  more sometimes. But it averages about 10 percent less. Further away you get from that it could be  
**[0:19:25-0:19:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:19:25):**  up to 20 percent and that would be 25 at the most. And that's compared to spring wheat now because  it's a spring grain. Our winter grains where they can grow winter wheat is using much higher  yield and so when the people are comparing those two it's not really apples to apples.  
**[0:19:44-0:19:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:19:44):**  It's spring wheat to winter wheat and so the yield in the same area is going to be quite a bit  different. But since it's a spring wheat and those different spring wheat areas we don't have that  comparison too often. So if it if they have a 20 percent less yield and you're getting four to  
**[0:19:59-0:20:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:19:59):**  five times more per bushel you're coming out very well and then with organic cost of organic  production for grains in the upper grade plains is normally one-third to one-half less depending  on how much of inputs you are growing with with your chemical agriculture. You're not buying those  
**[0:20:17-0:20:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:20:17):**  expensive inputs and you're growing your own inputs. We see a significant reduction in the  cost of your farm organic regenerative organic systems. So you're really gaining on both ends  of it higher price lower inputs and that more than covers the small decrease in yields. Our yields are  
**[0:20:37-0:20:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:20:37):**  also something that's variable with the weather. So if we're under a severe drought this grain  actually will out yield because it has some drought resistance it will out yield modern wheat  and chemical agriculture. If we're having just an average year then it will be pretty close. I mean  
**[0:20:55-0:21:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:20:55):**  then you're closer you're 10 percent. If we're having a very successful year with really good  range or extra range the yield potential of modern wheat and also with chemical agriculture  does exceed organic by 20, 30, 40 percent. But you're into really good yields and so it's not a  
**[0:21:13-0:21:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:21:13):**  detriment it's just maybe you could have you're coming closer to being a similar economic situation  with your chemical neighbors on those extremely plentiful years. But they don't come very often  and maybe one year and five is that way. And the average though you're much better off over the  
**[0:21:34-0:21:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:21:34):**  long haul under the average. When you were describing how the distribution of this grain  you mentioned that the majority 80 percent if I understood correctly is going to Europe in total  with Italy being a significant proportion of that. Why so much more significantly in the European  
**[0:21:53-0:22:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:21:53):**  marketplace than in North America? Well that's a really good question John. Why is it so much more  of interest in Europe than here? One thing that you find in Europe is more interest in organic  in the first place than in America. Even though we have a higher dollar value we sell in America  
**[0:22:12-0:22:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:22:12):**  it's because we have so many more people that are buying it. But our percent of organic food  that's sold in America is around six percent. Many countries in Europe are exceeding that some  double and some triple that almost. But in Italy which led the way for our big growth in the world  
**[0:22:30-0:22:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:22:30):**  actually because this grain is a very close relative to durem it makes a wonderful pasta.  And to them it is just like the old timers tell me it's like pasta that they used to have.  And remember even before World War II the smell of it in the factory as it's being manufactured  
**[0:22:48-0:23:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:22:48):**  is something that they once had and then lost and now they have it back again. So they're very big  interest in this and they're very very critical and picking about the quality of their food. And  if you have something that's an extremely high quality they're very very interested in it. And  
**[0:23:05-0:23:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:23:05):**  it carries true not just to pasta but to breads and cookies and cakes and seitan for meat substitutes  and all kinds of other things are making syrup with a grain syrup or making milk or drink like  rice milk and with that they can make ice cream and cheeses. And it's just their imagination just  
**[0:23:27-0:23:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:23:27):**  has no end. And we didn't go over there with an idea of promoting it or anything they just  they found it themselves. And when the naturopathic doctors discovered that it was  good for their patients they made that well known throughout the country and that  
**[0:23:42-0:24:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:23:42):**  served a little bit as a kindling to start the fire under the whole project for us.  Earlier we spoke about some of the nutritive value or nutrient potential that may have been  lost with our modern breeding as we bred for bins and bushels production and we didn't give  
**[0:24:00-0:24:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:24:00):**  much consideration to quality. What is the nutritional value for us as consumers of this  grain as compared to modern grain? Has anyone been looking at that? Well we've looked at specific  aspects and we did chemical analysis minerals and nutritional profile with proteins and fatty acids  
**[0:24:22-0:24:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:24:22):**  and all the things that go into those nutritional profiles and we didn't really see things we didn't  as a whole there wasn't anything that really stuck out as being very significant. One thing that we  saw was that selenium was quite high it was about three times or a third higher than modern wheat  
**[0:24:41-0:24:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:24:41):**  that was able to absorb and and put into grain even growing side by side and that was of interest  to us and because the selenium was high and we thought and we knew selenium was a strong  antioxidant we designed some experiments in Italy with rats looking at antioxidant capacity  
**[0:24:59-0:25:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:24:59):**  and that was very successful and showed a big difference in antioxidant capacity between modern  wheat and ancient wheat but it didn't show why other than we could assume well selenium would  have a part of that so what they found that we didn't expect we weren't even looking for  
**[0:25:15-0:25:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:25:15):**  was that the rats on the commute diet had no inflammation while the the rats on the modern  wheat were filled with inflammatory markers and in their organs you could see it and so then we  went directly to humans clinical trials looking at chronic disease because chronic disease is all  
**[0:25:37-0:25:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:25:37):**  linked to inflammatory problems and we studied heart disease diabetes irritable bowel syndrome  fibromyalgia and we saw all those tests show the same thing how much more anti-inflammatory  markers were present in in the blood and with some things like irritable bowel syndrome people could  
**[0:25:59-0:26:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:25:59):**  actually feel the difference with the heart disease and the diabetes they didn't really feel it but  you could see it in the blood it decreased cholesterol in all cases decreased blood sugars  decreased insulin insulin resistance dropped increased magnesium increased zinc in the blood  
**[0:26:14-0:26:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:26:14):**  but we don't really have or understood the mode of action for this we even saw it was having an  effect on the nuclear activity because the RNA that we're looking for the codes for certain  proteins and well all kinds of molecules in the body the sinicans that were produced from these  
**[0:26:34-0:26:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:26:34):**  codes from the nucleus was greatly increased for anti-inflammatory trisocyanins it's even having  an effect at the nuclear level john and we don't understand the mode of action but in a living  system you can actually see very distinctly there's a strong difference wow that is impressive  
**[0:26:54-0:27:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:26:54):**  so today we have so many autoimmune disorders as you say so our whole population in civilized and  developed countries and what we would term western countries or with western diets we  have this epidemic of degenerative diseases and degenerative illnesses in the human population  
**[0:27:12-0:27:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:27:12):**  which are all linked to inflammation so the idea that we could have wheat or grain that is actually  anti-inflammatory instead of pro-inflammatory i would say is quite significant it really is a  game changer and that was the most significant difference that we saw with the inflammatory  
**[0:27:29-0:27:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:27:29):**  properties and there were the difference like 35 to 45 percent where the rest of the differences  like cholesterol dropping of cholesterol and blood sugar and all that kind of stuff was in  the range of eight to twelve percent so this was something that was so significant that the  
**[0:27:44-0:28:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:27:44):**  researchers were just astounded i mean you can't even take pills and drugs to create this kind of  a change and yet by our diet we can make significant changes in our health and hypocrisy  is taught 2300 years ago that food should be our medicine and medicine should be our food and  
**[0:28:01-0:28:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:28:01):**  and this is an example of exactly what he's talking about i know that the europeans tend to  have much higher standards for purity of pesticides and chemicals than we do in our foods here in the  united states and in fact one pesticide that's of course receiving a lot of popular scrutiny in the  
**[0:28:20-0:28:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:28:20):**  press right now as it should i believe is glyphosate and it's interesting when you look at the  history of the permissible levels of glyphosate in grains here in the u.s and in feeds for livestock  they've increased those levels i think at least three if not four times over the course of the  
**[0:28:39-0:28:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:28:39):**  last couple of decades in order to still keep the majority of the grain crop below the maximum  permissible level so we're in some crops now we're we're i think in garbanzo beans we're up to over  1400 parts per million if i i have that second hand i haven't read that myself but how has  
**[0:28:59-0:29:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:28:59):**  glyphosate and other herbicides and other pesticides what have been your barriers to  entry into the european marketplace well that's a really good question the european marketplace is  not much different than the rules we have for america but within europe we have some countries  
**[0:29:18-0:29:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:29:18):**  like italy which of course our most important market as i mentioned to you it has a limit of  10 parts per billion with a small b or big b however you want to look at that per billion  limit for any pesticide for glyphosate until a few years ago you couldn't even test for that if that's  
**[0:29:35-0:29:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:29:35):**  such a low concentration the tests now have been improved the machinery the testing equipment so  that you can now test for it regularly and we were astounded we were shocked to find that almost  one third of our farmers were sending grain they tested higher than 10 it was around between 10  
**[0:29:54-0:30:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:29:54):**  and 25 some up to the highest 35 parts per billion now the contrast that was allowed in america and  the reason one of the big reasons that monstanto particularly then at that time owned the glyphosate  of course and roundup wanted to increase it because they knew that they were wanting to start  
**[0:30:10-0:30:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:30:10):**  promoting roundup as a desiccant so it would be sprayed on the crop to dry it down  immediately preceding the harvest this isn't done with wheat too much but it's done with legumes  peas lentils the brussels beans all the time in our area and for the north it's done with wheat to  
**[0:30:27-0:30:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:30:27):**  hurry the harvest before the snow flies and so we see more and more of it we have so much  glyphosate now all being used that we're starting to find it in the rain and through our research  after we found it in our green we tried to figure out where it came from because we knew our farmers  
**[0:30:43-0:30:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:30:43):**  wouldn't weren't spraying because if you spray these levels are about a thousand times more than  what we were seeing 500 to a thousand anyway and so we knew that wasn't the case but we were very  surprised and astounded to find small quantities measurable quantities in the rain during the  
**[0:30:58-0:31:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:30:58):**  growing season and now we are working with um trying to figure out what to do about that  and so what's happened when the grain got to italy they started testing and and then they started  finding traces and then when those traces went over 10 then they they did they did a recall or  
**[0:31:15-0:31:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:31:15):**  two on us and first we didn't believe them because we didn't think we had never seen it but we when  we check with our our labs that we're testing every single field from every farm in our whole  program causes we're spending a half a million dollars a year on testing john it's just incredible  
**[0:31:32-0:31:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:31:32):**  but we want to make sure that we could guarantee our product was organic and also very as low as  possible in in residual pesticides and it never been sprayed that's what that's what organic means  it's never been sprayed it's not used in the system anyway but it doesn't mean it's chemical  
**[0:31:48-0:32:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:31:48):**  free but we assumed that it was but we were only measuring 50 parts per billion at the time we  never saw it at that level but when they started being forced to test at 10 because of italy then  we did start to see it so that became a problem in america the legal limits on grain is 1 500 parts  
**[0:32:06-0:32:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:32:06):**  per billion so 1.5 parts per million is still okay for wheat to be labeled organic because it's five  percent of the epa tolerance for wheat which is 30 parts per million and that's where we that's  where we got stuck we lost over half our business and over the course of three or four years over  
**[0:32:25-0:32:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:32:25):**  figuring this out and now we test everything and we've had to go drops about a third of our farmers  as i was telling you in the hot zones and we're able to deliver grain that's underneath under the  10 parts per billion so we're starting to build it back up but this is very problematic and and just  
**[0:32:43-0:33:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:32:43):**  because we're finding it in low levels like this or if it's below that there's no reason to just  say well that's okay it's not okay that we're being contaminated and the sooner we can have  everybody organic and end this contamination the better off we're all going to be  
**[0:33:00-0:33:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:33:00):**  how much of that of these very low levels of the 10 parts per billion to 30 parts per billion  you mentioned that you're finding it now in the rain and you've been looking for it there  how much of it do you think comes from historical application from before the land was organically  
**[0:33:15-0:33:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:33:15):**  certified well our land has been certified for over 30 years and we never sprayed it  rounds up on any of our land it was because it came out after that time it started to come into  common use as a chemical control for weeds in the in the fallow year instead of cultivation so they  
**[0:33:35-0:33:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:33:35):**  they use chem fallow so no till in montana means chem fallow means it's using glyphosate  so that's what the general feeling or the general meaning of no till in montana is that they're not  tilling but they're using glyphosate but our we changed into organic before that actually  
**[0:33:54-0:34:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:33:54):**  was common so our soil has never been sprayed with glyphosate and yet it contains glyphosate  at extremely low levels wow so far in our conversation i failed to mention that bob  wrote a book titled grain by grain which i highly recommend in fact when i first read it i try i  
**[0:34:14-0:34:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:34:14):**  read the many books and i try to only pick the very best to share with people and to put on my  recommended reading list and i read bob's book one day and i put it on my recommended reading list  the next if that tells you anything so i highly recommend that all of you find that and find a  
**[0:34:33-0:34:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:34:33):**  copy of that and read it because it's very valuable reading bob in the book you talked about  your experimentation your efforts in growing dry land vegetables now i find this really intriguing  because of course mainstream fruit and vegetable production which we work a lot with on the west  
**[0:34:55-0:35:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:34:55):**  coast and around the country we tend to approach this from the perspective that these plants need  to have ideal moisture conditions constantly they need to be irrigated so i'd love to learn about  what you're doing how are things developing for you with dry land non-irrigated vegetable production  
**[0:35:11-0:35:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:35:11):**  what inspired that in the first place well we have in the west uh in the arid west in the northern  great plains areas of alkali that breaks out and covers the ground with alkali salts and makes  white patches and they're called saline seeps and they occur when water is absorbed at a high  
**[0:35:33-0:35:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:35:33):**  like a hilltop or an upper a higher level higher of the field and then seeps down into the field  and hits an impervious layer of clay or a really hard sandstone or something it forces it back up  and then it comes back up to the top of the ground with all these dissolved salts it's common to  
**[0:35:52-0:36:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:35:52):**  semi-arid fields and as it evaporates it leaves these salts on top of the ground and it ruins the  soil so what you can do to solve that problem is plant alfalfa around the outside edges between  the what's called the recharge area where the water enters the soil and the breakout area where  
**[0:36:10-0:36:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:36:10):**  it comes out during all these salts and if you take the water out of the ground at that point  uh use it in something that's used a lot of water like alfalfa you can um you can cause those  those deep areas to disappear because rain will as it falls will dissolve those salts and take  
**[0:36:30-0:36:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:36:30):**  them back into the ground and if no more is coming out you will eventually heal your soil  and so that's one of the things that we we knew about it that 30 years ago was that was just being  worked out and i thought wow rather than just grow alfalfa wouldn't it be interesting if we could grow  
**[0:36:46-0:37:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:36:46):**  vegetables with this extra water that i'm assuming would be there so i put a grid across  a saline seat from way outside of it to through the middle of it and i knew that somewhere along  that grid that line my vegetables and i and i tried several different types of tomatoes and  
**[0:37:05-0:37:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:37:05):**  tomatoes and all corn and just a myriad of different well three or four squash three or  four or five or six main vegetables and i knew that in some areas of that grid it'd be too salty  and they would certainly die in some areas it'd be too dry because they're too close to the center  
**[0:37:24-0:37:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:37:24):**  some areas they'd be too dry because they're too far away from the from the um where the water was  present underneath the ground but some places i thought they'd be just right i conducted that  experiment but like all good experiments you should have a control of course and so my control  
**[0:37:40-0:37:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:37:40):**  was just to go out in the middle of my field another field and just plant the same kind of  vegetables and all the same time of year and same condition everything as the control and what was  astounding to me i i did see a curve of production of the vegetables as i got into the salty area it  
**[0:37:59-0:38:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:37:59):**  went down and as i got out of the recharge area closer recharge area and was dry on top it went  down but the thing there and in the middle it was a little better but the thing that was most  astounding to me that was my control was as good or better than most of all of the plants around  
**[0:38:16-0:38:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:38:16):**  the recharge area and i didn't think i could grow well i didn't think it would grow that well out  in a regular field with no irrigation and that's how i got started and that was about 15 years ago  and since then i've i've focused on potatoes i started with 40 different varieties to see what  
**[0:38:34-0:38:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:38:34):**  would grow best on dry land i'm down to five that really work well i started with  about 25 different squash varieties i'm down to three that really work well i started with onions  i'm down to four or five onions that really work well i'm growing corn i'm growing tomatoes and  
**[0:38:52-0:39:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:38:52):**  then i stumbled onto watermelon and summer squash which i figured well i thought they would require  so much water you know water 30-pound watermelon is mostly water and i thought where would they  never get that but i was astounded to find out when i was visiting the farm and i was like  
**[0:39:08-0:39:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:39:08):**  was visiting israel and doing some experiments over there that one of my friends said said well  we've got watermelon that grows in the desert and i said well i have a desert nearly um so  uh i brought some seeds back and got some seeds for those kind of watermelons and they were very  
**[0:39:25-0:39:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:39:25):**  successful and i just started growing watermelon which i love and in a good year of needs heat of  course so that if we have normal heat normal growing season i can get a 30-pound watermelon  with not one drop of water being added and what i found to make this successful is i of course  
**[0:39:44-0:40:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:39:44):**  i can't have any weeds but i give each plant about three times more space than they would have  normally in the in the for the plant population for irrigated or or like where you live john  where you don't even have to water your lawns in ohio i've always been jealous about that but when  
**[0:40:03-0:40:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:40:03):**  i compare the rain fall that we get there's about 13 inches i know that your rainfall is about three  times that so it really is a pretty close relationship with the amount of rain and the  number of plants that that will support and that's what i've been able to do so our yield per plant  
**[0:40:21-0:40:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:40:21):**  is just about the same or even more than the average irrigated crops here particularly  potatoes we can compare pretty easily but we only have one third the total amount per acre but that's  okay because our the cost of producing that acre is much reduced with no cost for water the land  
**[0:40:40-0:40:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:40:40):**  costs are much less and the input costs are much less and all we have to do is make sure that we  keep the weeds out and and have a good plant spacing what are your aspirations for vegetable  production in montana that sounds like oxymoron when i say it out loud but yeah i'm curious where  
**[0:40:56-0:41:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:40:56):**  is it going well what i would like this to do with this is show people that we can grow something  besides wheat and barley in the northern great plains and that we should be able to provide our  own vegetables for our own communities here in in our region it doesn't make sense to bring in  
**[0:41:15-0:41:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:41:15):**  vegetables all of our vegetables from california or you know it's even more ludicrous i think that  we bring watermelons in from peru and in january or wherever they're coming from i don't know  but we bring stuff in from south america from there from our for our winter and their summer  
**[0:41:32-0:41:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:41:32):**  i think that is the wrong direction to go i think we should really try to rely on our own region to  produce the majority of what we have and i'm not saying 100 i mean there's it's fun to have a  pineapple once in a while we'll never grow pineapples in montana but why not have a pineapple  
**[0:41:49-0:42:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:41:49):**  for a treat but to think that we we have everything to eat is growing a thousand miles away to me it  makes no sense at all so i'm trying to on my farm now grow everything i eat and eat everything i  grow i'm up to in the summer i'm easily up to 85 or better percent of what i eat is what i grow  
**[0:42:07-0:42:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:42:07):**  on our farm and in the winter i'm eating a lot of stored vegetables pickled vegetables and the flower  crowd stuff like that pickled beets it's still over 75 percent of what i eat is from what i grow  and i'm just trying to do that arbitrarily to show people that we can actually  
**[0:42:24-0:42:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:42:24):**  eat recently and support a whole another layer of farmers and mall industries just in our east region  bob i do want to dig a bit more deeply into your capacity to grow all of your own food and what  that can really mean but before we go there i don't want to lose sight of a comment that you  
**[0:42:44-0:43:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:42:44):**  made something that i want to add to the conversation regarding um saline seeps and  water movement in the landscape there's a fascinating book written by an australian  farmer named peter andrews that is titled back from the brink how australia's landscape  
**[0:43:01-0:43:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:43:01):**  can be saved peter has developed really deep insights into how water moves through the soil  profile and through the soil horizon and how you can manage water differently in the landscape  to remove all the saline seeps so i know this is becoming a much more common problem for all of our  
**[0:43:19-0:43:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:43:19):**  listeners i wanted to at least point in the direction of that book because i think it  deserves to be much more widely known so i want to come back to your vegetable production and  growing your own food i'm really excited and inspired by this because like you i believe we  
**[0:43:34-0:43:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:43:34):**  need to develop a more regionalized and decentralized agriculture i don't think it's  healthy for our nation to be growing 45 percent of our total domestic fruit dimensional production  in three counties in california which is what is happening right now in your book you talked about  
**[0:43:54-0:44:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:43:54):**  developing a taste of place and not just buying orange juice from florida but also developing your  own juices so when you say that you're producing 75 to 85 percent of your total diet on your farm  during the summer months how much of that are common foods that everyone would recognize  
**[0:44:15-0:44:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:44:15):**  and how much of that are some of the unique things that you're developing that are uniquely your own  most of what i eat everybody would recognize um i eat a lot of potatoes and and beets and cabbage  and oh gosh whatever's in the garden in the summer the salads with spices and onions and all that  
**[0:44:33-0:44:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:44:33):**  kind of stuff in the winter i'm doing more well in the summer in the world doing more stored  vegetables like winter squash onions potatoes and the other things the other thing that we're  doing is we have small experimental orchards so i'm growing some berries we're also apples  
**[0:44:53-0:45:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:44:53):**  we're in zone three that's hardy to 40 below zero and there are about 200 apple varieties in the  country that are hardy to zone three and i've tried about 60 of them so far and i found a few  that are just outstanding and the other thing that we can grow here is our pie cherries sour cherries  
**[0:45:11-0:45:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:45:11):**  and we can't grow sweet cherries because they're they won't stand zone three but sour cherries  will and there's been a lot of great work done in the university of scotch one developing new  bush varieties that are much easier to work with than trees and so we're having good luck with that  
**[0:45:27-0:45:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:45:27):**  and i'm pressing both the cherries and the apples that make juice and combining about 20  percent sour cherry juice with 80 percent very sweet apple juice and and then we're  trying to put together things that are more common in uncommon ways but in ways that could be done  
**[0:45:44-0:45:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:45:44):**  locally or regionally and develop into something that's really could be known for that region and  be a specialty of that region in essence what you're describing is a very good example of  how we're trying to make sure that we're not getting too much juice and we're trying to make  
**[0:45:59-0:46:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:45:59):**  sure that we're not getting too much juice and we're trying to make sure that we're not getting  could be known for that region and be a specialty of that region in essence what you're describing  obviously you need to find varieties that are adapted to your fairly northern climate but from  
**[0:46:15-0:46:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:46:15):**  a water perspective if you have a third of the water third of the rainfall and you're spacing  plants out three times farther do you believe that you can achieve the same yields per gallon of  water per inch of rainfall that's what we've seen it's at least it's per plant it's the same yield  
**[0:46:33-0:46:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:46:33):**  per plant so we have one third plants and one third of the rainfall so big broad brush strokes  you could say is pretty close to a direct proportion so where you're having three times  more rain and we having to produce three times more in the field than we can it's a pretty close  
**[0:46:52-0:47:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:46:52):**  proportion how important is seed quality to achieving that type of performance i know one  of the things that i've observed is that many older varieties what people refer to as heirloom  varieties of vegetables have much more robust root systems and they're much better capable of  
**[0:47:10-0:47:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:47:10):**  absorbing nutrients they're just simply hardier as you described with your kamut grain whenever it is  found it's best if you have a drought year it tends to perform better and the same holds true  of all the older varieties so what have you experienced and observed with your vegetable  
**[0:47:29-0:47:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:47:29):**  varieties and and also with the kamut in terms of the importance of seed quality well i think seed  quality is where it starts you know you mentioned in the beginning and i know a lot of your work and  a lot of the regenerative effort is focusing on connecting with healthy foods with healthy plants  
**[0:47:48-0:48:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:47:48):**  and then clear into healthy people and i believe in that 100 but i'd like to add one additional  idea to that and that's starting with what i would call super seeds wouldn't really be correct to  call them healthy seeds because it's a little bit the wrong connotation because you can have a  
**[0:48:04-0:48:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:48:04):**  healthy modern seed too probably that's resistant to disease and it has good germination and all  that kind of stuff it's healthy but a super seed what you're referring to in the heirloom varieties  that can perform better under stress many times they have more aromas and more flavors and what  
**[0:48:24-0:48:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:48:24):**  they produce and from our research we've come to understand very clearly that aromas and flavors  are due to secondary metabolites in plants that plants make such as polyphenols and polyphenols  are very very directly related to anti-inflammatory properties and antioxidant properties that are  
**[0:48:44-0:49:04](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:48:44):**  very very important for good health so just by the fact of a plant tasting better and smelling  more delicious probably are getting a higher nutrition out of that plant and that is a genetic  by and large a genetic thing so if you add genetics to the way you're farming and the  
**[0:49:04-0:49:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:49:04):**  health of the soil you're adding a super seed to healthy soil you're ending up with super healthy  food and i think that might sound a little corny but i think that's the picture that i'm trying to  paint and help people to understand how all those factors are very very important and the more you  
**[0:49:23-0:49:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:49:23):**  focus on all of them the more you're going to produce something that's going to keep us strong  healthy and these days of well the current pandemic the people that are most resistant  to those are those that are in best health the people who are in poor health are the ones that  
**[0:49:37-0:49:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:49:37):**  are at greatest risk and so to have a good competition and a high performing immune system  is our best defense to diseases and i think that that is coming by and large with some good food  of course how we take care of our body we can't go out and abuse it or you know not exercise or  
**[0:49:57-0:50:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:49:57):**  give enough sleep or you know use it with alcohol too much or that kind of stuff and and expect it  to work right but food is the engine the fuel for the engine that we put into our bodies every day  three times a day and if that's not premium fuel compared to gas we're shorting ourselves we're  
**[0:50:18-0:50:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:50:18):**  putting ourselves under stress and that's why i think it's so important and seeds are where it  starts it's not where it ends but that's where it starts in your book you talk a little bit about  rather than framing the conversation as value-added farming you talk about value subtracted farming  
**[0:50:35-0:50:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:50:35):**  what exactly are you referring to well you know you hear this a lot the value-added idea that well  we're going to add value to something and therefore improve it but if you think about  adding value to something like grain the only reason we have to add value to it and and what  
**[0:50:53-0:51:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:50:53):**  we've done a perfect example of that is what we've done to white flour so white flour is fortified  we add value to white flour by adding back minerals and vitamins that were there in the first  place but you wouldn't have to add them back if they hadn't been taken out in the first place  
**[0:51:11-0:51:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:51:11):**  and removed by the refining process in this case of making white flour out of whole grain this is  a very big step backwards and you cannot add value back and still end up to the same place as you  started with before you started subtracting value by taking things away from the food the same idea  
**[0:51:31-0:51:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:51:31):**  could it be a by the soils if you never ever do anything to build up your soil but just take away  from it all the time you are going to decrease and decrease and decrease its value you're depleting  its value and just by adding artificial chemicals nitrogen or phosphorus or potassium and zinc and  
**[0:51:52-0:52:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:51:52):**  some of these other things it's not the same if you're focusing on feeding the plant rather than  feeding the soil and that's what we do with regenerative organic agriculture is try to feed  the soil and let the soil feed the plant and we don't focus so much on feeding the plant because  
**[0:52:07-0:52:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:52:07):**  in actuality and you're an expert at this john you know that the plant nutrition is coming from a  living soil and the microbes and all the activity in the soil is actually what's feeding the plant  properly and when you put artificial minerals that you think the plant needs and of course it does  
**[0:52:25-0:52:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:52:25):**  need some of those does nitrogen it does need calcium phosphorus and some of these other  macronutrients for sure if that's your only focus and think you can just overload the soil profile  so the plant has enough of its essential minerals it's really going through it backwards and as a  
**[0:52:41-0:52:56](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:52:41):**  result you're doing it because you have decreased the value of the soil in the first place you've  degraded the soil and this is a crutch you're trying to use to get back to it but it's a long  way to go back the way to go back is to try to add value keep the value that was there in the first  
**[0:52:56-0:53:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:52:56):**  place and if you've lost it then try to get back to the type of state that you had originally what  you're describing essentially is that mainstream agriculture the way that it has been practiced  for the last seven or eight decades has been subtracting value from our soil and subtracting  
**[0:53:15-0:53:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:53:15):**  value from the food stuff that we are producing because of constantly lower nutritional value  because of things we're taking out of it yes i was also really intrigued by the story that you shared  of how you set out to produce oil for biodiesel to produce your own energy and ended up producing a  
**[0:53:37-0:54:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:53:37):**  food product that then became fuel as well can you tell us a little bit about that story and  how that came to be well that's an example of not value subtracting right so i had an idea when the  first fuel crisis was was uh hitting us soon after we moved back to the farm in the very late  
**[0:54:00-0:54:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:54:00):**  70s and early 80s and there was a lot of talk of growing our own fuel and that most of it was  dealing with ethanol and ethanol production but we didn't really we weren't really suited that we  couldn't we can't grow corn here it didn't make as much sense to do that with other grains but  
**[0:54:18-0:54:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:54:18):**  the thing that intrigued me was oil seeds there was a big um possibility that we could use oil  seeds than to make biodiesel and run our diesel engines with it and that was my goal i started  out with um camelina because it was a grain that is very very productive here it can be planted  
**[0:54:39-0:54:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:54:39):**  very early it's uh in the mustard family similar to canola but canola cannot be planted so early  because um it's more susceptible to frost but by the time it starts to flower we're in the heat of  the summer here and really decreases the yields if it gives too much heat on it with camelina it  
**[0:54:59-0:55:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:54:59):**  matures much earlier and it flowers before the heat of the summer arrives in the end of may  and so that looks real promising and so i decided to get a press a oil press which i got and and  pressed some camelina oil i got a mechanism or the equipment to make biodiesel that was very  
**[0:55:21-0:55:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:55:21):**  quickly apparent to me that biodiesel came with a lot of drawbacks of dealing with wastewater  dealing with byproducts like glycerin and also the tests that were required to make sure that your  chemical reactions had gone to completion and their fuel quality was good enough for  
**[0:55:39-0:55:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:55:39):**  diesel engine so i was a little discouraged with that and my trips to europe which i make  marketing four or five times a year i led me to a meeting with um fellows in germany that were using  straight vegetable oil in their diesel engines they had to modify them a little bit to start the  
**[0:55:57-0:56:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:55:57):**  engine on diesel but i was after this warmed up that heat was used to warm up the vegetable oil  which then when it went in hot to the engine it could burn just as good as diesel so that's what  i decided to do i found out that camelina wouldn't work because it was made of polyunsaturated fat  
**[0:56:15-0:56:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:56:15):**  means it had several double bonds in the fatty acids in the lipid structure of that oil and i  had to have a monounsaturated fatty acid a monounsaturated example of a monounsaturated fat  is oleic acid so we were started then to grow high oleic safflower and that's our growth rate  
**[0:56:33-0:56:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:56:33):**  well here because it loves heat it's like a thistle it's a long season but it really does  well in high heat and low water so that's what we started to grow one of my hired hired men that i  had working for me at that time decided he'd take some of the oil into the local restaurant  
**[0:56:50-0:57:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:56:50):**  and they said this is the most fantastic oil we've ever seen or tasted and make better fried  chicken and better french fries than anything we can buy we'll give you two dollars a pound for it  so now all of a sudden i had an oil that was worth two dollars a pound and there's about eight pounds  
**[0:57:06-0:57:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:57:06):**  of a gallon and so i could either buy diesel for three or four dollars a gallon or i could use my  oil for it was worth 16 and so it didn't take me very long to figure out the economics of that  and i started selling it to restaurants for cooking oil and we picked up a pretty large  
**[0:57:25-0:57:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:57:25):**  accounts at montana state university and the university of montana and the university of  montana particularly was very interested in letting us have the oil back because i thought  well if i could get the oil back the used oil just clean it up take the water out of it filter it  
**[0:57:39-0:57:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:57:39):**  centrifuge it just clean it i could use the used oil in my diesel and tractor that's what i started  to do so we were able to eliminate the whole discussion of food versus fuel argument about  how we should farm and what we should use our land for by using our land first to grow food and then  
**[0:57:58-0:58:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:57:58):**  use that food once it was spent in the case of used vegetable oil for fuel and so again it was  a case where everybody wins and particularly the environment and and i found on being a farmer if  you can sell something you raise twice uh john it really increases the profitability so that's a lot  
**[0:58:18-0:58:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:58:18):**  more fun yeah that's a really uh really great story and i thank you for sharing that when you  think about all these various ventures bob you you have been able to make a significant impact  on agriculture you're running lots of experiments and trying different things what do you see as the  
**[0:58:36-0:58:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:58:36):**  opportunity for farmers today where should the farmers and our listeners who are listening to  this so where should they be thinking about opportunities that are on tap that they can  be thinking about well i think they need to um look further than their chemical representatives  
**[0:58:53-0:59:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:58:53):**  and that's where most of my neighbors are giving their information and a lot of the research that's  coming out of the university that supports that you know the usca budget for agriculture research  is 99 focused on chemical inputs and farming with chemicals biotech and all this artificial things  
**[0:59:11-0:59:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:59:11):**  and if we had more research money donated or earmarked for regenerative organic systems we  could have a lot of new ideas of how to farm better and more profitably we just need to put  the pressure on to encourage that but in the meantime i would encourage farmers to  
**[0:59:31-0:59:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:59:31):**  look up organizations that are tied to regenerative organic and and go affiliate there and go to their  meetings and meet some of the people that are farming this way and get some ideas about what's  going on and the demand for organic food in this country is far exceeding the supply we have one  
**[0:59:48-1:00:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=0:59:48):**  percent of our farmland now is organic or a little bit more than that but over six percent of food is  organic so we're way behind as farmers we need to really catch up and see how we might fit into that  and it's now there's opportunities really in every region to do so we just need to to well go the  
**[1:00:06-1:00:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=1:00:06):**  internet you can find everything there now and and see where the nearest demand for organic whatever  you're growing is organic vegetables or or grains or whatever you grow where's the nearest demand  for that and i guarantee you'll find some because a lot of the deficiency that we are not making  
**[1:00:24-1:00:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=1:00:24):**  up in this country we're growing our own organic food right now is being made up with imports  and so we're supporting farmers across the near side of the world and shipping across the oceans  again food that we could be growing ourselves and an extra money that goes to those premiums could  
**[1:00:39-1:00:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=1:00:39):**  be supporting farmers in each locality bob with all of your experiences you've developed a very  different perspective on agriculture than the mainstream which is very refreshing what is  something that you believe to be true about agriculture that is different from the mainstream  
**[1:00:55-1:01:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=1:00:55):**  view i believe that regenerative organic agriculture is the future and it's the only  future that makes sense because everything else is based on artificial crutches that are starting to  produce more problems than they're solving and that's certainly different than what mainstream  
**[1:01:15-1:01:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=1:01:15):**  agriculture is told and therefore what they believe and i think the sooner we understand that  the quicker we can start to make the changes that will benefit us all what is the topic that you  would like to speak about more often but you are hesitant to because you sense that many farmers  
**[1:01:34-1:01:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=1:01:34):**  may not be open to it or may not be ready to hear about it well let's see i think i'd like to speak  more directly to converting to regenerative organic systems on each and every farm and the  opportunities that exist there one thing john that you can't force change on people you have to  
**[1:01:54-1:02:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=1:01:54):**  demonstrate and be able to show that it's going to be better and and there's a reason to change  and so i don't come out too strong without backup what i would like to do with my farm is donate 600  acres out of the middle of it to create an organic research center so that people can actually come  
**[1:02:14-1:02:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=1:02:14):**  and see for themselves and field size plots that various rotations that have possibilities how to  grow different cocktails and and and use different cover crops for soil building using animal  components and and comparing it with um a neighbor of mine who's willing to rent me several acres  
**[1:02:34-1:02:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=1:02:34):**  right next to it for organic compared to chemical agriculture and looking at different scenarios for  conversion those are the kinds of things i would like to do and just by going out and say well  organic is better and we should all be doing it that doesn't really go very far because people  
**[1:02:50-1:03:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=1:02:50):**  don't understand how it could work on their own farm and if we could show more farmers how it  could really work on their own farm because it works fairly close to home for them multiply those  demonstrations and those and feature those successes all over the country in every region  
**[1:03:08-1:03:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=1:03:08):**  i think would be a great help this actually reminds me of a question that i wanted to ask  that is i think an important question but i missed it when we were speaking about  dry land the vegetable production how do you control weeds in your vegetable production  
**[1:03:24-1:03:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=1:03:24):**  that's still undergoing experimentation john the weed control is a very um a big part of it i've  had some great success with flaming of my potatoes for example my planting potatoes fairly early in  the spring and the weeds will come up with the potatoes because it takes them so long to emerge  
**[1:03:45-1:04:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=1:03:45):**  and if i flame them right at the emergence of the potatoes it gives me another way to control them  waiting for the time when i will then heal the potatoes and i can cover up young weeds with the  healing process that would come later but without the flaming the weeds are too big to be destroyed  
**[1:04:03-1:04:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=1:04:03):**  with healing i found that this year for the first time was quite successful so i'm interested in  trying that with some of my other vegetables i know that people use that in different parts of  the country we just i haven't seen it here or you know had experience with it or experimenting with  
**[1:04:18-1:04:38](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=1:04:18):**  different mulching types of mulch for amounts of mulch in the future i think that that's another  thing that could also conserve moisture and also manage weeds and we've had terrible grasshopper  clays this year and also a hail storm that went through and one of my co-workers asked me said  
**[1:04:38-1:04:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=1:04:38):**  well what other kind of plagues are there we can expect in montana i said well drought is watched  and that can be very serious but with heavy mulch maybe that would be a give us protection besides  controlling weeds right now i'm doing mostly cultivation which leaves the ground completely  
**[1:04:54-1:05:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=1:04:54):**  bare which i don't really like either but i've seen that if i have competition when i'm assuming  even if we have ground cover that there's not enough water to support both the ground cover  and the cash crop at the same time so i'm still experimenting with that kind of thing  
**[1:05:12-1:05:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=1:05:12):**  john but until then i'm just still relying on steel to um got my weeds down  wonderful well bob i want to extend a tremendous thank you for agreeing to be here and to share  your wisdom and knowledge and to all of our listeners the book again is grain by grain  
**[1:05:33-1:05:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=1:05:33):**  by grain by bob quinn and um liz carmel so highly recommend it bob thank you for being here for  sharing your thoughts and look forward to more conversations in the future thank you for having  me it was a great fun sean thank you thanks for all you do the team at aea and i are dedicated to  
**[1:05:54-1:06:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=1:05:54):**  bringing this show to you because we believe that knowledge and information is the foundation of  successful regenerative systems at aea we believe that growing better quality food and making more  money from your crops is possible and since 2006 we've worked with leading professional growers  
**[1:06:11-1:06:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=1:06:11):**  to help them do just that at aea we don't guess we test we analyze and we provide recommendations  based on scientific data knowledge and experience we've developed products that are uniquely  positioned to help growers make more money with regenerative agriculture if you are a professional  
**[1:06:29-1:06:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/Bob_Quinn_Final_Audio_RAP_S3_Ep_17.mp3#t=1:06:29):**  grower who believes in testing instead of guessing someone who believes in a better more regenerative  way to grow visit advancingecoag.com and contact us to see if aea is right for you  thank you for listening and we look forward to working with you  