### Regenerative Agriculture Podcast  (2020-37-11)
**[0:00:00-0:00:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:00:00):**  Hi friends, this is Jon and this is the Regenerative Agriculture Podcast.  Welcome back to the Regenerative Agriculture Podcast.  In this episode, I am delighted to host Olivier Husson, who has been one of my heroes for  many years, someone who I have admired at a distance.  When I first began studying agronomy and plant nutrition, I became really intrigued by the  
**[0:00:22-0:00:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:00:22):**  implications of looking at plant electricity, plants functioning as antennas, and looking  at agriculture and plant function from the perspective of biophysics rather than from  the perspective of biochemistry.  Within this context, I was really interested in learning more about redox and soil, EH  and pH.  
**[0:00:44-0:00:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:00:44):**  In the literature review, I was not able to find very good information except for one  source.  Olivier Husson wrote papers that were a voice of clarity in a wilderness of chaos.  So Olivier has written a number of papers on the importance of redox and EH as drivers  of the soil microbial ecosystem and soil and plant interactions.  
**[0:01:12-0:01:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:01:12):**  And I'm delighted to have him here today.  So Olivier, welcome to the podcast.  You have a very interesting background.  Can you tell us a bit about what has brought you to this research and how you came to be  working in this space?  
**[0:01:26-0:01:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:01:26):**  First, yes, let me say that I'm very proud to be asked and very glad to participate.  I'm a big fan of your work, James.  So it's a really, really pleasure.  I'm an agronomist, French agronomist.  I've been working in the tropics for more than 25 years.  
**[0:01:48-0:01:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:01:48):**  And one of the main crop I've been working with was rice.  And rice can be grown in very different conditions.  It can be grown, as most people know, with water in the field, in the paddy field.  But it can also be grown as wheat and plant aerobic crop as any other crop.  And I've been working on developing cropping system based on conservation agriculture,  
**[0:02:18-0:02:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:02:18):**  regenerative agriculture.  And I've been working my early time for my PhD, especially in paddy fields where redox  chemistry is really fundamental and is very well known.  So I asked myself why redox chemistry is so important in paddy field in anaerobic condition.  And it would not be important in a plant aerobic field.  
**[0:02:48-0:02:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:02:48):**  And I started about 10 years ago to work on this aspect.  And it's been quite interesting work.  And then we can apply this to more aerobic crops, the most crops we have usually in our  systems.  Olivier, there is a common perception that pH is one of the most important factors for  
**[0:03:14-0:03:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:03:14):**  managing soil nutrient availability.  And yet I've observed many environments and many fields where the pH was not where we  might have had expected it to be, but we had very good or very bad nutrient availability.  That was really what led me to look at redox.  What is the impact of redox on nutrient availability from the soil?  
**[0:03:36-0:03:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:03:36):**  I would say it's probably as important as pH.  pH, of course, is a key factor for nutrient solubility, but it's not the only one.  And if we look only at pH, we miss about half of the picture.  In fact, we really need to assess both pH and redox potential at the same time.  So redox potential is a measurement of the availability of the electrons as pH is a measurement  
**[0:04:06-0:04:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:04:06):**  of the availability of protons.  So if we draw a graph with pH and EH, we have a much better understanding of all the nutrient  solubility and all the plant nutrition we can get.  I've actually, or people have asked me that question, I've said that understanding redox  and managing redox is perhaps even more important than managing soil pH.  
**[0:04:36-0:04:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:04:36):**  And one of the questions that comes up frequently, what is the impact of redox on nitrogen availability  specifically?  You have both an impact of EH, redox potential and pH.  In fact, the main component related nitrogen availability would be the oxygen and the hydrogen.  So it's crossing at 45 degrees between pH and redox.  
**[0:05:08-0:05:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:05:08):**  It's really the gain of oxygen or the loss of hydrogen that will have the most impact.  So it can be read both on pH and EH axis.  So when you have low EH and low pH, you will have the main form would be ammonium.  And when you have high EH and high pH, you will get mainly nitrates for the mineral forms  of nitrogen.  
**[0:05:42-0:05:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:05:42):**  There's a growing interest in developing microbial populations that can really suppress different  pathogens in the soil profile.  What is the impact of redox and pH on the soil microbial community?  So this is probably the most interesting thing.  The microbial activity is very much impacted by EH and pH both.  
**[0:06:06-0:06:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:06:06):**  And in the other way, the microbial activity will have a huge impact on EH and pH.  This control or alter the EH, pH of the environment to make it more profitable, more favorable  for their growth for thriving.  So each species of microorganism will have a specific EH and pH zone where it will thrive.  So some of them are very rather bequeathed.  
**[0:06:38-0:06:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:06:38):**  That means they can grow on a rather large range of EH and pH.  But many, many microorganisms have a very narrow EH, pH of functioning.  It's very much related to the energetic functioning and to the function they will fill in, especially  for the microbes involved in the nitrogen cycle.  Nitrification will be at high pH, high EH, and the other way around nitrogen fixation  
**[0:07:12-0:07:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:07:12):**  can be done only at very low EH.  Wow.  So if nitrogen fixation can only happen at very low EH, I think the experiences that  I've had and what I've observed generally soils tend to have commercially farm soils  tend to have a high EH.  
**[0:07:29-0:07:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:07:29):**  They tend to be fairly oxidized.  Why is that and how can we reverse it?  Nitrogen in the soil is very much related to the loss of organic matter and especially  to the loss of biological activity.  The microbes, they breathe and through respiration, they consume oxygen source.  
**[0:07:51-0:07:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:07:51):**  So they lower the redox potential.  So in order to have balanced redox potential in your soil, you need good soil aeration  and very active microbial activity.  And for this, the soil structure is fundamental, but all this is based on organic matter and  microbial activity that will improve the soil structure.  
**[0:08:17-0:08:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:08:17):**  So you should not get too low redox potential in your soil.  Otherwise it would be asphyxia and only plant like rice, which can pump oxygen through the  roots, will be able to survive.  But you should not have too high redox potential.  Otherwise the plants will lose a lot of its energy to adjust the redox potential and the  
**[0:08:41-0:08:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:08:41):**  pH in the rhizosphere through pumping product from the photosynthesis to activate microbial  activity that will help the plant to sustain a proper environment.  So it's always a matter of you should have not too high, not too low EH, not too high,  not too low pH.  And for this, you need very, very good soil structure and a lot of biological activity  
**[0:09:07-0:09:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:09:07):**  and good soil organic matter content.  That's the basis for forming a soil where plants will be able to develop without losing  too much energy to adjust this in the rhizosphere.  Olivier, you've mentioned several pieces that I wanted to unwrap, but when you, in the comment  that you just made, when you speak of plants losing too much energy to adjust the rhizosphere,  
**[0:09:36-0:09:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:09:36):**  what are the different ranges of energy that plants can contribute to soils to try to correct  their environment?  So in fact, all the energy in the soil is coming from the plants.  So everything starts with the plants, with the photosynthesis, everything that lowers  the photosynthesis will lower the entry of energy into the system.  
**[0:10:01-0:10:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:10:01):**  And when the soil has not enough energy, that means as a too high redox potential, that  means lack electron and a too high pH lacking proton, the plant will need to adjust, especially  adjusting the rhizosphere.  It's a matter of sustaining proper EH, pH at the cell level.  It's a requirement for the functioning of the plants, sustaining homeostasis for EH  
**[0:10:31-0:10:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:10:31):**  and pH at the cell level.  And the plant has several mechanisms to do this, some chemical buffers, some activation  of genes to make proteins to adjust in the medium term.  But one of the main process to adjust this is to sustain a proper EH, pH level, the rhizosphere  level around the roots.  
**[0:10:55-0:11:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:10:55):**  And for this, it will pump product from the photosynthesis to the roots, all this root  exudation, and it will favor some specific microorganism.  It depends on what the plant is missing, is lacking.  And this microorganism will adjust EH, pH level, the favorable level for the plant.  So if in a soil you have wild structure soil with the appropriate level of EH, pH in the  
**[0:11:29-0:11:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:11:29):**  different aggregates, in the different part of the soil, because it's not homogeneous,  of course, you need gradients of energy to make them work.  Then the plant will spend most of its energy to grow, to make more leaves, so more capacity  to get energy from the sun to make more photosynthesis.  And this is a win-win process.  
**[0:11:54-0:12:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:11:54):**  Then the plants will work better and better, will feed the soil, adjust EH, pH in the soil  at proper level, and all the photosynthesis will work better.  The nutrients will be easily available for the plant.  So it's really a circle of improvements once you get at the proper level.  At the opposite, when you are on unbalanced level, being too high redox or too low redox,  
**[0:12:23-0:12:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:12:23):**  then it's a vicious circle.  Too low redox will favor bacteria that will, that works in anaerobic conditions so that  they will lower further the redox potential and will lead to asphyxia of the plant.  And on the opposite, too high level will make that the plants will need to spend most of  its energy to adjust in the rhizosphere.  
**[0:12:50-0:12:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:12:50):**  And all the energy the plant is spending to adjust, it's not available for making new  leaves and the capacity of photosynthesis is not increasing.  So it's a clear vicious circle and at the end of this vicious circle, you have a limited  amount of organic matter that comes back to the soil and the soil being very oxidized,  mineralization will be very fast.  
**[0:13:16-0:13:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:13:16):**  So you will lose organic matter.  So it's a real vicious circle.  Once you're getting too oxidized, the plant is struggling to sustain EH, pH or most as  is and it's spending too much energy for that and can not do it every year.  It's getting worse and worse.  
**[0:13:37-0:13:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:13:37):**  So the soil ecosystem can either be constantly degrading and becoming worse and worse, or  they can be constantly regenerating and becoming better and better based just very simply on  how we are managing them in the redox state of the soil profile.  Exactly.  So the difficulty is to start to initiate the process.  
**[0:13:59-0:14:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:13:59):**  When you start from a balanced environment like grasses or forest, then you have rather  high carbon levels, especially active carbon, the carbon that is accessible to microbes.  So you will get a rather buffered EH and pH in the soil at proper level and the plant  will spend most of its energy just producing more leaves or producing more energy.  And you have a circle of improvements.  
**[0:14:31-0:14:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:14:31):**  Every year it's just getting better.  You have more organic matter, more biological activity, a better soil structure, so a more  buffered EH, pH, so better conditions for growth and so on.  Once you're starting to lose too much organic matter and too much biological activity, your  plants will spend most of its energy trying to adjust and it cannot increase its capacity.  
**[0:14:57-0:15:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:14:57):**  Progressively, you are going to lose organic matter and it's going to get worse and worse.  You will lose soil structure, which is fundamental and it's a vicious circle.  So the problem is that in most of our agricultural fields, we have lost a lot of this organic  matter.  We have lost a lot of this biological activity.  
**[0:15:18-0:15:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:15:18):**  We started to lose the soil structure.  So we really need to recover all this.  So we need to restore the soil structure, to install plants that will improve the soil  structure, that will feed the biology in the soil.  But for this, you need your plants to grow.  
**[0:15:38-0:15:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:15:38):**  And when the soil is imbalanced, the nutrients can be there in the soil, but not available  to the plants.  So you need to make sure that the plants will get sufficient nutrition to provide efficient  photosynthesis so that it can feed the soil and produce more leaves.  I have always been an advocate of using foliar applications to accelerate and jumpstart this  
**[0:16:08-0:16:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:16:08):**  plant photosynthesis and use the plant's photosynthetic engine to begin changing the soil profile.  And if I'm understanding you correctly, then you're indicating that that could also change  the redox profile of the soil as well, particularly in the rhizosphere.  Yes, totally right.  It's clearly, the redox profile is coming from the photosynthesis mainly.  
**[0:16:31-0:16:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:16:31):**  The beginning of everything, it's the plant.  We know how to grow plants without soil, but without the plants, the soil is just becoming  a desert.  It's just beginning to be sent to lose all the clay, all the organic matter very fast.  So it's the plant that makes the soil more than the soil that makes the plants, at least  
**[0:16:56-0:17:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:16:56):**  in a system that works in a sustainable way.  As soon as the plant is taking more nutrients and more energy from the soil and it provides  to the soil, the system will not be sustainable.  You will lose energy in your soil.  And this will also rapidly lead to favor pests and disease in different ways.  
**[0:17:23-0:17:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:17:23):**  That's another interesting aspect with adding redox to pH in the perspective is that we  can better understand in which condition the different kind of pests and the kind of disease  will thrive.  And so we can identify the pH and pH condition in which the plant will be healthy.  Olivier, I've just realized that you and I are somewhat familiar with this terminology,  
**[0:17:51-0:17:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:17:51):**  but we're using very different terms in different language.  We speak about redox and pH and pH and reduction, oxidation.  Some people speak of RH2.  What are the meanings of all of these different terms?  And what does for us as producers and agronomists, what do we really need to understand about  
**[0:18:13-0:18:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:18:13):**  EH and pH?  So it's rather simple in fact.  pH measures the availability of proton, H+.  EH would be a measurement of the availability of electrons.  So if you make a diagram with pH on the X axis and EH on the Y axis, you will be able  
**[0:18:37-0:18:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:18:37):**  to assess the different zones according to pH and EH.  So low pH means a lot of proton and high proton availability, and that's acidic condition.  High pH is a low availability of proton and it's alkaline or basic conditions.  For redox, low EH means high electron availability because the electron is negatively charged.  So low EH is related to a lot of electron, a lot of available electron.  
**[0:19:19-0:19:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:19:19):**  So inversely, so low EH mean reduced condition, it's the condition where energy is available  because there's plenty of electron.  Inversely, high EH, high redox potential, EH stands for redox potential, is related  to low electron availability, so very low energy in the system.  Then what's important to understand is that EH and pH are related, especially in organic  
**[0:19:52-0:19:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:19:52):**  chemistry.  And that's finally what will really make the difference to assess soil health and plant  health would be to look at the parameter.  There's different ways we can do it.  We can adjust EH to pH 7.  
**[0:20:08-0:20:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:20:08):**  We can also calculate the PE plus pH, which is an equivalent, PE is the electronic potential.  It's just simply calculated from EH.  So in fact, it's difficult to explain this without a graphic, but in fact, PE plus pH,  if you look at it on this pH EH diagram, PE plus pH would be what drives you towards the  top right of this diagram.  
**[0:20:39-0:20:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:20:39):**  So high PE plus pH would correspond to low proton availability and low electron availability.  On the other side, low PE plus pH would be high proton availability, high electron availability.  So it's really where energy is gathered.  It's where you have a lot of hydrogen and where you have very few oxygen.  So it's very, very energetic compounds when you have such a low PE plus pH.  
**[0:21:16-0:21:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:21:16):**  And regarding the question to RH2, RH2 is two times PE plus pH.  So it's the same kind of measurements.  So broadly, the real accumulation of energy on a pH EH diagram, so with the proton on  the X axis and the electron on the Y axis, the availability of energy, it's at low PE  plus pH, that mean on the bottom left of this diagram.  
**[0:21:45-0:21:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:21:45):**  And it's where photosynthesis is bringing you.  It's how photosynthesis inject energy in all the system and on the opposite, when photosynthesis  is not working well, you're moving to the top right of this diagram where energy is  very weak, very limited.  So if I'm understanding you correctly, then when you have photosynthesis, that contributes  
**[0:22:10-0:22:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:22:10):**  to a reduced environment with an abundance of electrons.  And this is something that I find particularly interesting is typically in agriculture and  in farming, the explanations have revolved around chemistry explanations.  And I can't begin to recount the number of explanations that I have heard and read that  describe pH as a measurement of hydrogen, when in reality, we should look at it from  
**[0:22:39-0:22:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:22:39):**  a biophysics perspective and not a biochemistry perspective of looking at individual elements.  Yes, it's not, pH is not directly hydrogen, it's H plus, it's protons.  So it's hydrogens minus electrons.  What is the connection between various minerals and their oxidation states?  So we can read about the different oxidation states of let's say manganese or iron in the  
**[0:23:07-0:23:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:23:07):**  soil profile and understand that some oxidation states are very bioavailable for plants to  absorb and others are not.  What does this understanding of this pH and electron availability mean for trace mineral  availability?  So I would say the two main elements that will have a very rapid and strong impact related  
**[0:23:33-0:23:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:23:33):**  to pH and pH would be iron and manganese.  But in both cases, both cases, they will be soluble, so available to the plants in their  reduced form, which is Fe2 plus or Mn2 plus.  And in both cases, this Fe2 plus and Mn2 plus, they are in the area on the bottom left of  these diagrams.  
**[0:23:58-0:24:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:23:58):**  When you move up to the top right, so when you move to oxidize and alkaline conditions,  you will get oxide or hydroxides of iron and manganese.  And these are not available to the plants.  So the first element that you will make not available to the plants when you get your  soil oxidized and alkalinized would be the iron and then the manganese.  
**[0:24:28-0:24:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:24:28):**  And in such cases, you can add manganese or iron to your soil.  If the soil is too oxidized or too alkaline or both, the plant will not be able to get  it.  So the plant will have some processes trying to make it soluble in the rhizosphere.  The plant will spend energy to acidify and to reduce both processes are correct.  
**[0:24:56-0:25:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:24:56):**  We can measure this in the plants that they will acidify and reduce the rhizosphere.  But this will cost energy.  And if your soil is globally in very, very oxidized condition, you will not be able to  get your manganese or your iron.  And adding manganese or iron to the soil in such condition will not make any improvements.  
**[0:25:22-0:25:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:25:22):**  It's not the quantity, the total quantity you have in your soil that is the problem  is the form under which these elements are dominant.  The only way in such case to make it available to the plant would be through foliar application  of reduced form of iron or manganese.  We have observed this with many growers that we have worked with where we've experimented  
**[0:25:48-0:25:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:25:48):**  with soil applications of manganese using manganese sulfate up to a rate of 400 pounds  per acre combined with humus and humic substances with no increase in plant absorption because  the soil was in a very oxidized form.  Yes, you can even increase the deficiency during this because the more the concentration  you will have, the easiest it will flocculate, the dioxide will be formed.  
**[0:26:18-0:26:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:26:18):**  So in some cases you can even increase the deficiency by increasing the soil content  of manganese or iron.  Wow.  It's a limited increase, but the real problem is that it's not under a soluble form and  if the plant cannot make it under soluble form, it will not access to this.  
**[0:26:43-0:26:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:26:43):**  It's not a matter of amount you have in the soil, it's a matter of form that will dominate.  In any case, the plant will at least spend a lot of energy to reduce the rhizosphere  and to acidify the rhizosphere to get these elements.  So at the best the plant will lose a lot of energy, but in the worst situation.  And it's rather fast.  
**[0:27:12-0:27:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:27:12):**  For iron, at pH 4.5, if your redox potential is around 600 millivolts, which is something  we can rapidly gate in a soil with no organic matter, no biological activity.  Iron will not be soluble at all.  And the plants will spend huge energy to make it soluble.  Many of our soils are commercially farmed soils because of the way they have been managed  
**[0:27:38-0:27:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:27:38):**  with cultural management practices and tillage and so forth.  We find that the soils are very oxidized and we get tremendous crop responses from foliar  applications of iron and manganese.  Even when the soil analysis shows that you have abundant levels of iron and manganese,  they are not in a form that the plants can absorb.  
**[0:27:55-0:28:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:27:55):**  And so I think this is a very important management tool for us to recognize is that soil applications  of manganese and iron are not likely going to produce a crop response.  And I believe this is one of the reasons why mainstream agriculture hasn't been able to  successfully get a crop response because they're often applying the wrong form and in the wrong  manner.  
**[0:28:19-0:28:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:28:19):**  But Olivier, something else that you've mentioned that I've been connecting the dots on when  you speak about the presence of H plus, an abundance of electrons in a reduced environment  being a very high energy state and oxidized materials with an abundance of oxygen being  in the oxidized form, being in a low energy state that immediately makes me think of nitrogen  and the differences between ammonium NH4 and nitrate NO3.  
**[0:28:48-0:28:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:28:48):**  What is the impact on the plant of absorbing ammonium versus absorbing nitrate?  So there's plenty of impact.  It seems not so important because ammonium and nitrates can be absorbed by the plants.  Both can be soluble and can be easily absorbed by the plant.  But the first impact is that a plant that absorbs ammonium will release H plus in the  
**[0:29:16-0:29:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:29:16):**  rhizosphere to balance the charge.  And inversely, plants absorbing nitrates will release OH minus.  So this will strongly affect the pH, but also the pH in the rhizosphere.  And in consequence, it will affect the solubility of all the other elements because they are  very much related to pH and pH also.  
**[0:29:44-0:29:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:29:44):**  So the first impact is it will impact the solubility of the other elements.  And the difference in pH in the rhizosphere between a plant absorbing nitrates versus  ammonium can be more than three pH units.  You can have a plant absorbing ammonium, the pH in the rhizosphere will be as low as 4.5.  On the other side, the plant absorbing nitrates, the pH in the rhizosphere can be more than  
**[0:30:14-0:30:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:30:14):**  7.5.  So it's a huge difference and it strongly impacts all the other ions and all the other  elements.  So in the soil that is too acidic, it can be good to absorb nitrates, then that will  reduce.  
**[0:30:33-0:30:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:30:33):**  But it's rather freaky because pH and the pH naturally related, they are not independent.  Finally, oxidations leads to acidification.  So when water is losing electrons, getting oxidized, then it produce O2 and H+.  So oxidation is related to acidification and inversely, reduction is related to alkalinization.  So we have to be careful every time we are discussing with this kind of pH.  
**[0:31:15-0:31:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:31:15):**  It's not possible to assess pH without knowing the pH and inversely, knowing the pH has not  much sense in soil or in a living organism if we don't know the redox potential at the  same time.  So both really need to be assessed together.  And coming back to the plants and what are the impact of absorbing nitrates versus ammonium,  
**[0:31:42-0:31:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:31:42):**  the first impact is that the plants absorbing nitrates will need to transform, to reduce  it into ammonium before making amino acids to form proteins.  So this is a huge energetic cost.  Has eight electrons difference between nitrates and ammonium.  So that means ammonium will have eight electrons more than nitrates.  
**[0:32:10-0:32:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:32:10):**  So there's a few publication on this showing that a plant absorbing nitrates instead of  ammonium will increase its root respiration by 10 to 15% to absorb because it's another  point is that roots is globally negatively charged, low redox potential.  And the nitrates are negatively charged also.  So there's a need to make very, it's an active absorption and it requires energy.  
**[0:32:43-0:32:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:32:43):**  So just the absorption of nitrates instead of ammonia will require energy and some part  also is transformed into ammonium in the roots of root respiration is largely increased by  10 to 15%.  Most of it is for absorption and some parts for direct reduction of the nitrates into  ammonium in the soil.  
**[0:33:09-0:33:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:33:09):**  That's a first problem.  Then a second problem is that the plant needs to reduce this ammonium, this nitrate into  ammonium and again, it's about 15% of its energy that will be spent for this.  And the last part of it is that to do this, to transform nitrates into ammonium, the plant  will need a lot of water.  
**[0:33:35-0:33:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:33:35):**  So if there's plenty of water, it's good because the plant will absorb a lot of water.  The cell will be to adjacent.  So the growth will be very fast, but on the other side, if water is a limiting factor  and it's quite often a limiting factor in our agricultural system, the water use efficiency  can be reduced and the worst case can be in rice where the water use efficiency can be  
**[0:34:00-0:34:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:34:00):**  divided by two.  It would be just 50% of a plant absorbing ammonia.  But if there's all this problem with nitrates, not everything is perfect with ammonium neither  because ammonium absorption will lead to release of protons.  So in acidic soil, it can lead to very strong solubilization of aluminum.  
**[0:34:25-0:34:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:34:25):**  Then you will get aluminum toxicity, but also high ammonium content in the plants will make  it, will create toxicities.  It will be too reduced also for even for plants.  And globally, that doesn't know the cost.  Ammonium is not very mobile in the soil.  
**[0:34:46-0:34:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:34:46):**  So the cost for prospection will increase.  The plant will need to make more roots or more mycorrhizae.  In any case, it will need to develop larger surfaces and longer roots, longer mycorrhizae  to prospect to get sufficient ammonium because it's not mobile when the opposite nitrate is  more mobile, so it can be found in the soil, in the water solution quite easy.  
**[0:35:15-0:35:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:35:15):**  The result of all this is that all the plants when you, when they have the choice between  ammonium and nitrate, they will absorb both forms.  Some plants will absorb more nitrates than ammonium, like wheat for instance, or maize.  Some plants like rice or soybean will absorb more ammonium than nitrates.  Young plants will absorb more ammonium than nitrates and then get, when they get older,  
**[0:35:50-0:35:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:35:50):**  it's reversed the ratio.  So there's plenty of variation between the different species, between the different age  of the plants, between the different conditions, but globally they all work better when they  absorb a mixture of.  The real difference for me is when the plants absorbs organic nitrogen, amino acids or amino  
**[0:36:14-0:36:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:36:14):**  sugars, because then the plant will absorb nitrogen with energy of the same time.  The compound first, this amino acids that globally they are, there's no difference that  the charges is neutral.  So there's no imbalance in the plant that is created by ammonium or by nitrate absorption.  So absorbing amino acids or amino sugar, the plant will not be imbalanced for the charges,  
**[0:36:46-0:36:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:36:46):**  but also we get nitrogen under directly the amino acids form or very reduced form that  they will not lose again energy to reduce the nitrates or the ammonium after the ammonium.  The ammonium needs to be reduced also again into amino acids.  So the plant will spare a lot of energy for when it absorbs such a form.  Of course, the cost for absorption will be a little bit higher, but the energy that the  
**[0:37:19-0:37:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:37:19):**  plant gets from absorbing it under this form will more than compensate for this higher  cost for absorption.  Olivier, you said a number of extremely important pieces, but the two that really popped out  at me are that when plants are absorbing nitrate, it can require 15% of its total photosynthetic  energy just to convert nitrates to amine, nitrogen and amino acids.  
**[0:37:46-0:37:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:37:46):**  And the water cost, if you can reduce a plant's water requirements by half simply by making  sure that it is absorbing nitrogen in the form of amino acids rather than nitrates or  ammonium, that is a huge water savings that is very important for much of our climactic  stressed agriculture today.  Yeah, sure.  
**[0:38:10-0:38:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:38:10):**  Water is quite often a limiting factor and probably will be more and more fun in the  case.  The 50% is for water use efficiency, it's related to rice, which is a plant really with  high demand on water.  It's difficult to find literature for the plants, but in any case, the physiological,  
**[0:38:33-0:38:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:38:33):**  the chemical processes make it necessary for the plants to get more water to transform  nitrate into ammonium to release the oxygen and to get the proton and the ammonium.  The plants will take the H+, release the OH-, so there's a huge cost for water and it's  difficult to assess exactly how much it's for the different plants, but obviously there's  a high cost for water also.  
**[0:39:09-0:39:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:39:09):**  I think of all the work that you have done and that I've read in the conversations we've  had, the piece that perhaps excites me as much as any of this is the understanding of  disease and insect susceptibility based on different pH and pH factors.  Can you describe some of your work and what you've been learning in that regard?  It's some work that has been done in the grey literature for more than 70 years for other  
**[0:39:43-0:39:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:39:43):**  aspects than plants, but I'm just taking back on this kind of work.  Recently in the literature, in the scientific papers, we've found that redox potential was  involved in all aspects of plant physiology and all aspects of plant disease interactions.  It's everywhere, there's thousands of papers.  It's really amazing.  
**[0:40:08-0:40:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:40:08):**  This started less than 20 years ago.  20 years ago, pH was the key factor for plant physiology, plant pathology, for all these  aspects.  In less than 20 years, the redox potential has been identified or redox signal have been  identified as a key element that they regulate everything in the plant.  
**[0:40:33-0:40:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:40:33):**  It's up to a point that we don't know what is not regulated in the plant, what is not  regulated by redox signal.  So we still need to understand the interaction between pH and pH in this regulation.  That's probably a point we really need to work at and we cannot find really in the literature.  But globally, what's within and also in plant pathology, the physiological processes are  
**[0:41:03-0:41:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:41:03):**  getting better and better understood.  So we can identify globally the different pH and pH requirements for each main type  of pathogen.  Plant fungi, pathogenic fungi will develop in oxidized plant and on a rather acidic pH.  Necrotrophic fungi, the fungi that kills the cells and then feed from the dead cells are  
**[0:41:31-0:41:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:41:31):**  in extremely acidic conditions and very oxidized conditions.  The viruses, they will develop more in oxidized conditions, but at higher pH.  They need high pH to be mobile in the plant.  They need higher pH to swollen and then be able to replicate the RNA.  But they also need high redox potential to block the signal of defense from the plant  
**[0:42:05-0:42:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:42:05):**  by polymerization of the molecule that will be the signal for the plant to try to resist  to the attack of the fungi, of the virus in that case.  So viruses, it's really rather high pH and high EH.  On the other side, pathogenic bacteria will develop at low redox potential.  They have a metabolism based on a lot on sulfur and iron, so they need lower redox potential  
**[0:42:37-0:42:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:42:37):**  and rather alkaline conditions.  Homicets that were previously identified as fungi are now recognized as different category.  They don't have ketones and they are very close from the brown algae and this are also  very quite rather close from the bacteria.  So they will be at rather low redox potential and let's say neutral pH.  
**[0:43:05-0:43:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:43:05):**  So with this kind of thing, we can better understand why the different disease develop  in one part of the plant or another part, why they are entered in the plant at the moment  or through certain leaves.  All this fits very well with all what we know.  And for insects, it will be rather also it's rather related to this.  
**[0:43:30-0:43:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:43:30):**  So there are some, all this redox will have two impact.  It's a war for redox.  They will, the plant when it's attacked by a pathogen will try to kill it through over-oxidation.  It has not enough energy to control the pathogen by reduction.  So it will try to over-oxidize through hydrogen peroxide mainly.  
**[0:43:57-0:44:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:43:57):**  And at the same time, so this is localized where the pathogen is attacking.  And then at the same time, the plant will send a signal for shifting the metabolism  to more protection of the plant.  So getting a lower redox potential and lower pH because globally it's at low EH and low  pH that the plants will be healthy.  
**[0:44:23-0:44:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:44:23):**  And then for the insect, we can also have mechanism of resistance related to low redox  potential.  The most insects don't like low pH and don't like especially low redox potential, especially  when you have phenols or C vitamins, the digestive system cannot digest this easily.  But of course it depends if the insects are feeding on the phloem.  
**[0:44:53-0:45:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:44:53):**  Usually the phloem is more reduced and more alkaline than the xylem or the leaf tissues.  A feed for instance, that are vectors of different viruses will eat in the phloem.  They are sucking insects eating in the phloem, so it's rather alkaline conditions.  And they will prefer this kind of plants.  So especially when the phloem is not as reduced as it's supposed to be, especially when the  
**[0:45:32-0:45:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:45:32):**  photosynthesis is not working well.  For the insects that are eating the plants, the biting, chewing, different ways of controlling  would be through the resistance of the cell walls.  But first of all, it will be the accumulation of secondary metabolites that are very reduced  that would be in the vacuoles.  
**[0:45:58-0:46:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:45:58):**  And when the insect is biting this and chewing this, it will get unpalatable food for this  insect.  It will not be able to digest this well.  So this insect will not be attracted by such plants that have a high secondary metabolite  content.  
**[0:46:18-0:46:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:46:18):**  So there's plenty of research field also related to this.  And all the interactions between the insects and the different disease are also a fascinating  research area at the moment.  And the good thing in this approach, Ruedox potential in addition to pH, is that it provides  a very elegant, very relatively simple mechanism for unifying all the mechanisms and understanding  
**[0:46:51-0:46:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:46:51):**  the interactions between the soil, the climate, the nutrition of the plants, the physiology  of the plants, the genotypic difference.  So the environment, the soil, the climate, the genotype, the different species, the different  varieties, the practices, how our agricultural practices will bring the plants to one or  to another area of this pH diagram.  
**[0:47:23-0:47:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:47:23):**  And all this in interactions with the pests and the diseases.  So it's really a powerful tool to analyze all these interactions and to better understand  what's happening in the different situations.  I believe that is the piece that I particularly am so excited about is we could have a very  long conversation unwrapping and unraveling all the different interactions and the zones  
**[0:47:50-0:47:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:47:50):**  and the areas in which different diseases are present.  But the bottom line is that measuring and understanding the interactions between Ruedox  and pH gives us a tool to understand where we are.  And it also helps us understand what direction to move in and what tools to use, what nutrients  to use or what cultural management practices to use to move our plants from a disease susceptible  
**[0:48:20-0:48:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:48:20):**  or insect susceptible to a pest resistant place where we can now actively manage disease  and insect resistance based on these biophysics and biochemical profiles.  That's the piece that I'm really excited about.  Yeah, surely.  The main difficulties in this is that measurement of Ruedox potential is rather tricky.  
**[0:48:43-0:48:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:48:43):**  It's the classical electrochemical methods for measurement.  The measurements are false by the electromagnetic field.  So we have to be very cautious to be in an environment where the measurements are not  false.  That's probably the major reason why this has not been studied before.  
**[0:49:05-0:49:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:49:05):**  Measurement is tricky and we are working on developing different kinds of measurements  methods, especially based on spectrometry aspects.  These methods can be used for measuring other parameters, but we are rather confident that  we will be able to develop such methods that will make the measurement much easier.  The other difficulty is that, especially in the soil, EH and pH are extremely valuable  
**[0:49:35-0:49:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:49:35):**  in space and in time.  If you don't know in what condition you're measuring, especially humidity will impact  all this strongly.  It's fluctuating a lot.  A very important information is how much the soil is buffering this fluctuation.  
**[0:49:55-0:50:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:49:55):**  The lower the fluctuation and the better the average EH, pH, the better the growing condition.  The worst condition is for compacted soil.  Compacted soil can shift from extremely reduced and rather alkaline conditions when there  is heavy rain, they get submerged, they get waterlogged.  Then EH drops very fast, pH is rising slowly.  
**[0:50:25-0:50:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:50:25):**  Then three days later when it's dry, you can be at very high redox potential.  You can have huge, huge difference in redox potential in such soil.  For the plants, it's the worst because it doesn't know how to adapt to this from very  low redox to very high redox within a few days.  It's a real nightmare for the plants to adapt to this.  
**[0:50:51-0:50:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:50:51):**  Then again, it will rain and then the redox will drop.  It's really the worst condition.  That's why soil structure is so much a key element, a key parameter.  Actually, if I can measure only one parameter in the soil, I will look at the water stable  aggregate because once you have proper water stable aggregate, you have a proper soil structure,  
**[0:51:18-0:51:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:51:18):**  you have biological activity, you have organic carbon.  You will have a rather balanced and rather buffered EH and pH in your soil.  Measuring the soil was very necessary for understanding this for research, but as a  practical tool for farmer, you need to respect some condition doing this after 24 hours after  huge rain or during spring when biological activity is very active.  
**[0:51:50-0:51:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:51:50):**  Otherwise, you will not be able really to compare your results.  What's really, really interesting is measuring the plants.  In the plants, it's a very powerful tool to assess what is the impact of a practice or  cropping system or cover crop.  This is really where we need to develop a lot of research because as you said, we have  
**[0:52:17-0:52:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:52:17):**  the map of the different diseases and the difference of where we want to go, but we  still have difficulty to drive the system.  What are the effects of different cover crops?  It's still very poorly known.  By the way, one of the impact of phlegiums, of course, there's the nitrogen fixation,  
**[0:52:41-0:52:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:52:41):**  which has a tremendous impact on the next crop, but there's also something produced  during the fixation of nitrogen by the nitrogenase is that in this reaction, you produce also  H2.  The legumes, they inject in the soil H2, which is pure energy.  That's probably something that has been overlooked.  
**[0:53:10-0:53:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:53:10):**  There's the impact of the nitrogen fixation by the legume, but there's probably also the  impact of reduction of the soil by injection of hydrogen in the soil.  Measuring the plants can be really, really powerful tool.  At the moment, it's still a little bit tricky and it's a little bit too long.  It's five or six minutes per measurement.  
**[0:53:41-0:53:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:53:41):**  Using it for research is fine.  For farmer application, it's a little bit earlier, but even without measuring, just  knowing where we are, knowing where we want to go and knowing broadly what our practices  are doing, it's a huge improvement of the possibility we can get for creating a plant  of suppressive soils that will suppress all the pathogens and insects attack.  
**[0:54:15-0:54:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:54:15):**  That's something that's already going on quite well, I would say.  Olivier, I think the important piece that you mentioned is, yes, it is difficult for  us to measure and the tools are still needing to be developed and we're actively working  on developing the tools that can measure this more effectively and more easily in the field.  However, we do have an analog and that analog is when we have the presence of certain organisms,  
**[0:54:41-0:54:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:54:41):**  when we have the presence of insects or of a specific disease, the simple presence of  that organism tells us what the environment is, what the plant, where the plant is and  where the soil is.  From using that as an indicator, as an analog, we can now understand what direction we need  to go and what direction we need to shift the environment in so that the crop is no  
**[0:55:07-0:55:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:55:07):**  longer susceptible to that given pathogen or pest.  Yes, exactly.  Once we understood what are the different processes are doing in our soil and in our  plants, we can adjust the direction where we want to go.  I would add something we never discussed before and we had not enough time is that we can  
**[0:55:34-0:55:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:55:34):**  also use the weeds as indicators of the different conditions for pH, for pH, probably also for  electrical conductivity, which is another important parameter.  The different weeds develop.  In France, we have a very nice book called the Encyclopedia of the Bioindicators of Weeds.  If you read this encyclopedia, all the parameters that describe they can be interpreted into  
**[0:56:11-0:56:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:56:11):**  pH, EH and electrical conductivity.  That's something we started to work on also is how we can use the different weeds as indicator  of our conditions.  For instance, when you have in the same places some weeds that reflect a very low redox potential,  hydromorphine and things like that, and plants that reflect oxidized environments, that means  
**[0:56:45-0:56:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:56:45):**  you probably on very compacted soil, you will have high electrical conductivity, but it's  compacted soil.  And if you are both at this on the same locations, because the soil is shifting from one to one  situation to the other one, so it could be really an indicator of poor soil conditions.  And on the other side, the flora will evolve with the improvement of the conditions and  
**[0:57:11-0:57:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:57:11):**  you will observe different kinds of flora and all this flora can probably give you a  very good indicator of where you are on this EH pH diagram.  Sounds to me like I need to get the encyclopedia translated into English.  You described how when measuring redox values, they can really fluctuate based on the electromagnetic  environment.  
**[0:57:34-0:57:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:57:34):**  And one of the pieces we haven't really spoken about that I would like to touch on briefly  is soil paramagnetism and also the interaction with electrical conductivity that you just  described, because these are two other very important parameters when we think about agriculture  systems from a biophysics rather than a biochemistry perspective.  What have you been observing with those parameters?  
**[0:57:58-0:58:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:57:58):**  So the first for electrical conductivity, it's obviously a very important parameter.  We try to make it simple through pH and EH, but probably the most optimal EH pH zone also  depends on the electrical conductivity.  So this is something we need to adjust.  We need balanced EH, balanced pH, but also balanced electrical conductivity.  
**[0:58:26-0:58:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:58:26):**  And globally we can analyze our soil, plants, microorganism system as an electrical circuit.  Redox potential will indicate it's a voltage.  We measure difference of potential, so it's a voltage.  And to understand an electrical system, the voltage is not enough.  You need to have the resistance of your system or the inverse resistance is the electrical  
**[0:58:54-0:58:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:58:54):**  conductivity.  So, sorry, the inverse of resistivity is an electrical conductivity.  So the electrical conductivity gives you an idea of the resistance of your system.  And the electrical conductivity, it's a key parameter for precision agriculture.  They can use it to assess many parameters in the soil, including compaction, salinity,  
**[0:59:26-0:59:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:59:26):**  different nutrient levels, CEC.  So they measure it and they adjust the fertilization application most of the time to this key parameter.  And if we analyze this system as an electrical system, in fact, the leads would be the solar  panel that are charging the battery.  The battery would be the soil and the stable carbon will be the compartment of the battery  
**[0:59:54-1:00:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=0:59:54):**  and the carbon accessible to microbes and the microbial activity will be the charge  of the battery.  And then the productivity of your system would correspond to the power of production.  So it would be the square voltage time the electrical conductivity gives you an idea  of your production.  
**[1:00:14-1:00:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=1:00:14):**  So if you have very high electrical conductivity, you can produce a lot.  The power of your system is very high, but you unload your battery very fast.  So if you don't have the solar panel to reload the battery, you unload your battery and you  can get it empty.  It's what we get on soil that have lost their organic matter, their biological activity.  
**[1:00:45-1:00:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=1:00:45):**  It's an empty battery.  And I make the hypothesis that we hide the loss of organic matters, that means we hide  the loss of charge in our battery, the loss of charge in our system by increasing the  electrical conductivity.  This could sustain or even increase the production, but unload the battery, we've been losing  
**[1:01:12-1:01:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=1:01:12):**  organic matter.  On the opposite, if your electric conductivity is very low, then you will not be able to  produce.  So you need a balanced electrical conductivity that can produce as much as possible without  unloading the battery.  
**[1:01:28-1:01:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=1:01:28):**  And the reload of the battery depends on how much plants you have on your system.  That's why it's so important to have cover crops, living crops all the time to maximize  the photosynthesis.  We really need to optimize.  We get free energy from the sun, but we get it only if we can catch it.  
**[1:01:47-1:01:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=1:01:47):**  And for this, we need efficient photosynthesis.  And as soon as we plow the soil, we remove the cover crops, we remove the plants in the  system, we are losing energy in our soil.  First, we are not catching the energy from the sun, but we also have a process of oxidation  of the soil by the ultraviolet of the sun reacting with iron in the soil.  
**[1:02:17-1:02:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=1:02:17):**  This creates very oxidizing product that will attack the organic matter.  As soon as we have a plant, some leaves that catch the energy from the sun, we increase  the energy in our soil and in our plants.  But as soon as we remove this, we are losing energy.  We're not only not catching the energy from the sun, but we are also losing energy by  
**[1:02:42-1:02:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=1:02:42):**  strong oxidation.  When we think about electrical conductivity, I've wondered whether or observed, I believe  that electrical conductivity is not all quite the same.  Because when we consider soils that have large amounts of ionic nutrients, such as nitrate  or ammonium, for example, these are electrolytes and they can quickly increase the electrical  
**[1:03:07-1:03:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=1:03:07):**  conductivity.  Where if you consider a soil that has high levels of amino acids and amino sugars, those  have less electrolytes in my understanding and you have a lower electrical conductivity,  but a greater yield potential.  How do you describe that?  
**[1:03:28-1:03:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=1:03:28):**  How do you explain that?  Or are my assumptions incorrect?  There are in fact two electrical conductivities in the soil.  The one you described, what we could call ionic electrical conductivity, which is very  much related to the ions in the soil.  
**[1:03:46-1:03:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=1:03:46):**  The other one is the bulk electrical conductivity.  It's more related to the soil structure, to the humidity of the soil.  It's again why the soil structure is so important.  It's probably this second one that is the most important electrical conductivity in  the soil.  
**[1:04:07-1:04:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=1:04:07):**  It's the bulk electrical conductivity.  Those things we need to work out.  Regarding paramagnetism, because I did not answer your question on this, this is a parameter  that is very poorly known in scientific papers.  What is written most of the time is that it's a parameter that is not impacted by the practices,  
**[1:04:33-1:04:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=1:04:33):**  but it's mainly related to the parent material, to the rock from which the soil has been developed.  There are ways to increase this paramagnetism through application of very paramagnetic basals,  through designing some biochar to be paramagnetic.  We know how to do this.  Usually we can treat with iron sulfate before pyrolysis.  
**[1:05:04-1:05:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=1:05:04):**  There's a lot of work to do on this.  Also, when we read the literature in sedimentology, especially, we learn that at the interface  between water and air, you can develop some magnetotactic bacteria that produce magnetite  that are very paramagnetic.  It's probably a research track we need to work on.  
**[1:05:31-1:05:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=1:05:31):**  I believe that we can have an impact on soil paramagnetism through our coping practices  by gaining, it's again related to the soil structure.  The better the soil structure, the more water-air interface we will get.  So the highest probability we will get to develop this paramagnetic bacteria.  These are hypotheses.  
**[1:05:57-1:06:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=1:05:57):**  Another hypothesis I made regarding paramagnetism is that one of the cause of pests, attacks,  and things like this is probably also related to high electrical conductivity.  Increasing the electrical conductivity probably makes it unbalanced regarding to the paramagnetism.  We probably need to keep a balance between the two.  I make the hypothesis that increasing soil paramagnetism will help us to keep our plants  
**[1:06:34-1:06:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=1:06:34):**  at low PE plus pH when increasing electrical conductivity tends to bring them to high PE  plus pH to make them susceptible to insects and fungi and viruses.  All these are hypotheses, but I suspect that this paramagnetism aspect to be a very powerful  tool we could use with all the other tools, using all these microorganisms, boosting the  photosynthesis through foliar applications.  
**[1:07:05-1:07:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=1:07:05):**  All what you proposed with the seaweeds, with all this nutrition, all these cover crops,  we can improve all this picture by increasing the paramagnetism also.  I'm pretty sure of this.  Yeah, and we know that some of the gases such as oxygen is very highly paramagnetic and  so when we have higher oxygen content soils that can increase the paramagnetism.  
**[1:07:30-1:07:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=1:07:30):**  So I also believe that it is a very important parameter.  Olivier and I could continue this conversation for hours because the scope of his work and  his research is so broad and so all encompassing and as he described, so unifying that it encompasses  many different pieces.  And so we've actually, earlier this week, we hosted a very long webinar with a group  
**[1:07:57-1:08:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=1:07:57):**  of people that was about six hours long altogether that is now available on the Academy, academy.regen.ag,  because this is a very new topic, a very new way, a very different approach to looking  at plant and soil health and it's a very unfamiliar area for many people.  So there's a lot of information, a lot of different perspectives that need to be shared.  So this interview is just a taste of what is possible and the scope of Olivier's work.  
**[1:08:28-1:08:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=1:08:28):**  So on the webinar that is available on the Academy, we have all of the graphs and charts  that Olivier describes, where he describes the different sections or different zones  where various groups of fungi and bacteria and insects are present.  And if this is a topic that interests you at all, I would very highly encourage you  to go there and to listen and learn.  
**[1:08:54-1:09:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=1:08:54):**  It's completely free and some really valuable and very important information.  Olivier I want to thank you for being here on the podcast and for sharing your information.  I think it's extremely valuable and important for the world to understand this and I'm excited  to continue researching and continue learning more as we go forward.  Yes, thanks for the invitation and sure, we'd love to collaborate and we can, we move fast  
**[1:09:23-1:09:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=1:09:23):**  at the moment and we learn many things very fast.  It will be very, very fascinating job to make all this into a very practical way that will  help farmers and to better understand not only farmers, also researchers to better understand  what's happening in our soil systems.  It was really a pleasure.  
**[1:09:45-1:09:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=1:09:45):**  Thanks a lot.  Thanks a lot.  Thank you, Olivier.  The team at AEA and I are dedicated to bringing this show to you because we believe that knowledge  and information is the foundation of successful regenerative systems.  
**[1:09:59-1:10:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=1:09:59):**  At AEA, we believe that growing better quality food and making more money from your crops  is possible.  And since 2006, we've worked with leading professional growers to help them do just  that.  At AEA, we don't guess, we test, we analyze, and we provide recommendations based on scientific  
**[1:10:18-1:10:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=1:10:18):**  data, knowledge, and experience.  We've developed products that are uniquely positioned to help growers make more money  with regenerative agriculture.  If you are a professional grower who believes in testing instead of guessing, someone who  believes in a better, more regenerative way to grow, visit advancingecoag.com and contact  
**[1:10:37-1:10:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/redox-the-driver-of-soil-microbial-interactions-and-nutrient-availability-with-olivier-husson/#t=1:10:37):**  us to see if AEA is right for you.  Thank you for listening, and we look forward to working with you.  