---
title: Resilient Agriculture Models for The Future with Joel Salatin
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.

---

### Regenerative Agriculture Podcast  (2020-05-26)  
### Author(s): John Kempf  

**[0:00:00-0:00:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:00:00):**  Hi friends, welcome back to the regenerative agriculture podcast. Today I'm delighted and  honored to have Joel Salatin of Polyface Farms in Virginia here with us. Joel Salatin is a voice  and a name that scarcely needs an introduction. He has been a voice of inspiration to very many.  
**[0:00:21-0:00:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:00:21):**  Joel, thank you for being here and for sharing your wisdom and your inspiration as widely as  you have over the years. One of the questions that I was asked to ask you is one of your strengths is  that you're very articulate and able to describe your ideas and positions well to other people.  
**[0:00:42-0:00:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:00:42):**  How can other farmers learn that skill? Generally if a farmer is filling out a job description,  nowhere on that job description will it say storytelling ability or communication skills.  You know it'll be things like managing animals or keeping good records,  
**[0:01:05-0:01:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:01:05):**  you know being able to repair things.  Seldom do you see communication on there and so I've been blessed when I was through school,  competing in forensics and debate, theater, drama. I was always in the school plays and  
**[0:01:26-0:01:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:01:26):**  especially the debate team and learning to communicate and speak. I mean clearly  I have a gift for that but it's a gift that's been honed and I think this is what's important  that you may not become the most gifted orator but you can develop at least some rudimentary skills  
**[0:01:46-0:01:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:01:46):**  whether you take a couple of writing courses or join the local theater group. There's the  international speakers, non-profit called Toastmasters and their whole deal is their local  chapters all over the country, Toastmasters and what they do is they teach communication and  
**[0:02:09-0:02:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:02:09):**  speaking skills and you do little short vignettes, different kinds of little talks. People critique  you and you know you work at it. The truth is that people who are not familiar with the  world, who learn to communicate in any field become the pace setters, kind of the leaders  
**[0:02:29-0:02:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:02:29):**  in that field. You don't have to be the best but if you can tell the story the best,  you'll be considered an expert, you'll have an audience. People don't know I practice speeches  in front of a mirror, you know I give them to myself in the mirror and you you know you're  
**[0:02:46-0:02:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:02:46):**  in front of a mirror you know I give them to myself in the mirror and you practice your timing  and you practice your words and then I read a lot. Farmers tend to not be readers and  I would encourage just immersing yourself in a broad range of things. You know keep up on  
**[0:03:05-0:03:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:03:05):**  current events, read the old philosophy, read you know everything from Malabar Farm and  Lewis Promfield to Ed Faulkner and Plowman's Folly and Wendell Berry and immerse yourself  in the language of, I mean I'm not encouraging people to read Norman Borlaug literature,  
**[0:03:28-0:03:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:03:28):**  but know who the players are and people who know stuff, history, current events,  signs of the times, trends, people who know stuff or make interesting conversationalists.  I'm a voracious reader, an eclectic reader. I read everything from business to philosophy to  
**[0:03:50-0:03:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:03:50):**  religion to whatever marketing, self-help, whatever and read things that I don't agree with  because you need to understand what other what other people are thinking, get in their heads so  you know better how to articulate. These are all things that you can do to cultivate your own  
**[0:04:08-0:04:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:04:08):**  awareness and interestingness and as you cultivate that you'll become someone people enjoy  conversing with and listening to simply because you'll be able to have a better grasp of the  subject matter. I seem to recall somewhere in one of your books you wrote that I think the  
**[0:04:29-0:04:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:04:29):**  topic was on organic certification in general, you wrote that rather than certifying the process  that a farm uses perhaps we should begin certifying their bookshelves. Yes I've said that  more times than once. Unfortunately government organic certification at least has become a bit  
**[0:04:47-0:04:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:04:47):**  of a you know a little checklist of do's and don'ts. You know we understand that it's more  than just a list of do's and don'ts, it's an embrace of a of a worldview of a way we view  life and the way the world works. I'm not talking about politics, I'm talking about  
**[0:05:08-0:05:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:05:08):**  basic ecological function. You know the deep soils on the planet were not built with 10 10 10  chemical fertilizer and they were built with carbon solar you know real-time solar energy  converted to carbon and vegetation that rots or is eaten and manured in place. You know these are  
**[0:05:28-0:05:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:05:28):**  the great principles and it's a mindset, it's a worldview and yeah I have said numerous times what  we ought to be looking for is you know what's on the magazine rack behind the toilet and what's on  the bookshelf. That actually indicates where a person's mind is because where you're you know  
**[0:05:43-0:05:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:05:43):**  where your mind where your mental treasure is you know that's where your heart will be. You mentioned  that you read books that you don't agree with and something I've been thinking about recently  there's this quote from not Warren Buffett but his business partner Charlie Munger. I'm paraphrasing  
**[0:05:59-0:06:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:05:59):**  a bit but essentially he's saying you're not qualified to have an opinion until you can  articulate the opposing viewpoint better than the opposition. I think if we followed that  perspective there would be a lot fewer opinions in the world most likely. Yes that's true and you  
**[0:06:17-0:06:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:06:17):**  know on that point if I may swerve just a bit to this this is one reason why I don't pick at  McDonald's or write nasty letters about making GMOs illegal or closing down Monsanto or any of  these other efforts because I unlike many of the folk my friends in this ecology movement I think  
**[0:06:44-0:06:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:06:44):**  I think that the people who disagree with us are not evil intended. I think they are misguided.  I think they're ignorant and I think they're wrong but to denigrate the folks who live who work at  Monsanto as evil intended is a very different situation. I mean my neighbor here in Swope  
**[0:07:07-0:07:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:07:07):**  physical neighbor is the mid-Atlantic sales rep for Monsanto. We couldn't be more divergent in  how we view the way food and farming and ecology function you know in the living dynamics of the  soil and plant community but he really believes he's a good person. He really believes that he is  
**[0:07:38-0:07:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:07:38):**  feeding the world saving the saving the planet from whatever stupidity and starvation and famine  and you have to honor that as soon as you assume that these big bad corporations are and the people  who run them the people who make glyphosate or whatever that they are ogres and evil intended  
**[0:08:00-0:08:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:08:00):**  and you conceive of them in your mind as some sort of a devil or a demon you suddenly a shut  yourself off from ever making a bridge with them and number two you actually hurt your own ability  to step into the marketplace of ideas with something that's helpful because it prejudices  
**[0:08:26-0:08:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:08:26):**  your mind and your thinking. Now you've now prejudged them in their intent. We can talk  about effect all day and that's what I do but I never assume that even people I disagree with  vehemently in politics for example. I always assume that they're good intended and I think  
**[0:08:45-0:08:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:08:45):**  debate for this because in high school and college interscholastic and intercollegiate debate  I have a room full of trophies on this you know I wasn't the shabbiest in the world loved it eight  in fact dad always said I majored in debate and minored in school so I never made the best grades  
**[0:09:02-0:09:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:09:02):**  in the world but I just ate up debate and the way a debate tournament works is at least as you move  into the upper levels is that you have six preliminary rounds three of them you debate affirmative  three of them you debate negative and so it really does teach you to appreciate there is another side  
**[0:09:24-0:09:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:09:24):**  and I think that when we go into these conflicts with a deep appreciation that there is another  side and a person who believes the other side is not necessarily evil intended it actually helps us  to go into that conversation at a better spot. Joel I think this is such an important conversation  
**[0:09:48-0:09:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:09:48):**  our listeners here on this podcast are large-scale commercial growers from all over the world  including from here in the American Midwest and from California in the West Coast.  All of us are on our own pathway we're all on our own journey of learning about the effects  
**[0:10:04-0:10:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:10:04):**  that different compounds and causes have in agriculture and how we can improve our overall  systems and every farmer has as you indicated all the farmers that I've ever had conversations with  have a desire to leave a legacy they have a desire to leave the soil better for the next generation  
**[0:10:23-0:10:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:10:23):**  they have a good intent and they're all on their own pathway to learning about the challenges of  the present mainstream system. This has led me to ask the question what would have to be true  for farmers to really learn the effects more rapidly and desire to shift to a more productive  
**[0:10:47-0:10:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:10:47):**  and a more useful agriculture? It's a profound question and one that all of us wrestle with  no one makes a shift from routine without some sort of disturbance just like you don't build  muscle without exercising that actually temporarily tears down muscle and then when it rebuilds it's  
**[0:11:10-0:11:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:11:10):**  actually stronger than the muscle that it replaced and that's a physical metaphor for what happens  you know in our own lives nobody gets up this morning and says you know I've been using  x-brand toothpaste for 50 years for some reason today I just have a hankering to use y-brand  
**[0:11:26-0:11:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:11:26):**  toothpaste we tend to not embrace change like that we're very we're very routinized and we love our  routine you know we say that you know what's a rut you know a rut is a is a grave with the  ends knocked out we love our routines when you say well what would have to change well what changes  
**[0:11:47-0:11:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:11:47):**  is generally things not of our making there are other factors there are things that come in it  could be a disease you know this I mean I know a guy who was a large confinement pig farmer  his conversion came one morning when he woke up and he realized my first waking thought when I  
**[0:12:05-0:12:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:12:05):**  get up in the morning is I wonder where a slap broke last night and I was like oh my god I'm  gonna get a slap broke last night and a pig fell into the slurry pit below his first waking thought  was wonder what crisis awaits me at the pig house and he runs you know that's not that's not a good  
**[0:12:24-0:12:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:12:24):**  way to farm and it set him on a course of you know seeking another approach so everybody's  everybody's kind of aha moment awakening testimony starts with some thing I mean we see it in our  nobody who's been eating at the gas station for 30 years suddenly wakes up in the morning says  
**[0:12:46-0:12:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:12:46):**  you know I think I'm going to go to polyface and get one of those pastured chickens no what happens  is after 30 years of eating at the gas station they get a prognosis of cancer or type 2 diabetes  or they just don't feel good whatever and they have this wake-up moment that puts them on a path  
**[0:13:08-0:13:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:13:08):**  that they didn't expect to be on yesterday and so generally change only comes in crisis crisis you  know in Japanese in the Japanese language the symbol for crisis is the same symbol for  opportunity you just read it differently based on context and I just think that's such a beautiful  
**[0:13:32-0:13:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:13:32):**  picture we complain about our crises but we thank our crises for moving us where we wouldn't normally  go the same thing is true with developing a team we have posted in our office most successful people  find that their journey requires them working with somebody they wouldn't normally work with  
**[0:13:57-0:14:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:13:57):**  because you have to have complementary skills you know if you're an introvert you probably  need an extrovert if you if you're an engineer type you probably need a poet if you're you know  a a meticulous routine person you probably need some sort of a spontaneous you know dolphin in  
**[0:14:19-0:14:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:14:19):**  your life and we even see in agriculture you know people tend to gravitate toward either animals  or plants and even in plants they tend to gravitate either toward annuals and produce  or you know annuals or or perennials you know an orchard and bramble fruits and things like that  
**[0:14:36-0:14:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:14:36):**  so you can't embrace know everything do everything be good at everything nobody can do that all the  gifts and talents to be successful don't grow on the same pair of legs and that's why teams  that's why teams that's why families work that's why relationships work is because we're not  
**[0:14:56-0:15:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:14:56):**  singular and we farmers we're such independent i call us a bunch of hermit curmudgeons you know  um most of us have a better relationship with our tractor than our spouse so that the tractor never  talks back to us and it's always you know uh stars would be technically normally it would count the  
**[0:15:16-0:15:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:15:16):**  way you know and that's why they're so therapeutic for us because they do express unconditional love  doesn't matter if we've had a difficult day the cow is always happy to be milked to get a new  paddock and grass or whatever nobody gets bullied bad mouths are made fun of from their cow they're  
**[0:15:32-0:15:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:15:32):**  always happy to see you the point is we have to be grateful for the disruptions in life because  they move us places that we would not normally be i've told people over and over and over again  i'm not that smart i'm not that talented what i do seem to have a talent for is identifying people  
**[0:15:55-0:16:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:15:55):**  who are going places and hooking my wagon to them then they take me places where i would not have  gone on my own i'd like to dive a bit deeper with this joel it seems to me as though there are two  different levels of change there is the individual level that you described is where you receive an  
**[0:16:14-0:16:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:16:14):**  outside incentive to change something outside of yourself but then there is also this broader  societal change or social change where the societal dynamics and perspectives can shift very  rapidly and you have much more life experience than i am sure you've observed and experienced  
**[0:16:35-0:16:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:16:35):**  some examples of this but one of the things that i have asked myself and have thought about  if we desire to produce a very broad large-scale change in agriculture quickly what would have to  happen what would have to be true for the regenerative farmers to be the heroes in the  
**[0:16:55-0:17:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:16:55):**  landscape rather than being the farmers who are looked at with raised eyebrows and question marks  for them to be the heroes within their own communities i believe when you have that happen  when that shift occurs then socially and societally within the farming community we have a pathway  
**[0:17:14-0:17:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:17:14):**  towards producing massive change so think about the benchmarks of success that the average farmer  uses to describe to describe success what do you think of what you think of a successful farm  the number one metric most of them use to compare themselves among themselves which the bible  
**[0:17:32-0:17:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:17:32):**  says is unwise right yield yes that's right all right so so number one is yield that's bushels  per acre pounds per dairy cow whatever it's completely yield secondly it's the type of  equipment how big a tractor what model tractor how big a barn how you know it's infrastructure  
**[0:17:54-0:18:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:17:54):**  it's facilities okay neither of those things and i could go down this list but we're farmers we  understand farming in truth we find that neither of those has has anything to do with actual  profitability or you know economic stability my dad was a was an accountant he was not a cpa but  
**[0:18:17-0:18:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:18:17):**  he was he was a tax preparer and he did a lot of work for many of the farmers and the farmers  he never made a living from the farm i was the first generation that was able to to and i stand  on the shoulders of giants i acknowledge that i'm blessed every day that i come from a family who  
**[0:18:34-0:18:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:18:34):**  for two generations lived a little bit below their means instead of above their means and gradually  you know we were able to to put together a piece of land that then i was able to to come in and  build a farm a business on but anyway in the early days he died young he was 66 i was 31 i'd  
**[0:18:54-0:19:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:18:54):**  come back to the farm full-time september 24 1982 so we only had six years together here on the farm  before he passed away but he would tell me in those early early struggling days we weren't  making any money we had no debt but we didn't make any money but we didn't have to make much of it  
**[0:19:13-0:19:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:19:13):**  but we didn't make any money but we didn't have to make much money because we didn't have any  expenses and you know we were threadbare my mentor alan nation founder of stopman grass farmer used  to always say a profitable farm has a bit of a threadbare look you know when people come here  
**[0:19:28-0:19:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:19:28):**  to polyface they often remark wow you know this this is not glitzy stun no it's not it's dirt under  the fingernails it's put yourself up your bootstraps it's threadbare stuff but it's  dysfunctional strictly functional anyway he would tell me in those early years we were so struggling  
**[0:19:44-0:19:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:19:44):**  it was financially difficult threeson hour you know we were living in the attic we were living  on 300 a month uh driving a 50 car and he would say we were more stable financially than the big  fat cat you know john deere driving allegedly successful farmers in the area who he never told  
**[0:20:05-0:20:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:20:05):**  me who all of his clients were we never knew who they were he wouldn't even tell us where he was  headed when he was going to a client but he he would just say we're more financially stable than  a lot of these guys driving big trucks and big tractors not because we made a bunch of money  
**[0:20:22-0:20:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:20:22):**  but because our balance sheet was more stable how you become a hero is you outlast everybody  and you out integrity everybody because you're the one that pays your bills you're the one that's  happy to be farming you're not trying to figure out how to get out you're the one whose children  
**[0:20:42-0:20:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:20:42):**  want to stay in farming and they say well why in the world would your kids want to stay in farming  well because you know it's a great place to be well our farm stinks and doesn't make any money  dusty and drudgery and chores you know but half the farmers i know really don't want their kids  
**[0:20:58-0:21:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:20:58):**  to be farmers and so our culture has not been in a farm denigrating mindset for that long we've  only been on a farm denigrating mindset since about 19 whatever 1960 prior to 1960 farmers  were revered they were honored they were pillars of their community they were set on bank boards  
**[0:21:20-0:21:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:21:20):**  they were honored in society but since about 19 mid 60s late 60s farmers have moved into the hill  billy redneck dregs of society rather than the pillars of society that may change you know you  go to spain and when you realize that the the guy who knows how to prune the cork tree to produce  
**[0:21:45-0:21:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:21:45):**  the greatest number of acorns for the acorn finished iberico pork that fellow is revered  in the community and earns as much as a heart surgeon that's a different culture  that is a very different culture i think that in our culture we have denigrated now i don't  
**[0:22:09-0:22:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:22:09):**  know how else to say it look nobody has gone to their high school guidance counselor i i tell this  make this joke everywhere i go and i've never had anybody refute it nobody's ever gone to their  guidance counselor in our lifetime and you go in there you're you know you're a rising senior the  
**[0:22:28-0:22:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:22:28):**  guidance counselor wow you know mary or jim wow you've got really good grades you're sharp in fact  you know you're so sharp you should be a farmer why do we laugh at that joke why is that funny  and really that reality it's not funny no it's not it's absolutely not funny and that's why  
**[0:22:48-0:22:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:22:48):**  that's why when people ask me what kind of farming do you do i joke all my first response is always  uh profitable and that always throws them for a loop profit what farming profit you know it's  a lot more than profitable farming but i find it by just quickly responding what kind of farming  
**[0:23:07-0:23:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:23:07):**  do you do oh profitable that's not what they're expecting it really starts a conversation down a  different pathway than even they were expecting and i think that as we farmers in our movement  we need to be thinking about what long-term legacy value brings honor being the the top producer or  
**[0:23:31-0:23:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:23:31):**  having the biggest tractor you know all that means is that a bigger estate sale and at the end of the  day we need to be putting profit along with production and realizing that if we pay our bills  and we have places that people enjoy coming a haven where it's a farm that smells good  
**[0:23:58-0:24:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:23:58):**  looks pretty is relationally healthy my biggest joy is when visitors come to our farm their ceos  are different people from around the world they come and as they leave they say all of your people  are happy and that reminds me of the way queen of sheba you know when she came to visit solomon  
**[0:24:19-0:24:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:24:19):**  and she said even your butlers and your your slaves and your staff have a beautiful countenance  they're they're happy and we encourage that we we want a place where we are doing sacred work  and there's a deep level of happiness in doing sacred righteous big picture stuff this reminds  
**[0:24:41-0:24:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:24:41):**  me of a comment that you made in the marvelous pigness of pigs and by the way joel i read widely  as you do i've always enjoyed reading and read quite quickly many people over the years have  asked me to put together a recommended reading list to learn more deeply about what's going on  
**[0:25:02-0:25:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:25:02):**  and what's going on in the world and deeply specifically about agronomy and i put together  recently and shared with a group of people the only book on a list of 50-some books that i gave  a must-read recommendation was the marvelous pigness of pigs so thank you for sharing that  
**[0:25:18-0:25:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:25:18):**  and putting it out there yes very kind you made a comment that agriculture needs to reclaim the  moral high ground because of the pillaging or yeah i'll just use that word because of the  pillaging types of practices the degradation of soil health and agricultural ecosystems that we  
**[0:25:40-0:25:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:25:40):**  have propagated as a result of our management practices i'm reminded of this comment and what  you just described is that to be a hero and to leave a legacy we really need to reclaim the  moral high ground and not be the people who are damaging ecosystems on the planet well yes yes  
**[0:26:03-0:26:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:26:03):**  and this is why i'll just be blunt and say that the lie of you've got to produce this to feed the  world is such a it's a recipe for disaster on so many levels if you travel to africa the third if  you travel to third world countries they are rich in resources and many times their struggle is not  
**[0:26:25-0:26:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:26:25):**  because they don't have resources or because they don't have a market or anything like that  it is socioeconomic no country is responsible nor emotionally extorted to have to feed the world  ultimately communities must feed themselves and boy if there's one thing that we're learning in  
**[0:26:46-0:26:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:26:46):**  this coronavirus pandemic it is the value of communities being able to feed themselves  when commerce breaks down when there's a glitch you want a community that can feed itself this  burden on the back of farmers that they walk around hunched over with this burden of i have  
**[0:27:07-0:27:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:27:07):**  to feed the world i have to feed the world and if i'm successful at that then i'm successful  but that burden makes farmers lose soil uh it makes farmers produce bushels of material that  is nutrient deficient not nutrient dense so the nutrition goes down the quality goes down it's  
**[0:27:28-0:27:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:27:28):**  more susceptible to fungal attack or you know aflatoxins or a million different things it's  equivalent to a pastor thinking well i have to save the world no if that's your your mantra  you're going to cheat cut corners uh do anything possible to you know get people in the pews to  
**[0:27:52-0:27:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:27:52):**  put money in the offering plate to do all sorts of things that's not going to build a legacy that  lasts so farmers have to understand that there is a a much bigger program a much bigger protocol  going on than just i have to go out here today and feed the world no you have to steward and take  
**[0:28:15-0:28:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:28:15):**  care of things you have first of all you have to take care of your soil and you have to take care  of your animals or your plants you have to produce the best animals and plants that can be produced  you know that's stewardship the difference between conquistador mentality pillaging of taking what  
**[0:28:35-0:28:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:28:35):**  i can as fast as i can the difference between that and long-term stewardship where i've been  given talents and as long as the master is away i'm trying to increase those talents for the  master so that when the master returns and of course if god created this and it's in the  
**[0:28:51-0:28:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:28:51):**  ultimately the universe is god's then we should be asking well how do i give god a return on  his investment is a dead zone the size of rhode island in the gulf of mexico is that a good return  on on investment if you own the world would you be happy with aquifer depletion soil erosion  
**[0:29:11-0:29:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:29:11):**  dead zones pollution species extinction millions of acres uh being for example you know monocrops  as opposed to poly crops poly species and you know diversify plants and animals what would you want  out of this investment if we start thinking about it that way i think it can really help us  
**[0:29:35-0:29:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:29:35):**  you know get a handle on where we need need to each go with our own individual  place it's it's not okay to see a big gully develop in your field it's it's not okay to need  more things that end in cide the latin suffix for death it's not okay to see a depletion  
**[0:29:55-0:30:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:29:55):**  infertility to have to have to see the soil hardened and have to get a bigger tractor because  the old one can't pull it through the hardening soil anymore that's not okay that that's a general  it happens slowly and insidiously but the idea of wearing out land is completely foreign in the  
**[0:30:14-0:30:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:30:14):**  abundance lexicon we because of our footsteps should be seeing the land more productive every  year we should see our animals healthier our vet bills decline that is all a part of the abundance  mentality this mantra of needing to feed the world really originated as a marketing slogan  
**[0:30:37-0:30:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:30:37):**  of large-scale agribusiness to promote a certain type of agriculture what is presently called  mainstream agriculture or conventional agriculture the mantra has been swallowed hook line and sinker  by mainstream producers and farmers because it feels emotionally rewarding and fulfilling on one  
**[0:30:56-0:31:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:30:56):**  level and yet it is really the mantra at the foundation of an agriculture where soil is the  biggest export we export more soil and topsoil than we do grain i find it really interesting  we call this conventional agriculture it's been conventional only in recent history but according  
**[0:31:17-0:31:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:31:17):**  to the un fao small scale smallholder agriculture produces 70 of the global food supply and uses 30  of the inputs think about what that means for the inverse it means that everything that we presently  call mainstream or conventional agriculture produces 30 of the global food supply using  
**[0:31:37-0:31:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:31:37):**  70 of the inputs that is a description of a dysfunctional system in the field and then  as you mentioned a moment ago we're also seeing the system dysfunction and breakdown  on the processing side in the present environment with coronavirus and everything that's happening  
**[0:31:59-0:32:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:31:59):**  in dairy and beef it's very sad not just those two but in a broad array of different crops to see  the processing has become so centralized that we have a very weakened system and i think one of the  next steps is we have to look at how we can reclaim that system and no longer have the  
**[0:32:20-0:32:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:32:20):**  centralization well yes and these kinds of discussions as they flow like you and i are having  it's easy for a commercial large-scale farmer to suddenly feel uncomfortable like oh here he goes  here he goes again demonizing size size is automatically evil or wrong or whatever and i think  
**[0:32:41-0:32:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:32:41):**  right here it's important to point out we're not talking about scale and size per se we're talking  about a centralization let me give you an example right now look we've been in business a long time  we're not a huge farm although a lot of people you know when you hit i mean this year we'll probably  
**[0:33:01-0:33:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:33:01):**  hit three million dollars in sales a lot of people say that's a pretty big farm and according to the  usda it is a big farm but why does it have such a small farm feel well because rather than  centralizing we have expanded by duplication by decentralized duplication as opposed to  
**[0:33:23-0:33:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:33:23):**  concentration for example if we raise a hundred thousand chickens they're not going to be in two  great big poultry houses they're going to be in 300 little field shelters that we move every day  with human labor not tractors and machines so it's very human centric and these are scattered on  
**[0:33:48-0:33:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:33:48):**  our home farm we rent about 12 farms in the area and so they're scattered at other places and we  move them around from farm to farm we move our we move our personnel around from place to place  and so yes it's a lot of chickens sure it's a lot of chickens but it's not centralized in one spot  
**[0:34:06-0:34:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:34:06):**  we're very mindful of placing them where the soil needs the fertility where uh you know people can  access it easily we're very cognizant of that whole um womb umbilical carrying capacity of the  of the ecological nest as to where we place these things there's no smell there's no flies uh it's  
**[0:34:32-0:34:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:34:32):**  completely portable you know mobile infrastructure so say well uh we need to get these chickens uh  slaughter we need to get them butchered so what kind of processing facility you know thinking out  in the future well what if you know what what if we were doing a million chickens all right let's  
**[0:34:50-0:34:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:34:50):**  just say it's really successful and we were doing a a million chickens well what would that look like  well then you start thinking about human scale and ecological carrying capacity and so for example  you know dave shafer of uh featherman plucker fame has put together a cool poultry slaughter deal  
**[0:35:10-0:35:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:35:10):**  where he gets these um used shipping containers he has some omeish minnow like folks down in  missouri that'll take these containers and refurbish them into small little uh mobile  processing facilities so you know for a hundred thousand bucks you can uh throw a chassis under  
**[0:35:29-0:35:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:35:29):**  that bring it delivered to anywhere in the country set it on four pillars and boom you're in you're  in the processing business under federal inspection let's assume we want federal inspection  now can they do a million a year no they can't they can only do about 120 to 140 000 a year  
**[0:35:46-0:35:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:35:46):**  but guess what if we place those in farmland that can handle the real-time processing water  now we don't have to be in the hazardous sewage business we don't have to have slurry ponds and  we take what the industry has as toxic waste and is a major cost factor to clean up we use that as  
**[0:36:08-0:36:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:36:08):**  fertigation in real time because we're not overrunning and if every time we need another  you know 140 150 000 bird capacity we don't increase the central structure we simply choose  another piece of land over here with this you know 30 acres that can handle all of the processing  
**[0:36:29-0:36:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:36:29):**  water in real time as fertigation and we set another one over there and we set another one  over here and we set another one over here and so we we scale by duplication rather than by  centralization that is an incredibly democratized way to scale that's in direct opposition to the  
**[0:36:51-0:37:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:36:51):**  centralized concentrated mentality of the factory processing system and factory production system so  i don't want anybody listening to think that you know we have some sort of a vendetta against size  it's not size at all it's how that size is structured i think absolutely we can have  
**[0:37:14-0:37:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:37:14):**  5 000 cal 10 000 cal operations but they're not going to be structured in a typical you know  centralized confined way and that decentralization creates resilience which is so badly needed in  today's world joel one of the questions that i'm often asked that i would love to ask you as well  
**[0:37:36-0:37:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:37:36):**  is when we consider all of the social changes societal changes that have taken place in the last  couple of decades and that are likely to take place in the next couple of decades  we live in very uncertain times of course and none of us can predict the future necessarily but what  
**[0:37:53-0:37:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:37:53):**  changes do you anticipate happening over the next few years where do you see the big opportunities  and what direction would you advise young farmers to really pursue that's a hard question a i'm not  a prophet and in fact i collect i collect bogus prophecies i have a whole file i've been collecting  
**[0:38:10-0:38:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:38:10):**  them all my life and it's really amazing whenever i see somebody make a big prediction i clip it put  in this file and it's really hilarious now to go back 40 50 years and see the kinds of predictions  that that people made that you know did not come to pass at all i'm pretty that's the one thing that  
**[0:38:29-0:38:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:38:29):**  i am scared to do is make predictions what i can say is here's where trends seem to be moving  the reason i don't know where we're headed is because i think that there is still a very big  battle for the heart and soul of the food system whether it's going to go to you know led lighted  
**[0:38:50-0:38:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:38:50):**  vertical hydroponic factory stuff in you know cities which is of course what the bill gates and  the you know the um i'm sorry i have to laugh at my own joke i never thought about this that that  is a new illuminati led vertical light farming is the new illuminati anyway i couldn't stand it um  
**[0:39:16-0:39:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:39:16):**  anyway you know is that going to be where it goes and of course you know we've got this you know  norwegian company that's uh making yeast they're piping hyper oxygen into a yeast chamber and  creating supposedly every kind of food stuff you can imagine just out of this air that's fed yeast  
**[0:39:35-0:39:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:39:35):**  i don't understand all about it but you know the kind of of star trek food stuff that we're seeing  i mean including impossible burger and and beyond beef and all this stuff of fat you know fat  produced proteins and things there is a lot of money being poured into that right now and frankly  
**[0:39:55-0:40:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:39:55):**  a lot of uh cultural equity being poured into it as well the whole eat lancet report the un  you know demonizing livestock demonizing animals uh you know cows are destroying the planet and blah  blah blah blah blah i don't actually know which way this things are going to go if we're going to  
**[0:40:14-0:40:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:40:14):**  go to a you know a vegan future i mean there are there are now local ordinances being framed that  uh want to create special eating sections for meat eaters like a smoking section so the meat eaters  don't have to be housed with the non-meat eaters there are numerous ordinances being proposed for  
**[0:40:35-0:40:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:40:35):**  a meat tax that would put like a you know a 50 tax on meat because it damages the environment  i don't know where those things are going it's if you dwell on it very much you can get a little  bit discouraged here is what has stood the test of time and so when i wrote a book folks this  
**[0:40:54-0:41:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:40:54):**  ain't normal i i went back and looked at what has been the template of time and the template of time  is that the sun s-u-n drives this through chlorophyll through photosynthetic activity  to build soil and nobody in all the high tech programs uh hydroponics or anything else and  
**[0:41:23-0:41:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:41:23):**  nobody has been able to reproduce the nutrient complexity the full spectrum of ratios and  nutrient balance that comes from soil grown food so it seems to me like after all the smoke clears  and after all the technology does its thing that there will be a lot of food that will be  
**[0:41:51-0:42:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:41:51):**  a place for well-grown well-maintained soil grown anything once all the experimenters have gone  through their fads and their experiments just like you know hydrogenated vegetable oil was the  darling of the you know dieticians and nutritionists for decades and now not only are you  
**[0:42:22-0:42:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:42:22):**  not supposed to eat very much of it the actual recommended daily allowance is zero it's turned  from darling to demon in 50 years that's a pretty big change and it's very conceivable to me that  some of this impossible burger beyond meat vegetarianism veganism uh i mean we're seeing  
**[0:42:46-0:42:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:42:46):**  things about the microbiome the essential fatty acids in the brain brain development alzheimer's  there all sorts of cool things that we're seeing and one of the things that we're finding is  god's creation is a fearfully and wonderfully made thing that has certain rules there are rules  
**[0:43:04-0:43:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:43:04):**  there's an order there's an order to it and you can't just go in like a swashbuckling you know  a pirate and adulterate obliterate disrespect that order and so the soil is built primarily  with perennials so we want fewer annuals more perennials as much as possible and we want an  
**[0:43:28-0:43:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:43:28):**  integrated food supply not a segregated food supply so the thing that will stand the test of  time is anyone who figures out how to link up for example their pig operation to a cheese making  operation so that you relink this the way doesn't go to a landfill the way goes to the pigs and food  
**[0:43:48-0:43:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:43:48):**  scraps i mean 50 of landfill waste is edible scraps well those shouldn't go to a landfill  they should go to a chicken you know the chicken can eat that and make eggs out of it but you can't  do that if the chickens are segregated in a factory in iowa that's fed corn from illinois  
**[0:44:05-0:44:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:44:05):**  that's fertilized for material from the middle east we have completely segregated so the food  systems i see the future are going to be places that actually build soil that can actually build  nutrient density that can fill the full spectrum of the human microbiome and nutritional need  
**[0:44:25-0:44:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:44:25):**  with a fully integrated system where you have a complex relationships with plants and plants  plants and animals animals and animals and this primarily a regionally secure thing in other words  where the fertility to run it the energy to run it the inputs the outputs and the cycle  
**[0:44:51-0:44:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:44:51):**  is regional as opposed to global and therefore susceptible to all these you know breaks and  chains and whatever disagreements between nations and things like that rather it would be more  community regionally based when you put that together as a package integrated regional  
**[0:45:17-0:45:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:45:17):**  soil developed carbon-centric people oriented you put that together and you realize oh  well that's what has stood the test of time since the beginning of civilization and that's the way  that's the way that's the way i will bet for the future joel there's one specific aspect of this  
**[0:45:40-0:45:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:45:40):**  i'd like to dive into a bit deeper i recall a conversation that you and i had across the dinner  table about that's a number of years ago and i asked the question what would have to happen or  what would have to be true for mainstream midwest grain production corn and soybean production to  
**[0:46:00-0:46:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:46:00):**  shift to a grazing grass-fed beef production model because it was my understanding at that time  and still is today that particularly with corn prices where they are now but you can actually  make more money and be more profitable producing grass-fed beef at market prices than you can  
**[0:46:19-0:46:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:46:19):**  growing corn for some reason i thought that math came from you can you enlighten me if i'm thinking  about that correctly sure yes indeed and that's one of the my funnest things i do when i get into  a bunch of crop farmers from the midwest and so what i do i i i say okay we're gonna we're gonna  
**[0:46:38-0:46:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:46:38):**  grow corn i don't grow corn so you have to give me the numbers you know they give me the numbers on  whatever you know fertilizer planting costs diesel fuel equipment depreciation blah blah blah  and you come up with you come up with a number per acre seed you come up with a number per acre  
**[0:46:54-0:46:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:46:54):**  of expenses harvest all those things what are you going to get paid for this well of course that's  always fun because you have you have the optim optimists remembering what they got you know four  years ago the pessimists you know looking at what they got this year and so anyway but but it's a  
**[0:47:13-0:47:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:47:13):**  it's a fun exercise everybody finally comes up and generally generally it comes out to in the  neighborhood of of uh 50 dollars a profit per acre comes out to around 50 to you know 75 80 bucks an  acre that's kind of a sometimes obviously it can be zero but generally it's in the 50 somewhere  
**[0:47:37-0:47:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:47:37):**  between 1500 an acre on corn all right so then we go okay now we're gonna we're gonna grow some  we're gonna instead put this in grass and grow calves now the the number that the farmers have  to that i supply that they don't know is that the equivalent amount if you're growing 100 bushel an  
**[0:47:57-0:48:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:47:57):**  acre dry land corn land that will grow 100 bushel an acre corn will produce 400 cow day grass on the  words that's grass that will support 400 cow days per year which is a little over one you know one  cow per acre obviously land that only produces 50 bushel corn will only do 200 cow day you know  
**[0:48:24-0:48:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:48:24):**  per year and if land that will produce 200 bushel acre corn will do 800 cow days per acre so the  100 to 400 is pretty consistent well let's just go with 100 because that's nice and conservative  and uh no you know most farmers would would say 100 is a little bit low uh today most farmers  
**[0:48:45-0:48:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:48:45):**  would want well you know more about this than i do but yeah they'd want in the 150 range probably  let's just assume 100 for example because it's easier to do the math in your head uh so 100 we're  gonna we're gonna score 400 equivalents so that's 600 stocker equivalents because the stockers are  
**[0:49:03-0:49:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:49:03):**  a little more than half of a cow so the 600 stocker equivalents so we're gonna we're gonna  get these calves at you know 500 pounds what are they gonna you know they're gonna grow uh you know  and of course again the ruble farmers you know they sit here and they they throw out these  
**[0:49:19-0:49:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:49:19):**  numbers and and that's let's be very conservative and say this calf only gains a pound and a quarter  a day and we're going to keep it for 200 days 200 days and a pound and a quarter is 300 pounds and  we're going to buy that calf for you know x amount they give me a number we're going to sell it for  
**[0:49:37-0:49:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:49:37):**  the x amount they give me a number the point is that every one of those that pound and a quarter  of gain per day is let's just say that it's worth let's just say it's worth a dollar fifty just for  sake of discussion that pound and a quarter a day is worth a dollar fifty okay so then we put our  
**[0:49:56-0:50:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:49:56):**  expenses in we're going to have mineral hauling labor you know moving them around you know there's  really no equipment there's no fertilizer there's no planting there's no harvesting that's all  pretty well done you might have a four-wheeler that you have to depreciate to go take care of  
**[0:50:12-0:50:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:50:12):**  them but you know the costs are primarily labor hauling mineral and you're going to have some  mortality there's going to be some death loss the point is that um at a dollar fifty per cow day  even if we chop that substantially to a dollar per day times 600 stocker days is six hundred  
**[0:50:34-0:50:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:50:34):**  dollars per acre you take off your expenses i've done this all over the place iowa illinois  indiana ohio in the midwest and it always no matter what the price of cattle is no matter  anything it always comes out into the you know the two to three hundred dollars per acre range  
**[0:50:55-0:51:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:50:55):**  sometimes more but for sake of discussion right now let's just say it comes out to three hundred  dollars per acre well there's nobody nobody that's netting three hundred dollars per acre on corn so  what's funny is as you finish this exercise you know these guys kind of sitting there and then  
**[0:51:15-0:51:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:51:15):**  the first one you know he starts to chuckle and then another one chuckles they say well what are  we raising corn for and so i asked alan nation he's the first one that kind of went through this with  me i asked him one time i said well if this actually became widely adopted then corn prices  
**[0:51:35-0:51:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:51:35):**  would plummet because nobody would grow it he said oh no he said exactly the opposite corn prices  would triple because that's what it would take to get people to plant it it would have to match the  the reward of growing beef yeah and guess what guess what as soon as corn tripled guess what  
**[0:51:57-0:52:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:51:57):**  would happen to pork and chicken the beef it would go up it would become even more valuable  because those are omnivores they can't just eat grass like an herbivore and so if you read  jefferson's ag book thomas jefferson's he kept copious notes and if you read his ag book and  
**[0:52:15-0:52:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:52:15):**  look at the ratios in there it's amazing up until very very modern times the ratios were incredible  as to what you know beef and pork and chicken were and corn were worth if you take those ratios  for example in his day the cow value was 10 times the turkey today it's 50 times so in his day a  
**[0:52:49-0:52:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:52:49):**  turkey was worth 10 times a cow if you went and bought a turkey it was worth 10 times what a cow  was today i think you mean 10 of what a cow was it's 50 times yeah yeah a cow and you can just go  through this and the ratios are amazing to see the difference and and what so what would happen  
**[0:53:09-0:53:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:53:09):**  is if this were widely understood and large swaths of the prairie were returned back to prairie  with herbivores intensively managed grazing on them the grain prices would go way up  would go way up and that would make poultry go way up pork go way up and suddenly beef the  
**[0:53:32-0:53:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:53:32):**  herbivores the beef and the lamb folks would be the everyman meat again which is the way it was  throughout until very modern days and the uh poultry would be the luxury that's why president  truman said his vision for america was a chicken in every pot today he would say ribeye steak on  
**[0:53:53-0:53:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:53:53):**  every grill but back in those days chicken was extremely expensive and so he said a chicken in  every pot because the idea was everybody's going to eat like kings and back in the day poultry was  always the luxury because grain was simply too expensive to feed the poultry only only royalty  
**[0:54:12-0:54:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:54:12):**  and nobleman had enough wherewithal to be able to feed poultry grain and have it on demand otherwise  it was well you know we have chicken you know once or twice a year for festive occasions  because that's the only time there's enough extra vegetables and potato skins and you know homestead  
**[0:54:34-0:54:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:54:34):**  scraps to be able to fatten up a couple chickens that we can eat otherwise it's lamb and lamb and  beef it is interesting to think about how this shift might change the production landscape in  the midwest all of a sudden you no longer need nearly the grain infrastructure capacity the  
**[0:54:52-0:54:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:54:52):**  tractors the combines all the fancy equipment the rail yards changes dynamic significantly and  eliminates all the beef capers as well which is something else that is an interesting ecological  dynamic the interesting thing yes you're exactly right uh the interesting thing is that grain  
**[0:55:10-0:55:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:55:10):**  the transcontinental railroad the whole railroad system was essentially built on midwest grain  one of the reasons why the you know subsidies and grain programs developed was in order to  give the trains which initially were not profitable they needed freight and when the  
**[0:55:35-0:55:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:55:35):**  first trains went out to the mid there was no freight to carry they didn't have  factories and and you know and things to to carry uh and so the quickest first freight  was grain and so if we can encourage through federal policy if we can encourage grain production  
**[0:55:57-0:56:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:55:57):**  then we'll give the railroad something to carry the railroads can be profitable and we can now  have a great country the close symbiosis between railroads and midwestern grain is really embedded  in our in our nation's dna you used the phrase earlier when you were describing this 100 bushels  
**[0:56:19-0:56:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:56:19):**  per corn equals 400 cow days of grazing of grass you mentioned that you use the phrase that if this  were widely known it could really shift the production dynamics and the landscape and you've  obviously been speaking to this for a number of years how many growers have actually made the  
**[0:56:36-0:56:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:56:36):**  shift and the change oh a handful not not very many well you know look first of all  nobody again nobody wants to admit that their routine has been wrong that's just human nature  we don't want to admit that we've been doing the wrong thing we want to think we've been doing the  
**[0:56:57-0:57:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:56:57):**  right thing and so there's a stigma there's a strong stigma to to admitting we're gonna we're  gonna make a change uh yeah i just i just was last week emailing back and forth with a young  21 year old aspiring young farmer he's one of four sons in a confinement dairy operation in  
**[0:57:17-0:57:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:57:17):**  michigan you know they're milking almost 2 000 cows in confinement they're four million dollars  in debt he loves farming but he hates the family farm and he says you know how can i  what can i do so anyway i've been back and forth with him we met personally oh i don't know six  
**[0:57:38-0:57:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:57:38):**  months ago make a long story short he's got his first 300 broilers come he's going to put him on  pasture and portable shelters and he's got his first uh 12 pigs coming he's going to direct  market building up his customers and bless his heart his dad and his family has given him a  
**[0:57:56-0:58:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:57:56):**  little bit of a lot of families wouldn't wouldn't allow that you know but fortunately his he just  comes from a very unusual family where they're willing to let him have a little bit of of rain  and try something you know it's just one person at a time and and i think that as long as people  
**[0:58:16-0:58:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:58:16):**  can make it uh they just what my wife says they they don't know any better you know they just  this is all you know you don't realize how hard it is to make a change i'll give you a personal  story you know people think i'm a i'm an innovator i'm creative i yeah and i am i yeah i know i am  
**[0:58:36-0:58:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:58:36):**  yeah i know i am uh but listen oh shoot 30 i don't know what not 30 25 years ago uh we started doing  eggs in a pretty good sized way and so what we were familiar with was our little portable field  shelters with chickens and so i built a fleet of those to put a thousand layers 50 in a in each  
**[0:58:58-0:59:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:58:58):**  shelter and had 20 of these shelters moved them along the pasture and uh it worked extremely well  boy we thought we had the the cat's meow you know and we were on the front page of acres usa  magazine and and uh this was the cool thing well here a visitor came uh michael plain and joist  
**[0:59:18-0:59:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:59:18):**  his wife from uh australia he came up looked at this he looked at me shook his head he said this  is obsolete well i was offended what do you mean this is obsolete i was on the front page of acres  usa magazine what do you mean i'm obsolete those obsolete said there's a new of course you know  
**[0:59:34-0:59:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:59:34):**  you had to love him because of his wonderful australian accent and he said there's this new  um netting material electrified netting it was invented in germany and he said i got some of it  and it's it's the slickest thing in the world and you know you can move it around electrified he  
**[0:59:50-0:59:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=0:59:50):**  keeps the he keeps the varmints out keeps the chickens in and i said well how high is it oh  it's you know 42 inches i said well chickens will jump out of it you know i had every everything  so well you know all i can say is you're obsolete well boy i i chewed on that chewed on that for  
**[1:00:09-1:00:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:00:09):**  three years for three years i chewed on that and finally i said you know what i'm just going to get  a piece of this fence and just so i can prove to myself that it doesn't work so i can confirm my  thoughts because i know i'm right on this there's no way it can work i got a piece of it from premiere  
**[1:00:27-1:00:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:00:27):**  and set it up i remember it like yesterday i went up there i got one piece of it i went up and i  encircled one of the shelters and then i picked up a corner put a five gallon bucket under so the  chickens could all come out i got another five gallon bucket went over there and sat outside  
**[1:00:43-1:00:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:00:43):**  to watch it not work and in in five minutes in five minutes i said michael was right and i  ran down to the house i told terese i said michael and joyce were right we are obsolete  we're making this change today and we did and now we run the millennium feather net we run  
**[1:01:06-1:01:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:01:06):**  whatever five thousand layers in you know 25 of the labor the chickens are happier i mean it's  just it was a revolutionary thing for us financially from a labor stand and even from a  chicken health standpoint and an egg quality standpoint i mean everything everything was positive  
**[1:01:26-1:01:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:01:26):**  and yet it took me three years to try something why because i was emotionally invested i i built  those shelters i'd conceived those shelters this was my baby this was this was the model  i was emotionally invested in it and it struck me looking back on that if it took me three years to  
**[1:01:51-1:01:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:01:51):**  make that level of adjustment from one kind of portable pasture layer model to a different kind  of portable pastor layer model imagine these guys who've grown up running corn planters and  you know spreading fertilizer and running a combine and big trucks and and all of the the  
**[1:02:13-1:02:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:02:13):**  fraternity and the the the emotional affirmation the who am i who i'm a i'm a i'm a farmer that  grows corn and soybeans and indiana or iowa you know our whole identity and affirmation and our  self-confidence it's all wrapped up in this emotional thing that this routine and boy  
**[1:02:38-1:02:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:02:38):**  that should change that is just well alan nation used to tell me he said it's easier to change the  person to change the person's model or change the person's mind and his thing was it's so embedded  that literally a lot of farmers have to go out of business retire many of them are committing  
**[1:02:57-1:03:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:02:57):**  suicide i mean there's tremendous problems in this commodity agriculture sector it sounds harsh to  say it i think that that that is correct that it literally takes a changing of the guard to change  it it takes a changing of the land ownership and the people on it in hard times before something  
**[1:03:18-1:03:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:03:18):**  else actually can be done so it truly is adapt or die yes yes it really is and it sounds horrible  but that's a you know that's a that's a normal thing goodness you i mean it's the way it is in  marriage i mean you either learn to get along or you or you don't survive you know and and so you  
**[1:03:40-1:03:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:03:40):**  have to adapt if if she wants a squeezed toothpaste tube and you want a rolled one well is that a hit  you're gonna die on you're just gonna start squeezing it joel you you speak to many different  farmer groups and you've spoken to many different farmers over the years what are conversations  
**[1:04:03-1:04:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:04:03):**  that you would like to have more often but you sense that it makes farmers uncomfortable  oh my that's an easy one the number one elephant in the room is succession what happens if you die  tomorrow nobody wants to talk about it at stockman grass farmer magazine where i'm the editor now  
**[1:04:23-1:04:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:04:23):**  since alan has passed away we've really put attention on this over the last year and a half  we did our first succession school last fall we couldn't get people to come and i warned them at  the magazine i said yeah you want to do this i want to do it we all we all know it's yellow  
**[1:04:38-1:04:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:04:38):**  sit in the room but it's it's a taboo subject nobody wants to talk about it i don't know how  to punch through that i mean i guess nobody this isn't unique to farmers nobody likes to talk about  you know estate planning and and that sort of thing but but with farmers it's so important  
**[1:04:54-1:05:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:04:54):**  because you have the complication of the land which is really not it's not worth anything  unless you sell it but if you sell it then you don't have anything but money and and farmers  you know farmers are not just business people we we love our land i mean if somebody walked in today  
**[1:05:09-1:05:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:05:09):**  and said i'll pay you you know 10 million dollars for your land i'd say go get lost i wouldn't  get in for sale you know and there's an aspect of this yeah succession succession is absolutely  the conversation and the fact that the average farmer is now 60% of the land is now 60% of the  
**[1:05:29-1:05:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:05:29):**  land is now 60 years old in the next 65 in the next 15 years 50% of america's farmland is going  to change hands now you know you could quibble over that whether it's 50 or 40 percent or whatever  but the point is that we're going to have a massive massive changing of land and equipment  
**[1:05:53-1:05:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:05:53):**  and building ownership over the next 15 years who's going to be in control of that when we  get to this the point is this level of agrarian equity transfer has not happened in any civilization  in history it's only happened in conquest you know the huns come in and sack roam or  
**[1:06:14-1:06:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:06:14):**  or uh ging's khan slinks sweeps across europe i mean it's happened in conquest but it's never  happened in peace just a peaceful transition of this magnitude so we're in very uncharted waters  and coming out of this on the other end i don't think anybody right now knows what that's going  
**[1:06:36-1:06:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:06:36):**  to look like and now we've got the coronavirus complicating things which i think is going to  have a long tail of political and economic consequences from government intrusion to  whatever i get letters from 80 year old farmers saying can you find me a young person to  
**[1:06:54-1:06:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:06:54):**  inherit my farm too i don't want to give to my kids they'll just sell it i love this place too  just watch it developed or sold to anybody and i'm looking around well where's the young person  and you know young people oh yeah pick me pick me and you bring them in and in a month well they  
**[1:07:09-1:07:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:07:09):**  don't want to get up at five o'clock they don't want to they want to have a cup of coffee on the  veranda until eight o'clock till they you know go out and start and i mean not all i don't want to  be over generalistic but this is one of the reasons why we're so excited about the kind of  
**[1:07:27-1:07:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:07:27):**  farming that we do here at polyface because it is it's not capital intensive and it's highly mobile  and so when you have mobile infrastructure and you have high management so your equity is in skill  and information and not in infrastructure the average farm in america it takes four dollars  
**[1:07:49-1:07:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:07:49):**  worth of depreciable equity to generate a dollar in annual gross sales so if a farm is generating  a hundred thousand dollars in annual gross sales it will normally have four hundred thousand dollars  worth of buildings and equipment to generate that hundred thousand dollars our farm here our ratio  
**[1:08:09-1:08:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:08:09):**  is 50 cents to a dollar so if we're generating a hundred thousand dollars in sales we only have  50,000 in buildings and equipment that's a big difference in actual capital costs versus cash  flow and so that's why we're excited about i mean not just for us because we you know we're doing  
**[1:08:29-1:08:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:08:29):**  okay but for the generation of young people coming on and why we run our stewardship program our  apprenticeship program is to actually teach these ways so that our young people we've got young  people that have left our program and no money no equity no land no nothing and they're full-time  
**[1:08:47-1:08:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:08:47):**  farming placing for example a pastured poultry enterprise on an existing beef operation  with you know with an old geezer that's running his beef cows i could put a passion poultry  operation on any beef cow operation grain operation goodness let's put the grain through  
**[1:09:01-1:09:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:09:01):**  the animals we raise ourselves instead of going down to the elevator how about i pay you an extra  25 cents a bushel you raise gmo free i'll do the animals because you know you like to go to the  caribbean for uh three months in the winter and when you don't have grain crops you go ahead and  
**[1:09:19-1:09:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:09:19):**  i'm not going to affect your lifestyle i'm a young person i'll do the animals i'll feed your grain  through the omnivores direct market them and uh and you can continue doing your grain farming  until you're done anyway there are all these cool relational collaborative arrangements so that  
**[1:09:37-1:09:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:09:37):**  young people can get in and it's all enabled by having mobile modular management intensive  infrastructure as opposed to centralized high capital stationary concentrated infrastructure  it's one of the most liberating things for a young person to be able to enter this vocation  
**[1:10:01-1:10:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:10:01):**  debt-free and land-free because your farm business is actually mobile your customers are mobile your  farm business is mobile and it can be placed on somebody else's equity anywhere and if things go  south and the relationship breaks up you can just take your farm business and move it somewhere else  
**[1:10:22-1:10:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:10:22):**  this is the nimbleness of tomorrow's place we have not in agriculture developed a nimble protocol  it's an extremely non-nimble protocol if you read any business books today you know that as we move  into the future one of the trend lines is it's not about being big it's about being nimble as you  
**[1:10:46-1:10:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:10:46):**  said john it's about adaptability to changing things so what we see right now is we see people  buying on the internet we see door-to-door delivery we see so so you know our farm teams  have to have somebody that's social media savvy a good communicator a good instagrammer that can use  
**[1:11:08-1:11:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:11:08):**  electronic media for both sales and messaging to build these links and relationships with our  customers and you know the distribution picture is we've already got you know fedex and amazon  but we're seeing like in our area we're seeing a proliferation of what we call a man in a van  
**[1:11:27-1:11:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:11:27):**  a very very tiny little nimble outfits with one and two vans that are essentially food couriers  and there's a whole sub you know movement here of distribution that's nipping at the heels of  fedex and ups and something on a regional level they're not going global but they're just regional  
**[1:11:48-1:11:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:11:48):**  but because they're nimble and they're small and they're low capitalized they can actually undercut  on a local regional business they can actually do even better so these are these are trend lines  that we see this is such an exciting conversation joel and i'm really really happy to be having this  
**[1:12:07-1:12:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:12:07):**  conversation because there is the challenge of succession but succession is about more than just  the transfer of equity it's also a transfer of skills and like you i get many emails from people  at both ends of the spectrum older farmers who want to have young people take over their operation  
**[1:12:27-1:12:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:12:27):**  but also many young people even particularly many from a non-farming background have a desire to get  into farming and you and i both know that the skill level required to be a successful farmer  you can't just transfer from an un-farming background and expect to be successful and so  
**[1:12:43-1:12:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:12:43):**  there's the model that you're describing gives those people who truly have the grit and  determination and the wherewithal to be successful an easy entry without a colossal failure potential  yes well look if you want to raise chickens in the commercial model the first thing you have to do  
**[1:13:07-1:13:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:13:07):**  is build a half a million dollar chicken facility but if you want to raise chickens with us or in  our model all you need is about 300 bucks to build a pastured shelter and you start okay if  you're good at it and you enjoy it then you can build a second one and you can build a third one  
**[1:13:26-1:13:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:13:26):**  and so you know we now have the equivalent more than a car gill or you know tyson chicken house  but they're they're all these little uh little portable shelters that we can place at different  different fields different farms different plates different times different people can operate them  
**[1:13:46-1:13:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:13:46):**  and they're completely separate from the land base the single biggest cost of farming is land  but if you don't have to capitalize the land and you can jump in i mean this this is why this is  why a little uh one and a half acre intensive you know spin spin farming the sustainable produce  
**[1:14:04-1:14:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:14:04):**  intensive whatever what the end is but anyway you generate you know 150 000 on an acre of very very  intensively run uh a place i mean the uh singing frogs farm in petaluma california they're one of  my you know heroes a couple came in they were not farmers they bought five acres and this land was  
**[1:14:25-1:14:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:14:25):**  50 000 an acre it was at petaluma california but they actually cash floated through their produce  operation now they can grow 12 months of the year but they use techniques for example where they can  they use starter trays so they take all that early seedling phase run that in starter trays  
**[1:14:43-1:14:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:14:43):**  so the only thing that actually goes in the ground is an actual plant from juvenile to maturity  and that way they can actually on some of their stuff they can actually get 12 crops in a year  per square foot well suddenly you know you're you're into the 200 000 an acre income and that  
**[1:15:03-1:15:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:15:03):**  works but it's extremely skill knowledge and management intensive the single most important  piece of equity that any farmer has is experience and you can't google experience so when somebody  asks me you know i want to farm what should i do i say you know get experience and this isn't about  
**[1:15:24-1:15:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:15:24):**  organic non-organic commercial not commercial the fact is over half of what we do on the farm  building a fence fixing a trailer hitch how to back a trailer basic stuff that's not organic or  inorganic it's just regular life experience that's the most important equity you can have going into  
**[1:15:44-1:15:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:15:44):**  it these nimble low capital flexible systems i mean michael abelman up in um vancouver you know  he's got entire portable uh produce operations that he uses uh rubbermaid tanks fills them with  spent um you know mushroom media and takes them to vacant lots in the city you know he's rehabbing  
**[1:16:10-1:16:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:16:10):**  druggies and gang members and all sorts of stuff there in workforce and they get their hands in the  soil start growing plants do this in vacant cities vacant lots i mean he's got one five acre farm  under the under almost under a stadium an old defunct stadium in a parking lot it's revolutionary  
**[1:16:30-1:16:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:16:30):**  and if the city decides we're going to build something here then they just load all these  things up on a low boy and move them to another lot and so the entire farm operation the entire  the entire thing is portable that's nimbleness and i think that that holds a lot of promise for  
**[1:16:45-1:16:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:16:45):**  the future especially in uncertain times i mean the more uncertain times are the more nimbleness  you need joel i want to go back to the succession conversation i think there's a very important  question that needs to be asked and that is what advice do you have for people on both ends of that  
**[1:17:07-1:17:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:17:07):**  spectrum both for the older people who desire to transition and for the young people who want to  enter in first of all let's talk about the guy my age you know in your 60s you're on your way out  and you're thinking about next steps do you know somebody who wants it whether it's family or  
**[1:17:25-1:17:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:17:25):**  non-family sometimes it's non-family sometimes nobody in the family actually wants it but but  the kids don't want it sold they grew up there they have a love for the place blah blah blah  you know legacy family name blah blah blah so they don't want to sell it but they don't want  
**[1:17:41-1:17:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:17:41):**  to actually farm it the question is who's going to run it who's going to plant it who's going to  move the cows who's going to do this once you settle on that then you have to come together  and often often it's one it's one of the children not all of them but one if you're really fortunate  
**[1:18:05-1:18:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:18:05):**  you might get might have two that are interested but in general you know you have to figure out  who has the ability you got to look at your talent at your talent and your passion who's  got the ability who wants to do this who can do this and then make it so that person can  
**[1:18:27-1:18:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:18:27):**  which is why i'm a big i have great disagreement with the equal you know the equal inheritance  thing where it's an undivided equal interest all of us know plenty of families where one child  stayed home with dad and mom took care of them took care of the farm and then they die and  
**[1:18:47-1:18:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:18:47):**  suddenly this child with undivided unequal inheritance suddenly has to pay half a million  dollars or a million dollars to buy out the interest of the siblings the equity is not in  stocks and bonds or treasury bills it's in it's in the land farmers put all their equity in the  
**[1:19:06-1:19:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:19:06):**  land it's not in the not in liquidable liquidable you know assets so then the farm gets sold because  the siblings who stay there now that sibling who stayed there is in his 50s or her 50s they go  through a life crisis because this is what they love this is all they know but they can't they  
**[1:19:24-1:19:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:19:24):**  can't hang on to it because the sibling wants their million dollars this to me is the biggest  problem or or anathema in farm country farmers have to understand this is not about love it's  about stewardship who can steward that if you've got two children one stayed on the farm and the  
**[1:19:45-1:19:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:19:45):**  other one went to town and they've got their 401k Roth medical insurance and everything else it's  the height of unfairness to saddle the one who stayed home with having to buy out an equal share  of the sibling who went to town and didn't hold it together so that's a huge discussion that every  
**[1:20:09-1:20:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:20:09):**  family needs to have and once you decide a plan then you make it happen now in stopman grass farmer  we're actually trying to run a couple of succession articles per issue now because we really believe  this is the elephant this is tearing families apart it's been doing it for some time most of us  
**[1:20:29-1:20:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:20:29):**  who are in farm country can recite several horrible stories of succession not done well and  we would like to see it done well and there are ways to do it you can sell the farm early you can  do gift programs you can give cash to one and land to the other i mean in our family for example  
**[1:20:53-1:20:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:20:53):**  there were three of us i love the farm my other two siblings didn't and i demonstrated an ability  to keep it together and so so i get the land and they get everything else now is the land worth  more yep the land is worth more it's not equal but you know what the land is only worth a penny  
**[1:21:09-1:21:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:21:09):**  if i sell it so if if i don't sell it the land is worth they're actually getting way more than i am  because they're getting they're getting cash and cars and you know uh all the stuff you can turn  into cash i'm getting something i got to keep the barn roof on the fences up and the place painted  
**[1:21:27-1:21:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:21:27):**  and the you know the multi-flora rows out of the fields you got to have these conversations you've  you got to have these conversations you've got to figure out what your plan is going to be now that  being said what about the young general what about the the young people right the young people have  
**[1:21:41-1:21:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:21:41):**  to understand that you're not owed anything and you have to show an ability to be a steward which  means you have to do what demonstrates that you can hold it together and you got to remember the  farm isn't there after 40 50 100 years because somebody sat around and said they deserve it they  
**[1:22:07-1:22:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:22:07):**  work for it and so you have to prove that you can handle money you can handle your time and you can  make decisions that warrant you getting quote-unquote special treatment to be the hat they hang their  legacy on don't ask for special treatment don't ask for better living conditions don't ask for  
**[1:22:33-1:22:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:22:33):**  a better truck to drive show yourself faithful and you will then garner the honor and respect of the  older generation who's willing then to invest in you as the as the arrow parent these are the  conversations that farm families have to have but they by and large fear them and would like them to  
**[1:22:57-1:23:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:22:57):**  just go away but they don't go away and one day dad doesn't wake up mom doesn't wake up  and then where are you you have to think about what's going to happen down sometimes the best  thing is just to sell it and that's that's fine i mean my dad again i i you know he was an accountant  
**[1:23:17-1:23:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:23:17):**  and i remember him telling these older farmers who had kids that didn't want it and were not  that interested in it as these older farmers hit 60 and 70 he'd tell them sell it now why work  yourself to death till you're 80 on something that your family doesn't want just go ahead and  
**[1:23:36-1:23:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:23:36):**  sell it now and you can get a little five acre place enough to have a garden and plant some trees  and get your little farm fix milk a cow if you want to this is a long time ago but you know you  can get your farm fix on a few acres and enjoy your equity why should you die on your tractor  
**[1:23:53-1:23:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:23:53):**  so your kids can run off to las vegas with your money you make these decisions early not after  the fact you start this process early on joel thank you for that and i will also highly recommend  joel's book on this topic fields of farmers and subscribe to the stopman grass farmer for this  
**[1:24:13-1:24:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:24:13):**  reason if for no other just to get this information and to learn more about these activities joel i  want to be considered of your time thank you very much for sharing your wisdom and your thoughts  with our audience and i look forward to having more discussions with you in the future thank you  
**[1:24:29-1:24:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:24:29):**  john it's been an honor and a delight and blessings on you thank you joel  the team at aea and i are dedicated to bringing this show to you because we believe that knowledge  and information is the foundation of successful regenerative systems at aea we believe that  
**[1:24:47-1:24:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:24:47):**  growing better quality food and making more money from your crops is possible and since 2006 we've  worked with leading professional growers to help them do just that at aea we don't guess we test  we analyze and we provide recommendations based on scientific data knowledge and experience we've  
**[1:25:06-1:25:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:25:06):**  developed products that are uniquely positioned to help growers make more money with regenerative  agriculture if you are a professional grower who believes in testing instead of guessing someone  who believes in a better more regenerative way to grow visit advancingecoag.com and contact us  
**[1:25:23-1:25:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/resilient-agriculture-models-for-the-future-with-joel-salatin/#t=1:25:23):**  to see if aea is right for you thank you for listening and we look forward to working with you  