---
title: Rethinking Plant Physiology and Absorption of Nutrients from the Soil with Gerald  Pollack
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.

---

### Regenerative Agriculture Podcast  (2018-06-29)  
### Author(s): John Kempf  

**[0:00:00-0:00:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:00:00):**  Hi friends, I'm John Kempf hosting this podcast. I am passionate about developing regenerative  agriculture systems that improve soil health, produce crops that are completely resistant to  diseases and insects, and produce fruit of such an exceptional quality that we can have a legitimate  
**[0:00:16-0:00:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:00:16):**  conversation about growing food as medicine. I've discovered that there are many people with  incredible knowledge and information about soil and plant systems and how to develop regenerative  agriculture systems. However, much of this knowledge and this information is scattered,  
**[0:00:33-0:00:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:00:33):**  it's found all over the place. Some of it has been published in peer-reviewed publications,  but there are many incredible stories and a lot of knowledge that has not been published and that  hasn't been shared with many people. I started Advancing Eco-Agriculture in 2006 to bring this  
**[0:00:49-0:00:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:00:49):**  knowledge together in a more coherent fashion and incorporate it into products and growing systems  that growers can easily put into practice. It's my personal mission to have these regenerative  agricultural systems become adopted globally and become the mainstream, the status quo against  
**[0:01:07-0:01:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:01:07):**  which all other growing systems are compared. To help achieve this goal, I want to share the  knowledge that we have learned in the last decade and make it available to everyone. While we have  developed products at AEA that embody the principles of regenerative agriculture systems  
**[0:01:22-0:01:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:01:22):**  and make them easier for growers to apply, this knowledge and these principles can be applied  anywhere and when they are applied properly, they will always increase farm profitability  and resilience to climate stress. If you have any questions, suggestions, comments, or ideas,  
**[0:01:40-0:01:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:01:40):**  topics that you would like for me to discuss, please connect on LinkedIn or on Twitter,  where my username is at visionbuilder7 or you can also email me at john at johnkempf.com.  I would very much like to hear from you and to hear your feedback. Be sure to subscribe to this  
**[0:01:58-0:02:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:01:58):**  podcast and thank you very much for listening. Enjoy the show. On this episode, I had the  privilege of interviewing Dr. Jerry Pollack, who is a leading researcher in the area of  water structure and water ordering, or as he refers to it, a much better term is EZ water,  
**[0:02:16-0:02:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:02:16):**  which stands for exclusion zone water. Jerry's research work has won some exceptional accolades  and has been considered by some people to be the groundbreaking research in biology that  is going to become some of the most important research for the 21st century.  
**[0:02:35-0:02:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:02:35):**  Jerry's research in how water functions in plants and in cells has tremendous implications for how  we understand plant nutrition, nutrient absorption, nutrient flow with implants, and very importantly,  how we understand the absorption of nutrients and compounds by plant root systems and by plant  
**[0:02:56-0:03:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:02:56):**  leaves. In this discussion, Jerry and I talked about how the exclusion zone effect, the easy  effect of water, explains how water can quickly move up to the tops of very tall trees. We talk  about how this function of structured water can allow large red blood cells to move through  
**[0:03:15-0:03:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:03:15):**  capillaries that are only half the size of the red blood cell. And very importantly, I think one of  the key pieces for me was thinking about how biology in the soil can actually increase the  soil's water holding capacity directly by developing an environment that can hold more of  
**[0:03:35-0:03:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:03:35):**  this exclusion zone water directly around biological substances and biological substrates, even before  we begin building large amounts of organic matter. This is something that we've actually observed in  the field where we may apply a biological inoculant and get an almost immediate response in  
**[0:03:53-0:03:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:03:53):**  water holding capacity and drought resilience, even though there hasn't yet been time to build  large amounts of soil organic matter. And lastly, I would strongly recommend for any citizen,  scientist, farmer, agronomist who wants to understand how to manage plants and livestock  
**[0:04:11-0:04:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:04:11):**  and human health better, you really need to get to Jerry's books. His two books, Cells, Gels,  and the Engines of Life is one. The second is titled The Fourth Phase of Water, and they are on  the very, very short list. Both of those books are on the very, very short list of books that I reread  
**[0:04:27-0:04:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:04:27):**  regularly, just because they strike at the very foundations of what we think we understand  about biology and will fundamentally shift and reshape our understanding of biology in the near  future. I hope you please enjoy and please send us your comments. Thank you. Hi friends, welcome and  
**[0:04:47-0:04:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:04:47):**  thank you for listening to the Region of Agriculture podcast today. I'm excited to have Jerry Pollack  with me from Washington State University. Jerry has done some very groundbreaking research in  water and his research work has been described as perhaps having been the most innovative breakthrough  
**[0:05:04-0:05:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:05:04):**  in science in the 21st century. And I think certainly for agriculture, it has the potential  to be that because his research in water, plants, and animal bodies and our own bodies are all  primarily composed of water. And the understanding that he has developed really changes the way that  
**[0:05:21-0:05:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:05:21):**  we need to think about cellular metabolism. So Jerry, we're very excited to have you and looking  forward to hearing your thoughts. Okay, thank you, John. But let me just make one correction.  Not Washington State University, which is in Pullman in Eastern Washington and is famous  
**[0:05:36-0:05:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:05:36):**  for agriculture. I'm at the University of Washington, which is equally, maybe even more  famous, which is located in Seattle. And so there are so many universities with the name Washington  that it's really confusing. There's another one called Washington University, not University of  
**[0:05:52-0:05:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:05:52):**  Washington, which is in St. Louis. And then there's George Washington University, which is  somewhere in DC. And then even within the state of Washington, there's Western Washington University,  Eastern Washington University, Central Washington University, and probably myriad more throughout  
**[0:06:08-0:06:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:06:08):**  the country. So anyway, I'm at the University of Washington in Seattle, and I wish they'd  changed their name to make it easier for people, especially Europeans. They have no idea. Their  presumption is that there's only one university with the name Washington, but it's not true at  
**[0:06:25-0:06:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:06:25):**  all. I guess his name is so revered that people consider it a distinction to name their university  after him. Anyway, thanks for inviting me. Happy to be on and happy to share what we know about  water and other aspects of life. There are a couple of important pieces here. You've written  
**[0:06:44-0:06:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:06:44):**  two books, which I reread quite frequently, Cells, Gels, and the Engines of Life, and the Fourth  Phase of Water. And I guess perhaps as a kickoff, you discovered and described this fourth phase of  water as being the exclusion zone and described how that impacts living systems and impacts cell  
**[0:07:04-0:07:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:07:04):**  biology. Can you just give us an overview of exclusion zone water and how that might function  in plants and living organisms? How many hours do you have?  Okay. A synopsis.  
**[0:07:19-0:07:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:07:19):**  Okay. The quick synopsis. And stop me if I'm going astray. So we've all grown up to learn that  water has three phases, the solid, the ice, the liquid, and the vapor. And I learned that,  you learned that, we all learned that. On the other hand, many years ago, a suggestion was made  
**[0:07:38-0:07:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:07:38):**  by a famous physical chemist, more than 100 years ago that, you know, with these three phases of  water, it's really hard to interpret the known behaviors of water. You try to do it with the  understanding there are only three phases and you simply can't do it. It creates a kind of  
**[0:07:57-0:08:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:07:57):**  anomaly, anomalous behavior. If you total the number of anomalous behaviors, anomalous meaning  doesn't fit the theory. As of today, there's a famous website that details it. The number is  something like between 60 and 70 of them. So for a chemist looking at these, the number is so large  
**[0:08:16-0:08:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:08:16):**  that you think something has to be wrong with our understanding of water because there can't be so  many anomalies or translated into common English, there can't be so many features of water that  don't fit the theory. So it must mean that there's something wrong with the theory. So more than 100  
**[0:08:33-0:08:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:08:33):**  years ago, a suggestion was made that there must be another phase of water beyond those three,  a phase somewhere in between the liquid and solid. And this idea has been around, kicked around for  some time, especially by a few well-known people. One of them is a guy named Gilbert Ling, who's by  
**[0:08:52-0:08:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:08:52):**  now, he's 99 years old right now and he's written, I think seven books or six books on the subject.  And most of what he's written points to evidence that there is another, he doesn't call it a phase  of water, but he calls it structured water. That is where the molecules are not bouncing around  
**[0:09:10-0:09:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:09:10):**  randomly and pointed in every which way, but they're ordered. They're like dipoles,  you know, little plus and minus at either end and all these dipoles are lined up with one another.  And he's argued for many years that water inside the cell is exactly like that, is ordered. And  
**[0:09:29-0:09:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:09:29):**  also another one is Albert St. Georgie. And I'm not sure if you're familiar with that name, but  he passed about 20 years, 25 years ago, and he's considered to be the father of modern biochemistry.  And he knew through his years, having been in various fields including water, he knew that the  
**[0:09:48-0:09:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:09:48):**  organization or the order of water is really important in biology. In fact, famous quote of his  is, life is water dancing to the tune of solids. So he knew that water was centrally involved in  everything to do with living systems. And so that's when we started. And that was preface  
**[0:10:09-0:10:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:10:09):**  to answering your question, what is this fourth phase or easy water? And what it is, it's exactly  the kinds of things that these people were thinking about, but we found clear experimental  evidence for it. It's a phase of water that is indeed in between a solid and a liquid. If you  
**[0:10:26-0:10:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:10:26):**  think of, to appreciate the consistency, if you think of raw egg white, this is the consistency  of this kind of water. It's kind of gel-like, like a loose gel. And in fact, it's the main  component of water inside of gels, a side point. So it's an ordered phase where the molecules are  
**[0:10:46-0:10:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:10:46):**  lined up a bit different from what Gilbert Ling had put forth about dipoles organizing themselves.  It has a different structure. I can tell you about it later if you want. And it has, unlike ordinary  water, which is neutral, this has a negative charge, usually a negative charge. And it's built  
**[0:11:07-0:11:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:11:07):**  by energy. You need some kind of energy to build order. And this is ordered. And the energy actually  comes from light, particularly infrared light. And infrared light is all around us. If you were to  turn off the lights in the room and pull down the shades so that it's completely dark, and even when  
**[0:11:27-0:11:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:11:27):**  dark adapted, you can't see anything. If you were to take out an infrared camera and create an image  of all this, you get a beautiful image because everything is emitting infrared energy. And it's  used as a nightlight, especially for military purposes. So this energy is all around us. It's  
**[0:11:46-0:11:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:11:46):**  free for the taking. So you might call it free energy. So this free energy, which is all around  us, builds this kind of water. And the question is, where does it build? When? What happens is,  we found that when water meets a surface, particularly surfaces that are hydrophilic,  
**[0:12:05-0:12:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:12:05):**  and that means water-loving, means if the surface were like a desk or something, dropped a droplet  of water on it, the water would spread out, as opposed to hydrophobic or water-fearing,  in which case the water beads up and jerks away from the surface because it doesn't like it,  
**[0:12:21-0:12:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:12:21):**  it fears it. So usually, not everyone, but most hydrophilic surfaces, when water meets these  surfaces, the water, it transitions from ordinary H2O to this kind of fourth phase water. And the  reason we call it fourth phase, because it's just different from ordinary liquid water and certainly  
**[0:12:43-0:12:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:12:43):**  different from solid water, although the structure is somewhat similar to ice, not the same, but  there is some resemblance. And so when the water meets such a surface, what happens is that the  water layer, starting with the first layer right next to the surface, undergoes transition from  
**[0:13:03-0:13:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:13:03):**  ordinary water to fourth phase water. And it's not just a single molecular layer, that wouldn't be so  interesting, but it turns out many, many, many molecular layers build in that way. We found up  to millions of molecular layers that can build from such surfaces, all powered by the energy  
**[0:13:23-0:13:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:13:23):**  from light and especially infrared light, which is more powerful to build this kind of structure than  other wavelengths of light. And because it's an ordered phase, because the molecules inside of  this phase are not bouncing around randomly, they're well organized and ordered, in a sense,  
**[0:13:42-0:13:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:13:42):**  it's like a crystal, it's a liquid crystal. If you can imagine a crystal of say ice, which is solid  crystal, what happens is as the ice builds, it excludes all kinds of materials and particles from  the ice. Otherwise, you wouldn't get a pure crystal of ice, you get ice containing some  
**[0:14:01-0:14:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:14:01):**  junk or garbage or whatever. So as the crystals build, in order to gain the purity that they show,  they have to push out everything else, they exclude other materials, exactly the same as  when the fourth phase builds, it pushes out substances. And that's why we call it exclusion  
**[0:14:20-0:14:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:14:20):**  zone because it excludes. There's another reason for calling it exclusion zone, because exclusion  zone, EZ, and it's easy to remember. The only problem is it works in the US, but when you go to  Europe, it's EZ, so it's not quite as cool, but it works anyway. So it's kind of got a couple of,  
**[0:14:42-0:14:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:14:42):**  even more than those names, that EZ water, what I tend to call it, fourth phase water,  some people still refer to structured water, although that really is not an appropriate term  because everything has structure. Ordered water is another, they're all essentially the same term.  
**[0:15:00-0:15:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:15:00):**  So is that an okay preliminary descriptor of what we're talking about?  That was an outstanding preliminary descriptor.  Oh my goodness, it wasn't so good.  
**[0:15:10-0:15:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:15:10):**  And by the way, I would just very, very highly recommend to all of our listeners, this is a topic  that is so important. It has so many implications for understanding plants. We're having this  conversation, I wanted to introduce you to some of Jerry's work, but you really need to read the book.  
**[0:15:27-0:15:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:15:27):**  And so Jerry can give us some ideas, some inspiration and some ideas, but I would strongly  recommend that you read Cells, Gels, Engines of Life and the Fourth Phase of Water, two books that  are outstanding. So Jerry, the followup that I have to that initial overview is Understanding  
**[0:15:44-0:15:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:15:44):**  EZ Water. And there are a lot of implications for biological systems and to our understandings of  how cells work, how nutrients are transported. And there are two pieces in Plant Nutrition and  Agronomy that there isn't a good explanation for that. I know many farmers are interested in  
**[0:16:07-0:16:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:16:07):**  this, many farmers and many agronomists struggle to understand. The first is how are nutrients  transported and also water, how is water transported inside a plant? And secondly, related to that is  how are nutrients absorbed by root systems and then transported to the plant? We know there is  
**[0:16:26-0:16:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:16:26):**  plenty of evidence to suggest that the current models for how this is thought to work, the  water doesn't all fit the model. So we know the model is not quite correct. How might our  understanding of EZ Water be able to shift our thinking?  
**[0:16:41-0:16:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:16:41):**  Okay, those are broad and provocative and interesting questions. Let me talk about transport  first and if I run off track, remind me that we also need to address the issue of absorption in  plants. So transport, so the question always arises, how does the water get transported?  
**[0:17:04-0:17:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:17:04):**  And I guess the question is most interesting when you think of 100 meter tall redwood trees,  how does a column of water get transported from the roots all the way up to the leaves on top?  And this is a conundrum. In fact, just sitting on my desk right now is a picture of Martin  
**[0:17:23-0:17:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:17:23):**  Fanny. I don't know if you know the name, but Martin, he passed a couple of years ago and  I was sent this memoriam thing and it's been sitting on my desk and he was quite a handsome  guy when he was in his school days. But when I got to know him, he was getting aged and had a lot of  
**[0:17:38-0:17:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:17:38):**  problems and I think he passed probably he was in his 90s and he was highly influential. And he's  the one that had a famous Scientific American article, I think it was called, How Does the  Water Get to the Top of Tall Trees or something like that. And in his review article, he indicated  
**[0:17:54-0:18:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:17:54):**  how difficult the problem was to solve, but nobody really could understand because a column like that  is so high that the amount of energy it would take to raise something if you've got a head of water  on top of you that's 300 feet tall, there's a lot of weight and it's hard to imagine getting water  
**[0:18:13-0:18:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:18:13):**  to move up against such a heavy load. And at that time, he was not clear on what he thought,  but eventually after many discussions, I think he was kind of aligned with our thinking and he  wrote actually a nice little capsule at the back of my fourth phase book, which is still there.  
**[0:18:33-0:18:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:18:33):**  He's had something about, he thought that by reading this book, he would learn how physics  and chemistry apply to water, but he said he learned that through water, he learned more about  how physics and chemistry work. And I was really pleased with that comment. Anyway,  
**[0:18:50-0:18:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:18:50):**  the question is how is water transported? And so we think we understand this because we discovered  something that was completely unexpected. We found that if we took a tube that could, for example,  resemble a xylem tube, if we put the tube made of hydrophilic material, a thin tube, maybe 500  
**[0:19:11-0:19:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:19:11):**  micrometers in diameter and put it inside a bath of water, this was actually noticed by a young  student working in our laboratory who came running in. I was sitting in my office in the chair where  I'm sitting right now and I had a guest. I can't remember who it was, but we were in the middle of  
**[0:19:30-0:19:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:19:30):**  chatting or something and this undergraduate student walked in and very excited about what  he found. And he was excited enough to interrupt our conversation. And of course, I was happy to  hear what he had to say. He said, you know, I put this tube in the water and the water contained a  
**[0:19:47-0:19:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:19:47):**  lot of particles. So you can, there was any water movement. You could easily track it by looking in  microscope and watching how those particles behave. So he said, I put the tube in the water and I  noticed that the water was flowing through the tube, like water flows through a straw and it  
**[0:20:04-0:20:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:20:04):**  doesn't stop. It just keeps going. And he thought it was pretty important. He was supposed to be  doing something else, but like most of the students, they don't listen to me and they  find more interesting stuff than what they were assigned to do. And I actually encourage that sort  
**[0:20:19-0:20:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:20:19):**  of thing because some important discoveries have come. Anyway, he said the water just keeps flowing  through and it just keeps going and it doesn't stop. And he thought this was important. And I  thought it was extremely important because usually if you've got a tube and you want to drive water  
**[0:20:35-0:20:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:20:35):**  through the tube, it's sort of like a blood vessel, you know, and you want to drive blood  through the vessel, you need the heart to do the pumping. Well, we think there's more to it now,  but at any rate, you need to develop a pressure or a pressure difference between one end and the  
**[0:20:52-0:20:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:20:52):**  other end. And that pressure gradient drives the flow. And here there's no pressure gradient  because the tube is sitting horizontally oriented in the chamber of water. So there's no pressure  difference between one end and the other end. Yet the fluid keeps flowing through and you need  
**[0:21:08-0:21:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:21:08):**  energy to push fluid through. You can't get something for nothing. And so I'm thinking as he  comes in and delivers this news, I'm thinking that if he's right about this, then it's so important  because it demonstrates what we had known up to that point that the energy comes from the light  
**[0:21:26-0:21:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:21:26):**  that's absorbed in the water, especially the infrared light. And so I thought if his  observation is real and we checked it to check for artifacts or errors or stuff, it was correct.  If it's correct, it demonstrates the importance of this kind of energy that's being absorbed from  
**[0:21:46-0:21:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:21:46):**  the environment. So of course, when you think about plants, the environment is out there is  pretty important. So we knew, we found out, we did many experiments afterwards that it's the energy  from outside, particularly the infrared energy that gets converted into a different kind of  
**[0:22:03-0:22:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:22:03):**  energy. Actually, it's a charge gradient, but we don't need to go into that at the moment. It's in  the fourth phase book, but this is what drives flow through the tube. So now we have something  completely different and understanding about the driving of flow through a tube. And we can  
**[0:22:23-0:22:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:22:23):**  apply that, for example, to what happens in plants and trees, because again, we have these thin tubes  and in this case, they run vertically. And we know that the energy from outside can be used to  basically push the water through this kind of environment. And Martin Canny, by the way,  
**[0:22:44-0:22:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:22:44):**  did an experiment and it appears in my book. He took some xylem and he put some particles inside  and what he saw was an exclusion zone at the edges of the xylem. In other words, this fourth phase  water exists as an annulus just inside the xylem tube. And this is exactly what we found in our  
**[0:23:07-0:23:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:23:07):**  experiments. We used a hydrophilic tube made of various materials and always right next to the  surface, the material surface of the tube just inside is our easy water or exclusion zone. And  so the same thing Martin showed exists in xylem of plants. So therefore this reinforces the idea  
**[0:23:27-0:23:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:23:27):**  that what my students saw in the laboratory may be operative inside the trees and the energy is  now coming from outside. And without going into detail about the mechanism, it has to do with  charges that develop inside the tube and charge gradient. So if you have, for example, a lot of  
**[0:23:46-0:23:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:23:46):**  protons, the protons, well the protons, first of all, attach to water molecules form hydronium  ions and those hydronium ions repel one another. And so if there are fewer hydronium ions up high  and more down below, the hydronium ions, which is basically a protonated water, will move upward.  
**[0:24:04-0:24:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:24:04):**  And so we're pretty confident that this mechanism is a mechanism that applies in the xylem of plants  and it's detailed. I mean, without a couple of diagrams, it's not so complicated, but it's hard  without diagrams to explain the details of the mechanism, but it's in the fourth phase book.  
**[0:24:26-0:24:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:24:26):**  And my point, by the way, is that we think that this occurs also in the cardiovascular system  of you and me. So let me tell you, there's this side issue from the issue of agriculture and  plants, but it's really important. So I began my career studying or simulating, you might say,  
**[0:24:46-0:24:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:24:46):**  the cardiovascular system, pressure and flow. And I built a model. I was really excited about  this model and I thought we had pretty much solved every problem there was to solve because we could  explain the pressures and flows at different points in the cardiovascular system and everything  
**[0:25:05-0:25:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:25:05):**  occurred as a consequence of the pumping of the heart. And so for many years, I was kind of proud  of that, although it made no impact. I began to understand why. Usually when people build models,  the models are filled with assumptions. And if you're not sure about whether these assumptions  
**[0:25:23-0:25:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:25:23):**  are accurate or true or not, then it blends a kind of doubt. But at any rate, I thought I really understood  the cardiovascular system until I went on one of my trips to Russia, to Moscow University, where my  good friend Vladimir Vayikov introduced me to his neighbor, the guy in the next laboratory.  
**[0:25:43-0:25:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:25:43):**  And this guy was studying the cardiovascular system and he tells me through translation,  in the cardiovascular system, there's a very big problem. Oh, really? Tell me about it. He said,  well, the big problem is that capillaries are so small. So you start with the arteries and  
**[0:26:01-0:26:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:26:01):**  arterioles down to very thin capillaries and then the venules and the veins and back to the heart.  And it circulates. But when you get to those tiny capillaries, there's a problem because in healthy  young adults, the diameter of the capillary is three or four micrometers. And you compare three  
**[0:26:21-0:26:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:26:21):**  or four with the red blood cell that needs to squeeze through and it's six or seven micrometers.  So it looks like a plumbing problem. It looks like you have to force those red blood cells somehow to  get through these narrow conduits. And it looks like a screw up of mother nature. How is it possible?  
**[0:26:40-0:26:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:26:40):**  This is not a plumbing system that you would think that mother nature would devise, but  that's the way it is. And of course, there are reasons for it, obviously. But one of the things  is that in order to squeeze those red blood cells through, they have to bend, have to be kind of  
**[0:26:54-0:27:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:26:54):**  squeezed and pushed through. So this Russian guy calculates the amount of resistance that would be  encountered in squeezing these red blood cells and pushing them through. And he comes to the conclusion  that the resistance is so high that if the heart were fully responsible for driving blood through  
**[0:27:12-0:27:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:27:12):**  those capillaries, the heart would need to develop an extraordinarily high pressure, something like a  million times the pressure that it actually develops. You might call that high blood pressure,  but we're talking about six orders of magnitude. So this is a problem. He says it can't be. There  
**[0:27:31-0:27:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:27:31):**  must be something else besides the heart that's doing this because it just can't be. It's just  too far off. And well, that had big influence. The first thing, he had a few ideas about  mechanisms. I had my own ideas and I knew about our work where if you put a tube in a chamber of  
**[0:27:52-0:27:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:27:52):**  water, flow goes through the tube, like through a straw. So I'm thinking, wow, the same phenomenon  could be at play in blood vessels. And we tested it and my student has just been working on his  writing his PhD dissertation on this. And we found indeed that that was the case. We found that first  
**[0:28:12-0:28:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:28:12):**  of all, like others who found, if you stop the heart, the flow doesn't cease. This is the first  thing that is shocking. Many people don't know about this, but there are a handful of studies  over the years that have shown that, that if you stop the heart in any of a number of ways,  
**[0:28:30-0:28:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:28:30):**  you don't stop the flow. It goes down quite a lot, but it keeps going. And so the question is, well,  how is it possible that it can keep going? There must be something that is at work in addition to  the heart. And I think what's at work is the mechanism that I've been talking about where  
**[0:28:46-0:28:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:28:46):**  you can get flow propelled by the energy, electromagnetic energy, I guess you'd call it  infrared light energy. And you know, inside our body, there's lots of infrared because  the metabolic energy is heat and heat is where you get infrared energy. So it's like a sauna going  
**[0:29:05-0:29:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:29:05):**  into the sauna. You get lots of infrared energy and that energy is absorbed by the body. So at any  rate, we found that if you add infrared energy, that this flow through the capillaries that's  retained, even when the heart is not beating, it amplifies enormously. So we're confident that the  
**[0:29:24-0:29:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:29:24):**  phenomenon that I mentioned to you, where you get flow in a tube that it applies not only in our  cardiovascular system, but also in the vessels of plants and trees. So that was a long answer to your,  I guess it was your second question about flow.  
**[0:29:44-0:29:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:29:44):**  Jerry, I'd love to follow up on this. I know that you expressly mentioned that it's difficult  to describe with a diagram. And so if this question isn't easy to answer, then we can  come back to it in some other fashion. But we know within your blood example, we know that  
**[0:30:01-0:30:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:30:01):**  having the right electrolyte balance within blood is very important. Sodium, potassium, for example.  And you mentioned the importance of having the appropriate proton pressure and proton gradients  and within plants. And so I'm wondering how does this awareness also transfer to our understanding  
**[0:30:20-0:30:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:30:20):**  of nutrient mobility within the vascular tissue of a plant? Are there important nutrient balances  that we should be paying attention to in plant structure as well? Well, there are, but I don't  know them. And so I would hesitate to speculate, but I will say one thing that if you want to  
**[0:30:38-0:30:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:30:38):**  transfer something through tissue or through a vessel, there is a way to do this. I hesitate to  come across as though I tried to sell my book, but in the first book, Sales, Gels and the  Hengins of Life, this is described in detail. What it involves is if you can imagine a tube  
**[0:31:01-0:31:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:31:01):**  filled with easy water, with structured water, and that tube tends to exclude everything,  almost everything. We can't say everything because we haven't studied everything.  However, if there's a region along the tube that is not the ordered or easy water,  
**[0:31:17-0:31:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:31:17):**  but it's ordinary water, the solutes or nutrients or whatever you like will tend to gather in that  zone. There is a process that I described called zone melting, which pretty much does exactly this.  So again, along the tube, inside the tube, you've got structured water, but in some region along  
**[0:31:38-0:31:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:31:38):**  that structured water, you have a zone that's not structured. And so all of the nutrients would be  there. Now, if this non-structured zone propagates along the inside of the tube, then the nutrients  will move with it. And this is a way of transporting substances. And I think that this  
**[0:31:59-0:32:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:31:59):**  may operate inside the cell. If the cell, you think of the cell as containing only structured  water, and I think there's fair evidence that most of the water inside the cell contains easy water,  then all the nutrients would seem to get excluded. That won't work. And so you need to have regions  
**[0:32:21-0:32:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:32:21):**  inside the cell that are non-structured, at least transiently non-structured. And then you can move  things from outside to inside or inside to outside. And I think this is the way nature does it.  The word that comes to mind is like caterpillar or something where you have something propagating  
**[0:32:40-0:32:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:32:40):**  along it. And this is one way that nature can move substances. And I think it occurs not only  in plant cells, but also in animal cells. And I give some examples in that  Dales, Jails and the Engine of Life book, which I, sorry, the book was published some years ago  
**[0:33:02-0:33:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:33:02):**  and a few things have changed. Mostly, I think the book is as accurate as it was then. I think  it's as accurate now with the exception of a few considerations that are slightly different based  on what we found since then. But I think this is how nutrients can move from one place to another  
**[0:33:21-0:33:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:33:21):**  place. I hope that's clear. I'm not sure it is. Yes, I understand what you're trying to communicate  and that actually your explanation and your answer leads back to the first question that I asked a  little bit ago, which today the classical explanation for nutrient transport across cell  
**[0:33:41-0:33:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:33:41):**  membranes is the assumption that the cell membrane is impervious and we have channels and pumps and  transport systems that move nutrients back and forth, that we can only move individual ions  across cell membranes. And yet, particularly in agriculture, there are some pretty clear cases  
**[0:33:59-0:34:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:33:59):**  where the evidence doesn't fit the theory. And the classical one that I refer to all the time is  the absorption of systemic insecticides by plant roots where we're applying systemic compounds that  are absorbed in their entirety by the root system and then transported throughout the entire plant.  
**[0:34:15-0:34:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:34:15):**  You've proposed that there might be some alternate mechanisms for nutrient absorption by cells. Can  you describe that for us? Well, yeah, I think it starts with the fundamental assumptions that you  mentioned that the membrane is impermeable and that pumps and channels are what governs pretty  
**[0:34:37-0:34:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:34:37):**  much the behavior of cells, what comes in, what goes out. And I think that concept is just dead  wrong. And I know I'm in the minority and let me explain. First of all, most cells, not all cells,  have negative charge inside them, net negative charge. And if you stick an electrode inside the  
**[0:35:00-0:35:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:35:00):**  cell and measure the electrical potential difference between the inside and the outside,  typically in animal cells, it'll be minus 50 to minus 100 millivolts and in plant cells,  it's higher, typically, maybe 100 to 200 millivolts negative. But at any rate, the inside of the cell  
**[0:35:17-0:35:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:35:17):**  is negative. And this is reported by many people for many years. And I think there's no question  about it. The only question is, how does it occur? What's the reason for it? And somebody came up  many years ago, got a Nobel Prize for suggesting a sodium pump. That is, this pump lies in the  
**[0:35:38-0:35:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:35:38):**  membrane and the sodium gets pumped out. And so if you're pumping out positive charges,  a simplification of what the theory is, but basically if you pump out positive charge,  then the cell remains negative instead of neutral and the pump keeps going and therefore the cell  
**[0:35:56-0:36:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:35:56):**  remains negative. So it's an active dynamic kind of thing. A different explanation is that the easy  water inside the cell is negatively charged. And this is the reason why the inside of the cell has  negative charge. Now I'm not the only one nor the first one to question the existence of pumps and  
**[0:36:15-0:36:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:36:15):**  channels. Gilbert Ling, who I mentioned earlier, Gilbert came from China after World War II and  he was among three people chosen from all over China to come to the US study. And there were  three and one of them, I think one passed and one of them got a Nobel Prize in physics. And then  
**[0:36:37-0:36:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:36:37):**  it was Gilbert Ling who many people suggested is deserving of at least one Nobel Prize and maybe  more, but he's been passed over at least so far. And so Gilbert did some experiments to check this  idea that the membrane contained pumps and what he did was poison the cell in many different ways.  
**[0:36:57-0:37:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:36:57):**  I mean, it was, you might say overkill. And so if you pull the plug, if you poison, metabolically  poison the cell, you're basically pulling the plug on the pump and therefore the effect of  pumping should disappear right away. But they didn't. He could measure what's been attributed  
**[0:37:17-0:37:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:37:17):**  to pumping. That is the electrical potential was maintained for many, many hours after that  and finally disappeared and he computed. And with the most generous of assumptions given to the  other side, the cell needed 30 times the amount of energy that it could possibly conceivably muster  
**[0:37:35-0:37:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:37:35):**  just to achieve that. And so he said, it doesn't work. The evidence doesn't fit. Well,  nobody has challenged that since then. And Gilbert raised a number of other considerations,  which have gotten increasingly significant because the number of pumps that are now attributed to,  
**[0:37:55-0:38:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:37:55):**  I mean, suggested to lie in the membrane is something, a student who's studying this told me  something like 2,500 or something like this and the number keeps increasing because, you know,  in order to explain this separation of various ions or other substances, the trend is to suggest  
**[0:38:13-0:38:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:38:13):**  a pump. So everything's got their own pump and typically their own channel as well. And so  Gilbert says, there's not enough room in the membrane to accommodate all of these pumps,  let alone enough energy to power them because the sodium pump itself, even under the best of  
**[0:38:29-0:38:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:38:29):**  conditions, he computed uses 30 or 40% of all the energy that the cell can muster. At that time,  the thought was there's only one pump and that's the sodium pump. So if you think of that pump  is using 30, 40% of the cell's energy, and by now we're talking about thousands of pumps,  
**[0:38:48-0:38:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:38:48):**  it just doesn't make sense. And so that, for me, Gilbert's evidence suggests that there's no such  thing as a pump, doesn't exist in the membrane. As for the channels, there are other arguments and  these are brought up in the cells, gels and the engine of life book. If you think now there are  
**[0:39:09-0:39:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:39:09):**  more than a thousand, I believe different channels for different substances, different ions and such,  and there are big ones, smaller, smaller, smaller down to very small, even so-called aquaporin  channels for water. And if you imagine the lineup of all of these channels in the membrane,  
**[0:39:29-0:39:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:39:29):**  one for the biggest substance, the next biggest, the next biggest, so on, in order, the logic is  that each one will allow only one particular substance to flow through and exclude all the  others. So imagine, let's take first the biggest substance like a basketball and imagine a channel  
**[0:39:50-0:39:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:39:50):**  that will let the basketball through. So when the channel opens and lets the basketball through,  that channel must be able to exclude the softball, volleyball, golf ball, and all the others,  right? But they're all smaller. So how is it possible that that channel for the basketball,  
**[0:40:11-0:40:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:40:11):**  when it opens, can exclude all the smaller ones? You think that all the smaller ones would  fail right through. That applies not only to the channel for the biggest one, but the second  biggest also has to exclude all of the smaller ones and so on and so forth. So logically,  
**[0:40:27-0:40:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:40:27):**  it becomes untenable because it's hard to think of a mechanism where a certain channel will  certainly pass its basketball through, but how is it going to exclude all the smaller ones?  It's kind of like having a dog door, and the dog can get through barely,  
**[0:40:44-0:40:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:40:44):**  they squeeze through to get in or out of your house, but cat can go through too,  and so can the mouse or whatever. It doesn't exclude all the others. So there's a logical  inconsistency in the idea of channels. So both the idea of channels and pumps,  
**[0:41:00-0:41:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:41:00):**  there's something wrong with those concepts. So we go back to the issue of how does the cell get  its electrical potential? As I'm suggesting, it's the water that's inside the cell that's negatively  charged that accounts for this. So the idea has been that the cell membrane is impermeable to  
**[0:41:18-0:41:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:41:18):**  everything, and the only way that things get in and out are through these channels. But if the  channel doesn't exist, then what's going on? I think the answer is that cell membrane is not  impermeable to substances. There's several pieces of evidence. The one that I like is if you take a  
**[0:41:35-0:41:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:41:35):**  cell and you pass an electric current, this is the technique called electroporation, where once you  pass the electric current, the holes in the membrane are large enough that genomic material  can pass through. So we're talking about really big molecules can pass through, and the evidence  
**[0:41:53-0:41:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:41:53):**  for that is if you take a new genetic information and put it outside the cell, it gets incorporated,  and the cell expresses those genes. So it means the new genetic material must be getting from  outside to inside the cell, and it must be getting from the outside to the inside through those holes  
**[0:42:09-0:42:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:42:09):**  that are blasted in the cell by the electrical pulse. Now if that's true, and by the way, this  can occur once you pass the electrical current, you can put the genomic material outside a day  later and it still gets in. So it must mean that these giant holes in the membrane are there,  
**[0:42:27-0:42:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:42:27):**  they can last for a day or so, and then you ask the question, well something's wrong here because  if you have a big hole in the cell, how come all the ions will go out or in and kill the cell,  but the cell doesn't die. So it must mean that the membrane is not impermeable to all of these  
**[0:42:44-0:42:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:42:44):**  substances, and the reason the cell hangs together even without a membrane that excludes everything  is it's a gel, and you know if you handle a gel, the gel hangs together, it doesn't need a membrane,  and by the way, gels also have similar negative electrical potentials, same as the cell, but they  
**[0:43:04-0:43:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:43:04):**  have no membrane. And so I would conclude by saying that the idea that the cell membrane is  impermeable to all of this stuff is questionable. Another experiment to support that is if you take  a cell, like a muscle cell or a nerve cell that's been done with both, and just slice it like you'd  
**[0:43:22-0:43:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:43:22):**  slice the sausage, the cell doesn't die, nor does it generate a new membrane. And so when you cut a  slice, basically you're cutting through the membrane and you're exposing the inside of the  cell to the outside of the cell, but the cell doesn't die, nor does it generate new membrane.  
**[0:43:40-0:43:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:43:40):**  So it must mean that the concept that you must have an impermeable membrane around the cell is  not correct. This is very fundamental, and I think if one looks objectively at the evidence instead  of merely accepting what textbooks like to say, you'd come to that same conclusion. So back to  
**[0:44:01-0:44:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:44:01):**  your substances that get absorbed. Substances can get absorbed by the cell because there is no  impermeable barrier. I know this is a highly radical point of view, but I think if you look  objectively at the evidence, you can understand that it might be valid. A fair answer to your  
**[0:44:22-0:44:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:44:22):**  question? Jerry, that's an incredible answer, and it's not a surprising answer given some of the  evidence that I've seen out in the field, and yet it still kind of blows my mind a little bit for  what the implications are and what that might mean. Well, yeah, I'm sorry to indulge in  
**[0:44:43-0:44:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:44:43):**  philosophy too much, but in my long career, I've seen simplicity is the essence of science, and  when a concept grows so complicated that it's really hard to understand and follow and it's  full of assumptions as though it's like an upside down pyramid. It gets too big, too heavy on top,  
**[0:45:05-0:45:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:45:05):**  and it falls of its own weight. It's unbalanced. Science, nature, I should say, this is a point of  view, is my point of view, and it's no different from the point of view that's been argued for so  many years. Nature is simple, and if a mechanism looks and gets to be progressively more complicated,  
**[0:45:24-0:45:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:45:24):**  chances are that there's something wrong with the foundational concept, and I think that's where a  lot of biology is right now, extremely complicated with scientists standing up at the podium and  reveling in the complexity of the subject that they're studying, demonstrates how clever they  
**[0:45:42-0:45:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:45:42):**  are to be able to understand and cut through all the stuff and understand these complex mechanisms  that other people may have difficulty following and thinking that science is really not simple,  after all. It's complicated, and that they need to fill in all the gaps in this complex  
**[0:46:02-0:46:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:46:02):**  kind of construct. I think in a sense, science has gone astray because if you remember the principle  of Occam's razor, it should be Newton's razor because Occam was a religious guy, and he was  talking about that when you're arguing for the existence or non-existence of God, you have to  
**[0:46:21-0:46:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:46:21):**  keep the argument simple, and if you have a complicated argument versus a simple one, the  simpler one should prevail. It's more likely to be correct. And then it was Newton who took this idea  and applied it to science, and he said if you have two hypotheses to explain something, the simpler  
**[0:46:37-0:46:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:46:37):**  one is likely to be the correct one. So it's still attributed to Occam, but a few centuries later,  when Newton came around, it was really Newton who brought this into science, and scientists  have abided by that principle for so many years, but starting maybe a hundred years ago with  
**[0:46:55-0:47:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:46:55):**  physics, and physics became complicated, and of course the question is whether it's correct or not,  basically it became mathematics. It became abstract mathematics. For some people, it's hard  to understand their belief that abstract mathematics are required for understanding  
**[0:47:12-0:47:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:47:12):**  of nature. It might be true, but my own particular point of view is that I think simple mechanisms,  cause and effect, are the ones that are likely to be the actual ones working in nature. So a bit of  philosophy thrown in there with my apologies. I guess I've been in science long enough that I  
**[0:47:34-0:47:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:47:34):**  get to have an opportunity to voice that kind of opinion, perhaps not. Well I think it's a very  valid opinion and not something that you don't need to apologize for expressing because it's one  that I believe many people, at least many of the people that I communicate with agree with very  
**[0:47:50-0:47:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:47:50):**  much so. I'm still trying to fully understand a permeable membrane instead of a non-permeable  membrane. So I guess the simple question is then where is the limitation or what is the limitation  of cellular absorption of compounds? What do they have the capacity to absorb or not absorb?  
**[0:48:09-0:48:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:48:09):**  Well I can't answer that question. I don't deny the existence of a membrane,  it's just that either the membrane may not fully cover the cell, everybody  presumes that it's necessary or the membrane itself may be permeable throughout.  
**[0:48:30-0:48:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:48:30):**  And to understand how that applies to substances that are taken up by the plant,  this is more complicated or I hesitate to use the word complicated. I guess it's an area that  I for one have not given a whole lot of thought to but I can certainly speculate that if you have a  
**[0:48:50-0:48:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:48:50):**  region of the cell in which the water undergoes a transition from the easy water to ordinary water,  if there's a region with ordinary water it can certainly absorb substances from outside the cell  because it should be freely within that water substances can freely flow. Once they're  
**[0:49:11-0:49:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:49:11):**  inside the cell, if this region, if this unstructured water region moves along as we've  shown demonstrated that it can move, it propels itself along, then you can get substances that  can go from outside to the inside or similarly from the inside to the outside. How exactly that  
**[0:49:30-0:49:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:49:30):**  works is something that we've not studied and I can't suggest in detail how that might work but  it is a really important subject to worthy of study. It's just that most people who study these  kinds of things are convinced that you need to start with a foundation that involves an  
**[0:49:51-0:49:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:49:51):**  impermeable membrane and channels and pumps and if you start with that then everything and if it  turns out it's not correct as I'm suggesting then everything else will turn out to be extremely  complicated or in some cases impossible. So I hope some people begin studying that, extremely  
**[0:50:10-0:50:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:50:10):**  important. What's the size of the molecules of some of these pesticides, do you know?  I don't know off the top of my head. Molecular weights ranging from in the 40s into several  hundreds, I'm not mistaken. Okay. It's not my area of expertise. Yeah okay well one thing is  
**[0:50:29-0:50:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:50:29):**  possible that certain substances can destroy easy water, can turn it from easy water into  ordinary water and so if a substance is on the outside, if such a substance on the outside  reaches the water and starts to change that region of water from easy water into ordinary water  
**[0:50:50-0:50:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:50:50):**  then it's possible that that substance will penetrate the ordinary water, get dissolved in it  and then if easy forms again behind it, this is a way that the substance could be propelled from  outside the cell towards the center of the cell or somewhere inside the cell. So this is one  
**[0:51:10-0:51:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:51:10):**  possible mechanism for transport. Good, thanks for that and it's something that I'm certainly  interested in perhaps participating in studying more about in the future. I think another area  as we've been having this conversation, another area has popped into my mind that I'm wondering  
**[0:51:28-0:51:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:51:28):**  what the implications might be. Today there is, we have a water crisis in agriculture and what I mean  by that is we have soils that do not hold water very well. They've lost their aggregate structure,  crumb structure and so water doesn't infiltrate into the soils very well anymore and soils have  
**[0:51:46-0:51:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:51:46):**  also lost much of their water holding capacity due to loss of organic matter and the items that  I mentioned earlier, aggregate structure etc. Are there any implications for easy water in  agricultural soils? How does understanding the fourth phase of water shape our thinking about  
**[0:52:06-0:52:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:52:06):**  water in the environment? Yeah, good question, very good question and so this is kind of analogous  to you and to me to our drinking of water. Some kinds of water that we drink will just pass through  our system and come out and won't result in great hydration and other waters will stick and the  
**[0:52:28-0:52:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:52:28):**  question is well why, what's going on and I think the same thing is true of the soil. So easy water,  the first point is that easy water is the main water that fills biological systems for the most  part and but easy water grows next to hydrophilic surfaces, not all hydrophilic surfaces but  
**[0:52:49-0:52:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:52:49):**  many of them. So the surface of the soil or what's in the soil needs to be appropriate  and if it's not appropriate then the water that goes in won't stick or won't hydrate.  So if the soil is well, if the water holding capacity, what you mentioned water holding  
**[0:53:11-0:53:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:53:11):**  capacity has to do with the surface of what's in the soil and if it's appropriate or natural,  I would say, then it holds plenty of water and if you put water either through rainfall or  irrigation or however, the soil would hold that water properly but if you change the soil in ways  
**[0:53:32-0:53:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:53:32):**  that don't let the soil material hold that water then the soil won't be hydrated the way  we expect it to be and the water would just pass through or run down the slope or what have you.  So this is the issue that the content of the soil, the surfaces of what the soil contains  
**[0:53:54-0:54:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:53:54):**  need to be the kinds of hydrophilic materials that hold the water and that water is easy water,  they need to be the kinds of surfaces that actually build easy water and then if so,  if the surfaces are right then the easy water will build on them. We studied many kinds of surfaces  
**[0:54:13-0:54:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:54:13):**  and if you add water, some surfaces are really great about building easy water and that's the  water that is in biology, the water that's needed and other surfaces are not so great. So it has  something to do with the molecular nature of the particular surface and one hypothesis or  
**[0:54:31-0:54:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:54:31):**  speculation is that the charges on the surface need to be alternating in some way and distributed  in such a way as to form a template for the buildup of easy water and if they're not,  then it doesn't work and so the biological substances are ideally structured to do that when  
**[0:54:52-0:54:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:54:52):**  you think of proteins and nucleic acids and such inside the cell. In terms of the soil,  the same principles should apply that the material in the soil should be such that their surfaces of  this material have charge distributions that are just right to build easy water. If not,  
**[0:55:11-0:55:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:55:11):**  water will just run off and so when you destroy the soil, you're destroying the water holding  capacity which in terms of what we found translates to the ability to build easy water.  That help a little bit? That's fascinating. I'm really glad I asked that question because  
**[0:55:30-0:55:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:55:30):**  there is this idea within the area of biological agriculture that when soils have strong fungal and  bacterial populations that there is some mechanism by which fungi, particularly mycorrhizal fungi,  can access water and make it available to plant roots that plant roots themselves may not be able  
**[0:55:51-0:55:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:55:51):**  to access. While that may be the case, what you just described is a mechanism by which they can  actually attract water and hold water in the soil much better in addition to that.  I know there's a critical issue being once upon a time a backyard gardener but the organic soils are  
**[0:56:11-0:56:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:56:11):**  of course good at that. We don't use any pesticides of any sort. These are just awful poisons for us.  I think a lot of people are quite aware of this. Jerry, what is the question you wish I would have asked?  Oh boy, the question. Well, I guess there are a couple of questions.  
**[0:56:40-0:56:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:56:40):**  I guess I had wished that you might ask me about the role of water in health, in our health,  but I know you're agriculturally oriented. I wish you would have asked that. Well, it's the same  thing. Yeah, in a way it's the same thing. Yes, please. What is the role of water in health?  
**[0:56:59-0:57:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:56:59):**  Well, from our point of view, what we've learned, water is absolutely central for health. It's not  just a passive like a tub full of water in which the important molecules of life bathe.  If you look in the biochemistry or cell biology book, I'm not sure about plant biology, maybe  
**[0:57:17-0:57:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:57:17):**  it's different. I haven't read them, but water is considered not quite so important. It's just  kind of something to bathe the molecules. In some books, it's even hard to find the word water in  the index because it's so secondary. The first chapter will always talk about water and  
**[0:57:37-0:57:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:57:37):**  its properties, and then the rest of the chapter will go on to fail to mention water at all.  But water is so central. I think the reason it's central is that every protein in our body,  and of course when the proteins fold, that does the work of the cell. So like in a muscle cell,  
**[0:57:58-0:58:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:57:58):**  the myosin and actin proteins fold in some way and that gives us contraction. Then they unfold  and we get back to the relaxed state, but they're all surrounded by water. Although biologists often  forget that these molecules are bathed in water and the kind of water they're bathed in is easy  
**[0:58:16-0:58:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:58:16):**  water. So easy water surrounds or jackets or blankets each one of these proteins. When the  protein is about to fold, its normal environment is easy water is surrounding it. In fact, the easy  water and the protein are really a single unit together. They're one and the same. You can't  
**[0:58:34-0:58:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:58:34):**  separate them. So if the cell is missing this kind of easy water or it's deficient in it, or you  might say it's dehydrated, it can't function properly. If you're dehydrated, you can't play  another match of tennis and expect to win. You need to get rehydrated. So the cell can't function  
**[0:58:54-0:59:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:58:54):**  properly unless it's properly hydrated. So from our point of view, what that turns into is you  need a lot of, you need a full amount of easy water in your cell for that cell to function  properly. And so a good deal of health, according to this paradigm, centers on hydration, centers on  
**[0:59:12-0:59:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:59:12):**  what can you do, what can you do to build your hydration? And I guess the same thing is true in  the plants as well. And there are, yeah, very true. And what you can do, there are a whole bunch of  simple things that you can do. And one of them I mentioned is the sauna or sauna, depending on if  
**[0:59:32-0:59:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:59:32):**  you're from Finland or not. And it's hot, always hot. It's going to be dry or humid, but it's always  hot. And associated with this heat is infrared energy. So if you sit in the sauna, you're  absorbing a whole lot of infrared energy. And this infrared energy is what builds easy water.  
**[0:59:49-0:59:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=0:59:49):**  So the reason I think, or one reason you feel good, re-energize after you sit in the sauna is  that you're absorbing so much infrared energy that it builds easy water inside your cells. And  especially in those cells that have been deficient in easy water, they come up to their usual  
**[1:00:10-1:00:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=1:00:10):**  compliment. And so when you get out of there, you feel good. Either your brain feels stimulated and  refreshed, or your muscles don't ache anymore, et cetera, et cetera. And so this is one easy thing,  so-called easy thing for you to do to improve your health. Another one is what plants do naturally,  
**[1:00:31-1:00:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=1:00:31):**  and that is earthing or grounding themselves because they're in the ground. And question,  and there are a lot of biophysical and health studies now that show that if you ground yourself  or earth yourself by either walking barefoot in the sand or on the grass or immerse yourself in  
**[1:00:49-1:00:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=1:00:49):**  a mud bath or something, you're connecting yourself electrically to the earth. And it turns  out, although I didn't know this myself until about a decade ago, that the earth has a net  negative charge. I'm not sure if you're aware of this, but I grew up as a student in electrical  
**[1:01:09-1:01:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=1:01:09):**  engineering. And if one of my professors had told me that the earth has a negative charge,  if you plug in into the wall that you've got three prongs and one is the ground, if that connects to  a vast ocean of negative charge, I would have said, you're crazy. Because it didn't make any  
**[1:01:25-1:01:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=1:01:25):**  sense. But when this was first presented to me by a Russian guy who declared that my education was  deficient because in Russia, every middle school student knows about this, but in the US, almost  nobody knows about it. It's not that it's controversial, it's just that it's not taught.  
**[1:01:42-1:01:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=1:01:42):**  The earth is full of negative charge. Well, negative charge is needed to convert water to  easy water. So if you connect yourself, if you so-called earth yourself by walking barefoot or  walking on beach barefoot, you're connecting yourself electrically to this vast sea of  
**[1:02:02-1:02:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=1:02:02):**  negativity. I hate to use that word because it sounds like a psychological term, but negative  charge. I guess Benjamin Franklin screwed up when he called electrons negative, I should have said  positive, but whatever. If you're connecting yourself to this sea of electrons, then these  
**[1:02:23-1:02:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=1:02:23):**  electrons can come and be absorbed in your body to build easy water. And so this is another way,  at least I think this is the most straightforward explanation of why you feel better when you ground  yourself because you're absorbing this charge, build easy water and yourself can now function  
**[1:02:41-1:02:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=1:02:41):**  better. So that's another way. And a third way that you can help yourself is by doing what you  plant people know very well, and that is juicing, green juicing. Take a freshly growing plant  and squeeze it, squeeze the juice out of it and what you're doing and drink it. And what you're  
**[1:03:00-1:03:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=1:03:00):**  doing is squeezing the juice from inside the plant cell and the water from inside the plant cell  should be filled with easy water. So you're effectively drinking easy water, which should  very nicely rehydrate yourself. And as I said, the hydration is so important for function and  
**[1:03:20-1:03:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=1:03:20):**  health. So those are three, there are a few more ways, but I think we're running out of time.  But there are simple ways that you can make yourself healthy.  You connected another dot for me, which is something that just popped into my mind. When  
**[1:03:39-1:03:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=1:03:39):**  you mentioned infrared, today of course, many growers are starting to do field measurements  with drones, with various cameras using various or capturing various wavelengths. And there's been  this interesting phenomenon that has shown up where soils that are really biologically active,  
**[1:03:58-1:04:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=1:03:58):**  have high levels of organic matter and very strong bacterial and fungal populations,  have an extremely strong infrared signature, several orders of magnitude.  I'm not sure what you mean by signature. Do you mean that they're emitting infrared or absorbing?  
**[1:04:12-1:04:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=1:04:12):**  Yes, correct. They are emitting infrared.  I see. Okay. Well, more so than other comparable soils that are less organic.  Yes, substantially more so.  
**[1:04:26-1:04:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=1:04:26):**  Okay. Well, that's pretty interesting. When you build easy water, there are lots of charges that  are moving around from one point to another. And it's basically charged movement that gives rise  to electromagnetic radiation, especially in the infrared region. So this could be an indication of  
**[1:04:47-1:04:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=1:04:47):**  charges moving around to build easy water. It's not the necessary condition, but that would be  one interpretation of what's going on. So that would fit very nicely. Hadn't been aware of that.  That's interesting information.  
**[1:05:00-1:05:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=1:05:00):**  Yeah. All right. Well, to all of our listeners, I will be posting links to Jerry's book at the  bottom of this podcast episode. He'll be able to purchase them directly online. Thank you all for  listening. Jerry, thank you very much for joining us here on the podcast. I'm very grateful for the  
**[1:05:15-1:05:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=1:05:15):**  insights that you've shared. Oh, thank you, John.  How are you doing? Yeah, I really appreciate the invitation.  Thank you so much. This is stuff that excites me. I love to talk about it.  
**[1:05:25-1:05:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=1:05:25):**  Awesome. Thanks, Jerry.  Okay. Take care. This podcast was brought to you by a great company that I work for,  AEA, Advancing Eco-Agriculture, the leader in regenerative agriculture since 2006. At AEA,  
**[1:05:40-1:05:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=1:05:40):**  we believe in challenging the status quo to find more profitable and regenerative ways to grow  crops. We also believe that healthy plants are resistant to pests and disease, and that to grow  healthy plants, we must first think differently about agriculture, about empowering life instead  
**[1:05:56-1:06:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/rethinking-plant-physiology-and-absorption-of-nutrients-from-the-soil-with-gerald-pollack/#t=1:05:56):**  of suppressing life, about regeneration instead of degeneration. To achieve this, we formulate and  sell products that help growers produce higher quality yield with less risk of crop failure.  In short, we help growers make more money with less risk. Thank you for listening.  