---
title: Social Impacts Of Regenerative Agriculture With Gabe Brown
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### Regenerative Agriculture Podcast  (2018-04-14)  
### Author(s): John Kempf  

**[0:00:00-0:00:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:00:00):**  Hi friends, I'm John Kempf, hosting this podcast. I am passionate about developing regenerative  agriculture systems that improve soil health, produce crops that are completely resistant to  diseases and insects, and produce fruit of such an exceptional quality that we can have a legitimate  
**[0:00:16-0:00:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:00:16):**  conversation about growing food as medicine. I've discovered that there are many people with  incredible knowledge and information about soil and plant systems and how to develop regenerative  agriculture systems. However, much of this knowledge and this information is scattered,  
**[0:00:33-0:00:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:00:33):**  it's found all over the place. Some of it has been published in peer-reviewed publications,  but there are many incredible stories and a lot of knowledge that has not been published,  and that hasn't been shared with many people. I started Advancing Eco-Agriculture in 2006 to  
**[0:00:49-0:01:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:00:49):**  bring this knowledge together in a more coherent fashion and incorporate it into products and  growing systems that growers can easily put into practice. It's my personal mission to have these  regenerative agricultural systems become adopted globally and become the mainstream, the status  
**[0:01:06-0:01:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:01:06):**  quo against which all other growing systems are compared. To help achieve this goal, I want to  share the knowledge that we have learned in the last decade and make it available to everyone.  While we have developed products at AEA that embody the principles of regenerative agriculture  
**[0:01:22-0:01:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:01:22):**  systems and make them easier for growers to apply, this knowledge and these principles can be applied  anywhere. And when they are applied properly, they will always increase farm profitability  and resilience to climate stress. If you have any questions, suggestions, comments, or ideas,  
**[0:01:40-0:01:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:01:40):**  topics that you would like for me to discuss, please connect on LinkedIn or on Twitter,  where my username is at visionbuilder7, or you can also email me at john at johnkempf.com. I would  very much like to hear from you and to hear your feedback. Be sure to subscribe to this podcast,  
**[0:01:59-0:02:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:01:59):**  and thank you very much for listening. Enjoy the show. Greetings, friends, and welcome to the  Regenerative Agriculture podcast. On this podcast, we explore the science and practical application  of regenerative agriculture ecosystem, how to regenerate soil health, crop health and quality,  
**[0:02:15-0:02:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:02:15):**  and increase farm profitability. Our goal is to give you clear, easy to understand, and actionable  information that you can implement on your operation. In this episode, I'm very honored  and very excited to welcome Gabe Brown to our show. Gabe, thank you very much for joining us.  
**[0:02:30-0:02:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:02:30):**  My pleasure. Good to be here, John.  So, Gabe, you have a fascinating story about the work that you have done on your farm,  the successes that you've had, and some of the changes that you've been able to make over the  
**[0:02:41-0:02:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:02:41):**  years. What are some of your most memorable moments that led you to where you are today?  Well, I guess it all started back, I was born and raised in town. I wasn't from a farm or ranch,  but took an interest at a young age and happened to marry a gal whose parents had a farm and  
**[0:03:01-0:03:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:03:01):**  very conventional, heavy tillage and use of synthetic etc. But worked into that  and was able to purchase it in 1991. But because I was not born and raised on a farm,  I didn't have any of these preconceived notions. So I was open to new ideas. And I had a 1991,  
**[0:03:20-0:03:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:03:20):**  my wife and I purchased part of the operation from her parents. And 1993, I had a good friend  of mine in the northern part of North Dakota who was no till. And he convinced me, and it didn't  take a lot of convincing because it just made sense to me in our rather semi-arid environment,  
**[0:03:38-0:03:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:03:38):**  we were trying to save moisture. He said, Gabe, you need to go no till in order to save time and  moisture. And that just made sense. But he also said, I'm going to give you a little advice. If  you do it, he said, tell all your tillage equipment, then you're never tempted to go back.  
**[0:03:51-0:04:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:03:51):**  And I actually did that. I had to sell my tillage equipment in order to be able to afford the no  till drill we purchased. And so that started me down this path. But the biggest change in our life  came about the years 1995 through 98. We lost two crops in a row to hail, then one to drought. And  
**[0:04:12-0:04:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:04:12):**  then the fourth year in a row, we lost the crop to hail again. And I tell people those four years of  natural disasters were absolute hell to go through. But they were absolutely the best thing that  could have happened to me because of the fact that financially, the bank wasn't going to loan us any  
**[0:04:30-0:04:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:04:30):**  more money. I had to learn, okay, how am I going to make a living off this land without the use of  all of these synthetic inputs? And so those couple of factors were the biggest driving force in our  move towards regenerative agriculture. What were the key pieces that you changed during and after  
**[0:04:51-0:05:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:04:51):**  that four-year period that were substantially different from the way that you've been farming  before? Right. Well, when you think about it, the first year, 1995, we lost 100% of our crop to hail.  It occurred the day before I was going to start combining our spring wheat crop. Spring wheat was  
**[0:05:08-0:05:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:05:08):**  our major cash crop at the time. Well, we all of a sudden laid all this biomass down on the soil  surface. So we got all this armor protecting the soil. Then 1996 come along, same thing,  lost 100% of the crop to hail again, again laying down tremendous biomass. And we're leaving all that  
**[0:05:28-0:05:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:05:28):**  soil intact. We're not disturbing that soil ecosystem. Well, because that hailstorm was  so devastating, we didn't even have enough feed for the livestock. So I had to go in and feed  like sorghum, sedan grass, and cowpeas. And I was intelligent enough to know the value of seeding  
**[0:05:47-0:06:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:05:47):**  legumes with grasses and those simple things we can do to benefit production and increase biomass.  So I did that. Well, it got to the point where we were virtually with no money, I couldn't afford  to even put up hay. So we turned livestock into those acres and graze. So this series of natural  
**[0:06:09-0:06:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:06:09):**  disasters was actually the best thing that could have happened from a soil ecosystem, soil funk  standpoint, because we were lowering synthetic inputs, which obviously led to not as much carbon  being burned through because of the overuse of particularly nitrogen fertilizer. Then we weren't  
**[0:06:30-0:06:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:06:30):**  applying phosphorus fertilizers. So that led to buildup in mycorrhizal fungi, along of course,  with no soil disturbance. So all these little things that nature was forcing us to do was  actually advancing soil funk. So it was a period of events. And I tell people very honestly, I had  
**[0:06:49-0:07:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:06:49):**  no idea what a cover crop was back then. I had no idea about soil health, soil function, but just  due to circumstances, we were going down that path. You've mentioned a couple of different  pieces that you worked on that you incorporated, perhaps not by intention, but rather by default,  
**[0:07:06-0:07:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:07:06):**  that improved soil health, no till cover crops, livestock. A question that I've been asked on a  number of conversations recently is many people are beginning to recognize the value and the  importance of cover crops, but there's still a lot of hesitation around incorporating livestock  
**[0:07:24-0:07:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:07:24):**  into agriculture ecosystems. So the question I would have for you is in your estimation,  how important do you believe it is to incorporate livestock to the overall ecosystem? Well, that  comes back to let's step back and take a look at how these particular, these fairy soils were  
**[0:07:42-0:08:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:07:42):**  formed. They were formed over eons of time, with large herds of bison, elk being moved across the  landscape by predators, trampling, grazing, and defecating, and urinating. And we had this natural  nutrient cycling occurred, and then the animals would move on long periods of rest and recovery,  
**[0:08:03-0:08:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:08:03):**  which allowed for maximum amount of carbon to be pumped into the soil. And soil health revolves  around carbon cycle. And so that's how our prairie soils were formed. Well, look what we've done in  our monoculture type mindset. We've removed the diversity and we've removed the animals from the  
**[0:08:24-0:08:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:08:24):**  landscape, and now we're simply not pumping as much carbon into the soil. Now, can we advance  soil health without livestock? Absolutely. I tell people I have several quarters of land that were  just not able to graze livestock on, surrounded by housing developments and no water, and it's just  
**[0:08:42-0:09:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:08:42):**  not worth the hassle to incorporate livestock onto those acres. We've still significantly advanced  the soil health on those acres. However, we will never have those soils to the point where we  don't have the soils that we're able to graze livestock on. And the main thing, there's many  
**[0:09:04-0:09:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:09:04):**  benefits of having livestock on cropland, but the one thing I think producers are really missing out  on is the profitability of doing so. I ran some numbers after 2016, and we added $220 net return  per acre on the cropland acres we were able to graze livestock on. And that's significant. With  
**[0:09:29-0:09:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:09:29):**  margins where they are in commodity agriculture today, what producer wouldn't want $224 per acre?  Now, I'm not saying all producers will want to go through the things we're doing with livestock,  but in saying that, they're missing a major opportunity there. I tell people,  
**[0:09:47-0:10:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:09:47):**  if you have the ability, cover crops are an absolute no-brainer from a soil health standpoint,  but if you can integrate livestock, that's a way to convert those cover crops into dollars. And I  tell producers, even if you don't want to do it, there's many young people in the communities  
**[0:10:03-0:10:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:10:03):**  around the country who would love the opportunity and chance to run some livestock and enter  agriculture that way. Why not benefit your resource, help a young person and integrate  some livestock under your cropland? That's a great idea for incorporating the next generation.  
**[0:10:19-0:10:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:10:19):**  And also, when you talk about the economics and the profitability, an additional $220 net per  acre, isn't that a larger net than most growers are getting from producing corn? Well, yes. On  our operation, we sell very few commodities. We're doing value-added direct to consumers simply  
**[0:10:40-0:11:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:10:40):**  because of the dollar return we can generate by doing so. But I just shake my head at commodity  agriculture today and I ask the question, I have no desire to produce commodities and I really  don't understand why people do. There's just no money in it unless there's a major drought  
**[0:11:01-0:11:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:11:01):**  somewhere or some external force. We tie our hands, so to speak, when we produce commodities.  And I'm just, obviously by talking to me, you'll get to understand I am not a proponent of the  current production model. I think it leaves too many decisions in hands other than our own. I  
**[0:11:22-0:11:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:11:22):**  tell people we are profitable every year on our operation because we set our own price. We take  that out of somebody else's hands, put it in our own. So when you're able to do that, that just  really adds to your bottom line and increases profitability significantly. When I think about  
**[0:11:42-0:12:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:11:42):**  the implications of what you are describing, there is this entire industrial ecosystem that has  evolved to handle commodity crops. When you think of all of the combines and equipment,  equipment manufacturing, logistics, grain elevators, and feedlots that have all evolved  
**[0:12:03-0:12:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:12:03):**  to accommodate this commodity cropping mindset, what you're essentially describing is displacing,  has the potential, in my understanding, to displace practically all of that or at least  the great majority of it by bringing livestock back onto the land to graze crops and cover crops  
**[0:12:21-0:12:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:12:21):**  directly on the soil. And that has some substantial ramifications, obviously not only for  long-term soil health on a macro level, but also for the agriculture industry as it exists today.  Yes, you're right. And let's be honest, it's not going to change overnight. It's going to change  
**[0:12:41-0:13:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:12:41):**  slowly over time. However, the movement we're seeing, and I spend a lot of my time dealing with  the human health aspect of production agriculture. And we have a human health crisis,  we have a human health crisis in this country. America spends more on healthcare than any other  
**[0:13:00-0:13:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:13:00):**  country in the world, yet we lead the developed nations in cancer, ADD, ADHD, Parkinson's,  Alzheimer's, autoimmune diseases, obesity, and the list goes on and on. Well, why is that? Now,  let's be very honest, I'm not in no way blaming it all on farmers and ranch. It's due to our  
**[0:13:19-0:13:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:13:19):**  sedentary lifestyle. But a lot of it, farmers and ranchers have to accept part of the blame because  the nutrient density of the foods that we're producing is a fraction of what it was 50 to 70  years ago. So how are we going to change this downward trend in human health? It has to start  
**[0:13:39-0:13:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:13:39):**  with the soil and it has to start with the movement of nutrients through the ecosystem and  inevitably ending up in our bodies. Well, you look at what's causing the downward trend in  nutrient density in our foods, a lot of it is related to the health of our soil ecosystem. That,  
**[0:13:58-0:14:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:13:58):**  I profess, comes about from our industrialized, commoditized mindset. And so, if we're going to  truly affect human health, it has to start at the soil level and the ecosystem level and what  farmers and ranchers are doing. Okay, then it gets back to using the principles of a healthy soil  
**[0:14:18-0:14:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:14:18):**  ecosystem, just what I talked about when we started about how we have to do what's necessary  to advance the health of our soils, get more nutrients, plant secondary metabolites that are  moving through the plant and then inevitably into the human food chain. Well, we're not going to do  
**[0:14:38-0:14:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:14:38):**  that with commodity agriculture. And just this past winter here, I've spent a great deal of time  with several large organic companies working on regenerative protocols where they are actually  driving change on their producers and their producers are going to be paid accordingly  
**[0:14:59-0:15:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:14:59):**  through the regenerative practices they do on their operation. And it all comes about because  these large companies know that the next real wave that's coming, so to speak, is the focus on human  health. So, they're going to make more money if they have higher nutrient dense foods. The only  
**[0:15:18-0:15:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:15:18):**  way they can get that is by improving the health of the ecosystem, soil ecosystem. And so, it all  comes about in a roundabout way, getting back to our system is broken with commodity industrialized  agriculture. Farmers and ranchers get a beat into them all, we got to feed the world, feed the world,  
**[0:15:37-0:16:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:15:37):**  feed the world. Well, there was some figures released here in December of 2017 that dated,  we produced enough food on this world last year to feed 14 billion people. Well, think about that.  We have approximately 7.8 billion people in the world, yet we produced enough food to feed 14  
**[0:16:01-0:16:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:16:01):**  billion. So, farmers and ranchers are, you know, they're shooting themselves in the foot if they  think they got to increase production to feed the world. There's already enough production out there,  you know. So, the only way you're going to differentiate yourself from everyone else  
**[0:16:15-0:16:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:16:15):**  and to increase the value of what you're producing on your operation is you better be  producing nutrient dense food and then you have to set your own prices and be paid for it. And  that's what we're trying to do on our operation, that's what we're encouraging others to do also.  
**[0:16:31-0:16:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:16:31):**  Gabe, you brought up a number of absolutely fascinating points. There is this idea,  even today, the numbers that you just shared surprised me a little bit, there is this  perception even today that we're not producing enough even for the current world population,  
**[0:16:50-0:17:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:16:50):**  yet you're describing that in fact that's not the case. We're overproducing much more than we need,  which essentially would indicate that we don't really have a production problem,  we have a distribution problem. And I find that...  
**[0:17:03-0:17:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:17:03):**  That is exactly right, John. Those figures, you know, enough to feed 14 billion people  is the highest I heard. I did find several places that state we've produced enough last year to feed  10 billion people. In saying that, there's over a billion people worldwide that go to bed hungry  
**[0:17:23-0:17:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:17:23):**  every night and don't have enough food and it is exactly as you said, it's a distribution problem,  it's not a product problem. The other thing we have to be very honest and look at is a lot of  what we produce does not go into human food consumption, and a lot of it is going obviously  
**[0:17:43-0:18:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:17:43):**  towards things like ethanol and then grain to feed cattle. And I will argue that, I tell people,  I've slaughtered thousands of beef animals and I have yet to see one with a gizzard. So why are we  feeding beef animals grain? It does not make sense. Now in saying that, I'm going to be very honest  
**[0:18:05-0:18:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:18:05):**  and tell you I will eat grain fed beef if grass fed isn't available and it's still a highly  nutritious nutrient dense product, but I will certainly would rather be grass finished beef  simply because of the health benefits of it and I prefer the taste of it, quite honest. So we have  
**[0:18:22-0:18:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:18:22):**  to look at all of production agriculture, what we're doing and you know our Soil Health Consulting  Partnership did a school in eastern Iowa and when we do schools in places like that, it absolutely  amazes me the mindset of producers in thinking that the only thing they can produce there is  
**[0:18:45-0:19:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:18:45):**  corn and beans. The only thing they can produce corn and beans. There's not the infrastructure,  there's not the market and I just really get disappointed by that quite honestly because that  shows you how in production agriculture we have such a narrow mindset and we close our thought  
**[0:19:05-0:19:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:19:05):**  process to other ops that we have that maybe would make us more money. And I think part of  the problem is the current farm program. You know, let's face it, 95 plus percent and that's probably  on the light end of cropping decisions are based on revenue insurance and what people can make off  
**[0:19:23-0:19:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:19:23):**  revenue insurance, guarantee themselves. And I quit being involved in any farm programs a number  of years ago because for one thing, I don't think the American public should be paying and subsidizing  my operation. If I can't make it on my own, I shouldn't be doing it. The other thing is why  
**[0:19:42-0:20:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:19:42):**  would I want to tie my hand and be limited to what I can do on my operation? For instance, in 20,  here in near Bismarck, North Dakota, we've gone through a couple very dry years and when we  went into planting last spring, I had planned on putting more corn in but because we were so dry,  
**[0:20:04-0:20:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:20:04):**  I switched my cropping decisions accordingly. And due to that fact, I was able to harvest crops that  made me a decent profit last year, even though we only had 5.8 inches of rainfall during the growing  season. You know, you tie your hands and limit yourself when you're in this commoditized,  
**[0:20:25-0:20:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:20:25):**  industrialized mindset and producers need to learn how to adapt and observe and change according to  the dish. I've been fascinated by the mindset of growers which you just described and referring to  what you experienced in Iowa. It's intriguing to me that in the state of Iowa, any crop that is not  
**[0:20:48-0:21:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:20:48):**  corn and soybeans is classified as a specialty crop. I mean alfalfa and wheat production are  classified as specialty crops in Iowa. And when you go back, prior to the freeze of, if I recall  correctly, I believe 1946, prior to 1946, Iowa was sick in the nation for apple production. It was a  
**[0:21:07-0:21:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:21:07):**  major apple growing region in the United States. Wow, I didn't realize that. That climate still  exists today. The climate hasn't shifted that substantially but there was just one freeze  that in which they lost a lot of trees and the entire industry never came back. And so when you  
**[0:21:24-0:21:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:21:24):**  think of that, I mean I'm using apples as one example, but there was a diverse agricultural ecosystem  in Iowa in the 40s, 50s, and 60s that has, they were also, north central Iowa was the  black capital production of the world and that has completely disappeared. I shared with producers,  
**[0:21:44-0:22:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:21:44):**  and don't get me wrong Tony, it's not just eastern Iowa. I can go anywhere in the United States and  list similar stories, but I shared with attendees of our school, I shared the net returns, average  net returns over the past nine years on my operation. And my highest net returning crop per  
**[0:22:05-0:22:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:22:05):**  acre of my cash crop is cereal rye and hairy vetch combined in combination. Over the past nine years,  our average net return per acre is $951. Now how many people out there grow rye and hairy vetch and  then combine it and sell it? Well not very many. Bingo. You know I often tell people, people laugh  
**[0:22:27-0:22:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:22:27):**  at Gabe Brown because he's different. I laugh at them because they're all the same, right? Nobody  else is doing this, you know. It's just like my family and I have planted over 1,500 fruit and nut  trees the past four years are in our operation. How many peaches are being grown in North Dakota?  
**[0:22:45-0:23:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:22:45):**  You know what I can get for a North Dakota grown peach? Two to three dollars per peach. Why wouldn't  I do that, you know? I just laugh at people with their closed mindset, you know. And also I think  people don't realize, you know, here in the Midwest we're somewhat isolated from what's happening on  
**[0:23:04-0:23:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:23:04):**  the coast. Well in my traveling and speaking, I spend a lot of time on the east and west coast,  and you get talking to consumers out there. It's absolutely amazing. I visited with the producer  who is running 8,000 laying hens on past. He's selling his eggs for a dollar per egg.  
**[0:23:24-0:23:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:23:24):**  A dollar per egg and he just laughs. He says people can go to Walmart or wherever they want  and buy cheap eggs, but I can sell all I want at a dollar an egg, you know, because people are  willing to pay for it. Here in Bismarck, North Dakota we run 1,100 laying hens on past. You can  
**[0:23:40-0:23:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:23:40):**  buy eggs at the local store for less than 70 cents a dozen. We're getting four dollars and  fifty cents a dozen and we can't even begin to keep up with demand because people, they see the  difference when they crack those eggs open. They want to know where their food comes from. So  
**[0:23:56-0:24:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:23:56):**  people say, well I'm not going to raise chickens. I don't want anything to do with that. Okay,  don't complain to me. You're not making money, you know. This isn't rocket science. Then think  of how we're feeding those hens. Well, I mentioned to you we grew the rye and hairy veg that I'm  
**[0:24:12-0:24:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:24:12):**  selling as seed. We run it through a cleaner, take out all the screenings. That's how we're  feeding our chickens is screenings. So I'm taking a waste stream from one enterprise to fuel the  profit in another. That's just good business. That's all. That's just good business then,  
**[0:24:25-0:24:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:24:25):**  you know, but so many people aren't willing to do these little things and then they wonder why  they can't make any money. Yeah, I also have many colleagues and friends that I've met in my travels  who are doing similar things to what you're describing who are extraordinarily profitable.  
**[0:24:42-0:24:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:24:42):**  And not only are they profitable, but they are finding a lot of joy and fun in the work that  they are doing which didn't exist before they stepped outside of the typical boundaries of  doing what everyone else was doing. You're exactly right, John, and isn't it enjoyable to have people  
**[0:24:59-0:25:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:24:59):**  come up to you? And I've had people in their 60s come up to me and say, Gabe, agriculture is fun  again. I'm enjoying this. We don't have the stress. My wife is happy, you know, we're not stressed out  over finances anymore. And, you know, I tell people, they may laugh at my chickens, but who  
**[0:25:18-0:25:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:25:18):**  doesn't enjoy sitting watching the chicken, you know? I mean, it's a chicken. It's not like it's much  work. And it's enjoyable. I tell people, you know, I used to when I was in my conventional,  quote unquote, mindset, I used to wake up every day trying to decide what I was going to kill that  
**[0:25:35-0:25:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:25:35):**  day. Was it going to be a weed? Was it going to be a fungus? Was it going to be a pest? You know, I was  going to kill something every day. Now I wake up, how do I get more life on my operation? And it's  much, much more enjoyable working with life than death. That is, you're exactly right. I, in a  
**[0:25:52-0:26:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:25:52):**  series of seminars a couple of years ago, I asked farmers the question, why do you farm? What was it  that attracted you to farming in the first place? And when you begin unwrapping the answers and  digging down into the foundational reasons that attracted growers to begin farming and to stay in  
**[0:26:09-0:26:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:26:09):**  farming, it is really because of their appreciation and their desire to have a connection to life and  living process. And we really love watching seeds germinate in the spring. They love watching the joy  of a newborn animal. And we have unconsciously adopted a model of agriculture that is directly  
**[0:26:27-0:26:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:26:27):**  antagonistic to those core values where we've adopted a model that is based on a warfare  mentality of search and destroy, identify a specific pest or pathogen and figure out how you  can kill it. And then of course, if you're not successful with the first weapon of choice, you  
**[0:26:40-0:26:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:26:40):**  just get a bigger bomb and get a stronger pesticide. Right. And look where that's led us. You know,  now we have weeds that are resistant to herbicides and et cetera, et cetera. And it's just leading us  down this path of decimation of the ecosystem, but it also has human health ramifications. And I  
**[0:26:58-0:27:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:26:58):**  really think we as producers need to step back and look in the mirror and realize that the things  we're doing on our farm and ranch are impacting human health. And we have to take some responsibility  for those, for our actions. Yeah. I think in many cases, we as growers may have lost sight of the  
**[0:27:16-0:27:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:27:16):**  fact that our primary responsibility is growing food. We talk about feeding the world, but it's  become a very, very abstract concept where it's for many of us, it's no longer real about actually  connecting to the people who are consuming that food. It's easy to distance ourselves from that.  
**[0:27:32-0:27:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:27:32):**  Correct. I'd like to go back to speaking a little bit about beef production. Today, there is a great  deal of dogma and a great deal of political dialogue around how beef is bad. Beef is bad  for the environment. We are consuming too much beef. We need to reduce our meat consumption,  
**[0:27:53-0:28:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:27:53):**  and we're not going to be able to feed the world with, if we continue to increase meat consumption  and emerging developing countries, developing economies increase their meat consumption.  And yet this is a very different perspective from the one that you've been describing,  
**[0:28:09-0:28:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:28:09):**  where you believe livestock are actually an integral part of a regenerative agriculture ecosystem.  So I have a few questions around that. I guess perhaps the one to begin with would be when you  think about quote unquote feeding the world, do you believe that it is possible, if you look at,  
**[0:28:26-0:28:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:28:26):**  well, let me begin over again. If you look at protein production per acre from a macro perspective  and being able to feed a growing world population a higher quality diet, can we increase meat  consumption globally and produce an equivalent or even greater amount of beef using the type of  
**[0:28:46-0:29:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:28:46):**  system that you were describing than we can with corn production and feeding grain the way it  happens currently? That's a very good and pertinent question. Thanks for asking it, John. The answer  is absolutely yes. We can increase the, I'm going to say meat protein consumption, because it's not  
**[0:29:02-0:29:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:29:02):**  only beef, it's other species of livestock also. Look at what we're doing now in production  agriculture. Animals are confined in lots, whether it be a feedlot, whether it be a large  vitamin dairy, whether it be hog production, find in buildings, poultry production, find in building,  
**[0:29:21-0:29:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:29:21):**  instead of having those animals out on the landscape. The issues that we're seeing and  you often hear people demising beef consumption because of methane production. But what they don't  realize and fail to take into account, there was actually more ruminants on North America  
**[0:29:42-0:30:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:29:42):**  pre-European settlement than there are now. Okay, if methane was is real issue, we should have had  higher methane emissions back then, right? No, the reason we didn't is because there's methanotrophs.  And methanotrophs, organisms down near the soil surface, when a grazing animal emits methane,  
**[0:30:01-0:30:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:30:01):**  those methanotrophs latched onto it and use it as a food source. Okay, that's not happening with  animals in confinement. So the critics are correct in today's production model. But when we get out  animals out on the landscape, there's many benefits to having them out there. You know,  
**[0:30:19-0:30:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:30:19):**  it's a proven fact that the biology in the soil, microbiology is directly related to biology in the  rumen and also biology in the human gut. You know, we have billions of bacteria and fungi in our  guts also. So it's all tied together. Now getting back to answering your question about adding  
**[0:30:40-0:30:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:30:40):**  protein and feeding more protein to people in the world. The current production model, okay,  let's look at the average producer who's producing corn and soybeans. They're producing one commodity,  either corn or soybean, one of those each year. Now look at a regenerative model. Okay, we can still  
**[0:30:58-0:31:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:30:58):**  grow corn and soybeans. But what we're doing besides that is we're growing cover crops. And then  we're grazing those cover crops with beef on my operation, for instance, with beef, we've got  pastured hogs, got pastured poultry, we've got grass-finished lambs. I'm stacking so many more  
**[0:31:16-0:31:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:31:16):**  enterprises. I just laugh at the notion, oh, you are not going to feed the world with regenerative  agriculture. Gee, I'm producing way more nutrient dense calories per acre than the industrial  mindset is, plus it's a wider variety. The answer becomes we can't feed the world with the industrial  
**[0:31:37-0:31:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:31:37):**  mind. We can produce enough commodities, but we can't produce enough nutrient dense food. We can  do that with the regenerative mindset because we stack so many more enterprises per acre. And  therein lies the big difference that nobody takes into account. They only look at monocultures  
**[0:31:54-0:32:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:31:54):**  because they have that mindset that we got to look at one single thing. And we got to look at  the ecosystem as a whole, we got to look at all these stacked enterprises. We're going to produce  way more calories, nutrient dense calories per acre in a regenerative manner. That's incredible.  
**[0:32:11-0:32:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:32:11):**  That's exciting. That's exactly what I've been observing with growers that we have worked with  as well. And I wanted to hear your perspective on that. So that to me is incredibly inspirational  because it gives us a great deal of hope for the future. And when we think about the opportunities  
**[0:32:28-0:32:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:32:28):**  that exist and the potential that exists to really develop an agricultural ecosystem that  can not only regenerate soil health and plant health and all these various pieces, but that  can also, where we can also begin having a legitimate conversation about growing food  
**[0:32:44-0:33:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:32:44):**  as medicine and really helping to improve the health of the consumers who are consuming the  food that we're producing. You're exactly right, John. You know, there's a new book that just came  out this past year, What's Making Our Children Thick? And it was wrote by two doctors and they  
**[0:33:01-0:33:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:33:01):**  take a look at what's happened to the health of society, particularly in the United States,  over the past 50 to 70 years. And it's all that the real decline in human health has come about  when we change the production model from one of these very, very diverse farms that you talked  
**[0:33:23-0:33:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:33:23):**  about were once in Iowa to the industrialized mindset. And as I mentioned earlier, I think a  lot of it is tied to the health of and function of our ecosystems. And so it's to everyone's benefit,  the producer, the farmer or rancher, when they diversify and start stacking more enterprises,  
**[0:33:44-0:33:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:33:44):**  it's to their benefit because it's going to increase profitability for them. And it's  inevitably to the benefit of society as a whole. And we haven't even started talking about, you  know, healing our watersheds and the problems, you know, water is becoming a larger and larger  
**[0:33:58-0:34:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:33:58):**  issue throughout the world. And, you know, those ecosystem processes will be healed also as we  change from the current production model. Absolutely. Gabe, as you have developed these  systems, and if your thinking has evolved on your farm over the decades, what has been something  
**[0:34:15-0:34:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:34:15):**  that has really puzzled you on your operation? Well, one of the things that puzzles me, you know,  we're blessed. We get thousands of visitors coming to our ranch during the, it's amazing,  they don't, they never come during the winter to North Dakota, it's always during the summer. But  
**[0:34:32-0:34:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:34:32):**  you know, we've had visitors from 22 foreign countries in all 50 states the past five years,  and every Canadian province. So we get a lot of visitors from all over and they come thinking,  you know, they have in their mind that it's going to be this utopia. Well, no, I've got a working  
**[0:34:49-0:35:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:34:49):**  farm and ranch like everybody else. And we have issues that we deal with. And one of the big ones  that I've struggled some with is perennial wheat. And obviously, as we move from an annual  cropping system, by that I mean one that was high use of synthetics that should have said as  
**[0:35:10-0:35:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:35:10):**  a conventional type cropping system to more of this regenerative model, the annual weeds are  no longer an issue. They just don't bother as much. But it's the perennial weeds and trying to  get that puzzle figured out. Now, I really believe that the work that Dr. David Johnson is doing at  
**[0:35:28-0:35:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:35:28):**  New Mexico State University with a high fungal component in his soil is going to be one of the  keys to do figuring out that puzzle, so to speak. And I have been a big proponent for many, many  years on we have to get away from these bacterial dominant soils, we've got to get the fungal  
**[0:35:47-0:36:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:35:47):**  activity back into our soils. But Dr. Johnson has helped me realize that it's even more important  than I thought. And so I'm happy in that our soil health folks was able to hire Dr. Johnson as a  technical advisor, and he's doing some work with us to teach us just what he's doing with this static  
**[0:36:08-0:36:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:36:08):**  compost, high fungal activity. And it's really is showing some promise on being able to mitigate  these perennial weed issues. So that's one of the things that has puzzled me the most. And I,  like everybody else, I'm very, very cognizant of the fact that I am farming still a degraded  
**[0:36:30-0:36:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:36:30):**  resource. I tell people I've been on thousands of operations all over the world, and I've never been  on a single operation, including my own, where the resource isn't degraded. So there's something to  learn for all of us. And it's just like a big jigsaw puzzle. We're learning all the time,  
**[0:36:46-0:37:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:36:46):**  trying to fit pieces together. Yeah, and of course, thinking about developing  fungal dominated soils, you have a substantial advantage in that you've developed a system  that incorporates a lot of perennials where you have an environment that can foster the  
**[0:37:02-0:37:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:37:02):**  development and the preservation of fungal communities in the soil profile, which is  a critical element that may be missing on a more conventional farming operation.  Right. That's right. And I tell producers, you know, producers are, and it's human nature to  
**[0:37:18-0:37:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:37:18):**  have a million excuses. Wherever I travel, people, you know, I get many, many people coming up to me,  but Gabe, you don't understand, but Gabe, you don't understand. Our soils are different. Our  climate's different. Yes, it's different everywhere. But one thing, the principles  
**[0:37:32-0:37:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:37:32):**  of healthy ecosystems are the same everywhere in the world where we go, you know, where there's  production agriculture. The other thing producers just tend to not understand is that they can  influence how those ecosystems function by their management. And every ecosystem all over the world  
**[0:37:50-0:38:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:37:50):**  has its unfair advantage. You mentioned some of the unfair advantages I have being located in  North Dakota. You know, I just did a school in North Carolina. They have unfair advantages in  that their growing season is much, much longer than mine, obviously. So they can cycle more  
**[0:38:08-0:38:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:38:08):**  carbon, you know, than I can in any given. Now, due to their moisture, they're going to cycle  through that carbon, but, you know, faster, but they can grow more things. So they can compensate  for that. No matter where we are in the world, we have unfair advantage. And it's up to us as  
**[0:38:24-0:38:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:38:24):**  producers to find those unfair advantages and then use them to our benefit. Exactly. What has been  something that has surprised you? One of the most surprising things was in 2003, I was very blessed  in that Dr. Chris Nichols came to work at the ARS station Mandan, North Dakota, about 20 miles from  
**[0:38:44-0:39:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:38:44):**  my place. She came out to my place in 2003, saw what I was doing, and she said, Gabe, you've come  a long way. Your soils have improved significantly, but you will never truly be regenerative until you  significantly back off or eliminate the use of synthetics on your operation. So what I did there,  
**[0:39:04-0:39:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:39:04):**  you know, I'm pretty gullible person in that if a person really comes across credible to me,  I am going to either try and prove them right or wrong. So after Dr. Nichols was here, for four  years, I did split trials and realized our soils had advanced quite a bit, but I did split trials,  
**[0:39:25-0:39:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:39:25):**  different rates of synthetic fertilizer, and then all the way down to zero. And I was amazed at the  production of cash crops I was able to get and cover crops for that matter in the form of biomass,  I was able to get without the use of those synthetics. The other thing that really struck  
**[0:39:44-0:40:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:39:44):**  out to me was on the fields where we were not using the synthetics, the aggregation of the soil  just advanced very, very rapid. We noticed we were building more soil aggregates. Of course,  you build more soil aggregates, you can have better water infiltration, you got a home for  
**[0:40:01-0:40:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:40:01):**  biology, etc. So that really surprised me that I was actually decimating, so to speak, my soils  by the use of all these synthetics. And so I learned an old great deal to Dr. Chris Nichols  for challenging me back then. And our soils took a giant leap forward because we tried those split  
**[0:40:25-0:40:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:40:25):**  trials then for four years. So we haven't used any synthetic fertility, pesticides, or fungicides  since 2007. We still occasionally use a herbicide, but not near as often. So that's one of the things  that really sticks out to me as a major turning point for our operation. That is quite incredible.  
**[0:40:46-0:41:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:40:46):**  And I guess just for clarity, one of the questions that I have when you talk about synthetics,  particularly synthetic fertilizers, what had been the synthetics that you were using? Are you  describing things such as anhydrous ammonia, potassium chloride, or salt?  
**[0:41:03-0:41:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:41:03):**  Yeah, yeah, we were not using any anhydrous ammonia. We were not using any liquid forms.  It was all dry forms of synthetic fertilizers, so like urea and DAP, etc. That's what we were  using simply because of our equipment was set up for it. But what we really noticed was, for one  
**[0:41:25-0:41:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:41:25):**  thing, we were significantly over applying nitrogen, and of course that was burning through  the carbon, you know, and then we just, it was destroying aggregation. The other thing was we  were over applying phosphorus, which is done virtually all over the world, you know, we're  
**[0:41:42-0:41:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:41:42):**  over applying the phosphorus, which is having a negative impact on mycorrhizal fungi. Mycorrhizal  fungi, of course, free-coals malin, which is critical for the formation of soil particles. So  that's why that combination there is why we noticed such a significant improvement in the  
**[0:41:59-0:42:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:41:59):**  aggregation of our soil when we removed. Now, am I sitting here today telling producers,  oh you should all quit using synthetics? No, don't. You're going to have a wreck if you do.  You know, our soils are like drug addicts. We got to wean them off of these synthetics over time.  
**[0:42:15-0:42:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:42:15):**  The beautiful thing today is we're able to do that, and thanks to tests such as the Haney soil  test, it gives producers the confidence to really see just how much nutrients they can have in their  soils be converted from organic to inorganic via biology. And so there's huge advancements being  
**[0:42:36-0:42:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:42:36):**  made in soil testing and how nutrients move through the system via biology that we're able to  more confidently do this, show producers, okay, let's start weaning off fully over time and get  the health back into your soils. And that's the one piece that we tell growers in our consulting  
**[0:42:55-0:43:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:42:55):**  work is they need to earn the right to both discontinue the use of fertilizers or slow  down the use of fertilizers and also to discontinue the use of fungicides and insecticides. That is,  there's tremendous potential to grow plants that are extremely disease and insect resistant,  
**[0:43:12-0:43:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:43:12):**  you kind of have to earn the right to get there and it doesn't happen overnight.  That's very well said and very true. Look at the work Dr. Jonathan Longerin, you know,  the paper was just released where in peer reviewed that regenerative farm and ranch is much much more  
**[0:43:31-0:43:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:43:31):**  profitable while improving their ecosystem as compared to those that are using, in this case,  it was the DATRAID corn genetics. Yeah, exactly. Gabe, what do you believe to be true about modern  agriculture that many other people don't believe to be true? I believe that, look, today when a  
**[0:43:51-0:44:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:43:51):**  producers go out and buy, say, a combine or a tractor or a new pickup, they get an owner's  manual, right? They get an owner's manual, you know, you're supposed to read it, etc. We're never  giving that for soils. When we go out and buy land or rent land, we're not giving an owner's  
**[0:44:08-0:44:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:44:08):**  manual. Too many producers look at their soils as simply a medium to hold a plant upright. They  don't realize that soils are a living, dynamic, very resilient ecosystem and they don't realize  the power of soil life, the power of photosynthesis. I'm often asked by people who come to my place and  
**[0:44:33-0:44:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:44:33):**  when I speak at conferences, what's the one thing you do on your operation that sets you apart from  your neighbor? And I tell them I have a living, growing root in the ground as long as possible  throughout here. It just, you know, and you've done the same thing, John, you travel to these  
**[0:44:51-0:45:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:44:51):**  conferences and workshops to speak and you drive for hundreds of miles. Well, let me give you this  example. In October, I had to drive 652 miles to speak in western Montana. This was in October.  How many green growing crops did I see in October from Bismarck, North Dakota to Butte, Montana?  
**[0:45:13-0:45:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:45:13):**  Once I left my place, the answer was one. I saw one field that had a green growing crop on it that  was taking CO2 out of the atmosphere through photosynthesis, making all these carbons and  molecules and pumping that into, it wasn't making carbon molecules, but it was converting it to  
**[0:45:30-0:45:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:45:30):**  liquid carbon, pumping it into the soil. We as producers do not realize the power of the natural  system. And if we would just give nature half a chance, she's very resilient and we could heal our  soils, put more dollars in our pocket, plus produce a more nutrient dense food, you know, and that's  
**[0:45:51-0:46:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:45:51):**  what frustrates me is just too many producers have blinders on, they think it's all about  federal farm programs. And I get a kick on what's happening at the current moment as we're  recording this podcast, you know, there's this quote unquote, tariff war going on with China,  
**[0:46:07-0:46:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:46:07):**  I just laugh because that'll have absolutely no bearing on Gabe Brown and his operation, because  we made ourselves resilient to that because of what we've done to heal the ecosystem. You know,  producers don't realize that just how much of their profitability revolves around this living  
**[0:46:27-0:46:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:46:27):**  dynamic ecosystem and that they can heal it if they give nature half a chance. That is the one  piece that I'm so excited about, and I speak a lot about at conferences is harnessing the power  of the photosynthetic engine, having living growing plants is really the only way that you  
**[0:46:45-0:47:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:46:45):**  have of bringing new energy into the system and bringing new energy to a soil profile. And it's  such, it's so incredibly powerful. We don't even know, most growers don't even know and have  they have never had the opportunity to observe truly healthy plants that are photosynthesizing  
**[0:47:04-0:47:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:47:04):**  at max capacity. And if we can just harness that photosynthetic engine and tap into that,  that has such incredible possibilities for regenerating soil health and producing extraordinary  crops is tremendous untapped potential there for everyone. You're absolutely right, John. You hit  
**[0:47:20-0:47:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:47:20):**  the nail on the head there. Ray Archuleta always poses the question when he presents to groups,  is your farmer ranch being run on ancient sunlight or new sunlight? Are you one that's using  high amounts of carbon in the form of fossil fuels? Are you harvesting energy with growing plants?  
**[0:47:39-0:47:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:47:39):**  And like Ray always says, if we could just get producers to cover their fields and grow things  and then significantly back off on the tillage aspect so that carbon can cycle through rather  than being released from a tillage past, we could take care of a lot of the issues that we're seeing  
**[0:47:55-0:48:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:47:55):**  in production agriculture today. This isn't rocket science. It's been done for eons of time. And when  you talk, John, about the carbon, you know, the potential and the energy being brought in through  photosynthesis, then the livestock come into play because when a livestock grazes one of these cover  
**[0:48:14-0:48:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:48:14):**  crops, a living plant, that plant then is going to start pumping more carbon into the soil,  thus improving the carbon cycle even more. So that's where livestock integration can  advance soils to another level. Absolutely. What do you think is the biggest opportunity  
**[0:48:29-0:48:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:48:29):**  in agriculture today? The biggest opportunity I see in production agriculture is going to  revolve around advancing your soil health to the point where you can truly produce more  nutrient-dense foods because we're seeing a real trend in, well, it's worldwide, but particularly  
**[0:48:51-0:49:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:48:51):**  in this country where producers, excuse me, consumers are starting to think of food as  health. You know, look at the amount of medicine, prescription that are being used today. There is  a shift occurring where consumers, you know, it was called pill for ill medicine, you know,  
**[0:49:12-0:49:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:49:12):**  they wanted, doctors were prescribing just pills. I think last statistics I heard, don't quote me  exactly, but it's something like 800 and some prescriptions are being rolled per thousand  individuals in this country. That's absolutely ridiculous. Instead of doing that, consumers are  
**[0:49:28-0:49:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:49:28):**  starting to realize that food is health and what they eat directly dictates how healthy they are.  I had the good fortune of spending a day with Dr. Daphne Miller. Dr. Daphne Miller wrote the book,  she's a family practitioner who wrote the book, pharmacology, and she told me she firmly believes  
**[0:49:49-0:50:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:49:49):**  95 approximately percent of illnesses that people have can be cured or prevented just through what  they eat. So as a producer out there, why would I not want to take advantage of it? Why would I  not want to offer products that are high in nutrient density and then I'm going to be  
**[0:50:10-0:50:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:50:10):**  rewarded for it? I'm going to charge. Gabe Brown's a capitalist. I make no excuses for what I'm  charging for what I'm producing because I'm the one out there putting my capital on the line every  year doing these practices that are necessary to ensure that what I'm producing is nutrient dense.  
**[0:50:28-0:50:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:50:28):**  Well consumers there have already proven to me they're willing to pay for it and they'll write  the check for it because they know that it will have a positive impact on their health. So I think  that's the one thing that more producers need to look at and I really think we're going to see that  
**[0:50:45-0:51:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:50:45):**  trend accelerate rapidly in the near future where consumers are going to search out, find the  producers who are producing nutrient dense products under regenerative practices and then  they're going to vote with their buying dollar where and who they want to purchase from. Yeah,  
**[0:51:00-0:51:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:51:00):**  I see that happening already as well particularly in the food and vegetable production space and  it's just going to continue to accelerate. I think you're absolutely correct. What is a book  or resource that you recommend most often to growers? Yeah, there's two of them right now that  
**[0:51:14-0:51:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:51:14):**  I'm really recommending. One is a soil owner's manual by John Stick. John Stick is a retired  NRCS soil health specialist here in North Dakota and he wrote a wonderful, it's a short read,  very easy read just outlining the principles of soil health and I hand out copies wherever I go  
**[0:51:36-0:51:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:51:36):**  of that book because it's a way that producers can sit down and it's not overwhelming to them  and look at, you know, get the ideas in their mind of what they need to do to regenerate their  resource. The next book I've been recommending lately here is the one I mentioned earlier,  
**[0:51:54-0:52:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:51:54):**  What's Making Our Children Thick? And I do that kind of as a shock factor because as I said  earlier, I don't think we as producers really realize the impact we're having on society by  what we're doing and producing. And so like I said, I think it's up to all of us to look in the mirror  
**[0:52:14-0:52:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:52:14):**  and realize, you know, what we're doing may not be what's best not only for ourselves but  for society. Yeah, that's awesome to have to actually have a soil owner's manual because that's  what you were describing we need earlier. On that note, I am just going through the editing process  
**[0:52:31-0:52:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:52:31):**  on a book of my own so I'll shamelessly put a plug in here. My book's going to be released in November.  It's going to be entitled Dirt Toil and it's just going to be a read on our family's  journey through the over the past 20 plus years as we've moved into these regenerative practices.  
**[0:52:49-0:53:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:52:49):**  It's not going to be a real soil owner's manual type of book, how-to book. It's going to be just  more of the story and then I'm going to use examples of what I learned, you know, through all  the mistakes I've made over the past 20 plus years and give stories about how certain people  
**[0:53:08-0:53:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:53:08):**  influenced my lives and what I took away from that and how I used it to build the  ranch we have today. That's awesome. Dirt To Soil by Gabe Brown. Do you have any idea where it will be  available? It will be available through Chelsea Green and then we'll have it on our soil health  
**[0:53:24-0:53:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:53:24):**  consulting website and I'm sure it'll be out on Amazon also. Absolutely. Awesome. What technology  and ideas are you really excited about for the future of that? You know, I tell people if they get  to know Gabe Brown, Gabe Brown is not a very intelligent person. I have a pretty good sense of observation.  
**[0:53:45-0:54:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:53:45):**  I think there might be some debate about that. I appreciate that but I'm really not. I am  observant and I'm able to look at things and I tell producers this. As I said earlier, I'm on  hundreds of operations every year all over North America and I love going to people's farms and  
**[0:54:02-0:54:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:54:02):**  ranches. I can always learn something everywhere I go and I think we've lost the power of observation.  I think sometimes we look at technology as a cure-all. You know, us as producers, it seems we want  to rest apart. We want to know if we apply this pesticide, this seed treatment and put this  
**[0:54:22-0:54:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:54:22):**  seed on, back traits at this time and apply these to fertilizers and chemicals, then we can combine  X amount. Regenerative Ag is all about observation and about understanding what is happening in our  soil and it amazes me and I'm sure John you will agree with this, how many producers  
**[0:54:44-0:55:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:54:44):**  never take a shovel and look at their soil. You know, I will guarantee you I have dug in several  of my neighbors' soils more often than they have. You know, they just never do. They don't think of  looking at it. Now you ask what technology is coming about that I'm excited about. There is  
**[0:55:01-0:55:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:55:01):**  leaps and bounds being made in the knowledge of soil biology right now and the instrumentation,  etc., to analyze just what this biology is doing and you know, Dr. Chris Nichols, who's one of the  world's foremost soil microbiologists, will tell you she used to think she knew one percent of  
**[0:55:22-0:55:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:55:22):**  what was going on in the soil. Now she realizes she knows one-tenth of one percent. So that  shows you the amount of learning we have yet to do. So I think the technology as far as just  understanding these soil microorganisms, that's one thing I'm excited about. Another one I am  
**[0:55:40-0:56:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:55:40):**  really excited about from a consumer standpoint is the Bio-Nutrient Food Association is working  on a instrumentation that consumers will be able to have and they'll be able to go into any  grocery store, farmers market, etc., scan a food item and then the nutrient density of that item  
**[0:56:02-0:56:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:56:02):**  will be measured and available. And I think that is just going to, they're hoping by 2020 that that  will be available. I think that will be game-changing because consumers, given a choice,  they are going to purchase the higher nutrient dense product if it's within recent price wise.  
**[0:56:21-0:56:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:56:21):**  Well, as consumers are more educated about food as health, I think that'll drive real change on the  landscape too because all of a sudden farmers, you know, boy, their product isn't selling. Well,  it's way lower nutrient density. They better start making changes to their management in order to  
**[0:56:41-0:57:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:56:41):**  positively affect the oil ecosystem. So I think that's just huge in what's going to be done there.  Third thing as far as technology, there's been some real advancements in being able to measure  exactly how much carbon we're cycling through our system. I'm working with a group now called  
**[0:57:01-0:57:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:57:01):**  Landstream and Dr. John Norman who helped develop much of the instrumentation that's being used by  NASA is a key player in that organization along with Abe Collins. And they're looking at real-time  data, how much carbon, sunlight is being collected over the landscape and then they're going to be  
**[0:57:24-0:57:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:57:24):**  able to project out growth of plants biomass and it'll really help grazers. They'll be able to  predict how much forage they'll have available at any given time. And then it'll be able to  help grain producers look at, okay, how much carbon cycling in the system, how much growth  
**[0:57:42-0:57:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:57:42):**  will they get out of these plants, how much production, et cetera. So there's some pretty  exciting things that are in the work. Gabe, throughout this conversation, you've mentioned  so many different ideas that farmers should consider, things that they should consider  
**[0:57:56-0:58:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:57:56):**  looking at and possibly working on. There's almost the opportunity for a bit of confusion  for people who are just asking the question, well, where do I begin and where do I start?  What are the first actions that you would recommend the growers to take?  
**[0:58:10-0:58:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:58:10):**  Yeah, and then that's a great question and you're absolutely right. A lot of times people are just  overwhelmed by it. Well, it all comes back to the five principles and what can they do on their  operation? First thing I tell producers is they need to educate themselves. With internet  
**[0:58:27-0:58:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:58:27):**  technology today, it's very easy to educate yourself through YouTube videos and through  Audible, through books as you're in the tractor. Look at that as school and learn something.  One of the things that I'm fortunate is just I have this desire to learn as much as I can.  
**[0:58:46-0:59:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:58:46):**  So I try, I read on the average two books a week and listen to more than that. I just can't  get enough information. So I encourage producers to learn and then apply the five principles. I  tell them, take one field, whatever will allow you to sleep at night, whether it be five acres or I  
**[0:59:05-0:59:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:59:05):**  had one producer who took 8,000 acres first year and moved into regenerative practice. Whatever  allows you to sleep at night, commit yourself that field for five years and say for five years,  I'm going to try these principles. And then those principles are simply least amount of mechanical  
**[0:59:21-0:59:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:59:21):**  or chemical disturbance possible, armor on the soil surface. So we don't want bare soil. That's  not, you know, nothing growing. We're not collecting sunlight. Third principle, of course,  is diversity. You know, we need diversity. These ecosystems were very, very diverse. I always tell  
**[0:59:38-0:59:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:59:38):**  the story about how my son taught rangeland management at the local community college for  five years. He brought his students out to one of our quote unquote native pastures. And in two  hour timeframe, they collected over 140 different species of grasses, forbs and leggings. That's  
**[0:59:54-1:00:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=0:59:54):**  diversity. Now, what are we doing today? Oh, we plant corn and beans. Okay. Now, which is going  to be a healthier soil ecosystem. Fourth principle, we talked about this earlier, living in the ground  as long as possible throughout the year, collecting sunlight. That's what it's about. Fifth principle,  
**[1:00:09-1:00:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=1:00:09):**  animal integration. And I would add insects on there, although insects are animals because  we don't realize the benefit that insects provide to the ecosystem. So have a producer try these  five principles on a given field for five years. I've never had anyone go all five years and then  
**[1:00:28-1:00:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=1:00:28):**  go back to the old way they were doing things. I've had them drop out after a year or two because  they just didn't have the will and fortitude to stick with it. But I've never had them go all five  years. Usually by year three, they're changing their entire operational, you know. And there's  
**[1:00:43-1:01:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=1:00:43):**  one other thing, one other advancement, John, I just want to mention briefly here that I think  is really important is we need to get perennials back into our systems in one way or another. For  those who live a bit further south than you or I, I see that as being more of a what Colin Sice  
**[1:01:04-1:01:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=1:01:04):**  in Australia terms no kill cropping, where you have a perennial growing at all times, and then  you're actually no tilling your cash crop into that. It's being done successfully in Kansas,  producers such as Che New are doing this now, where he has perennial growing paddocks and then  
**[1:01:24-1:01:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=1:01:24):**  he's no tilling and they are cool season, he's no tilling warm season species in there such as  grain sorghum, etc. That is just key because you have that living root at all the time in the soil  and then as that cool season shuts down, you seed the warm season cash crop best of both worlds.  
**[1:01:43-1:01:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=1:01:43):**  I've had the good fortune of being over on Colin Sice's place in Australia several times and to me  that's the ultimate cropping system right there. That sounds like next generation for certain.  What is the one question you wish I would have asked? You did a good job, John. I think  
**[1:02:00-1:02:21](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=1:02:00):**  you covered most of the basis. You know, it is, I understand it's a bit overwhelming  to many producers, but I tell them just try something, just do something, grow something,  you know, and don't think they have to do it all. I tell everybody I don't want everybody doing all  
**[1:02:21-1:02:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=1:02:21):**  the things Gabe Brown is doing. We all have our own desires, our own goals, different landscapes,  different conditions. You need to do what makes you happy, you know, but the other thing is don't  ever complain to me that there's not money in production agriculture, you know. One thing that  
**[1:02:40-1:02:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=1:02:40):**  I really, really get tired of is when I travel all over, I often ask the question, how many of you  want your sons or daughters to come back to join the operation? Most people raise their hand and  then I ask, well, how many of them are? Very few will and I think that's just sad that we have an  
**[1:02:59-1:03:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=1:02:59):**  industry where we're actually driving young people away rather than inviting them in and, you know,  those of you who know my operation know that my wife and I have two children and our 30-year-old  son is a partner in the operation. I knew from a young age our son wanted to come back, but I made  
**[1:03:17-1:03:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=1:03:17):**  it conducive for him to come. He knew before he even got out of college that this operation would  be his and it wasn't because we were just handing it to him, it was because he deserved it and we  were inviting him back and we allowed him from the get-go to make management decisions. You have to  
**[1:03:36-1:03:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=1:03:36):**  make it conducive for these young people and desirable for them, you know. It's pretty, you  know, what young person wants to come back from college when mom and dad are struggling all the  time and don't know where the next dollar comes from and, you know, that just doesn't make sense.  
**[1:03:51-1:04:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=1:03:51):**  We have to change our mindset and make it conducive for the next generation.  Absolutely, and that and the economic piece is a big part of that and also I think when you talk  about creating a conducive environment, being able to make management decisions and being able to  
**[1:04:07-1:04:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=1:04:07):**  identify something as your own. If you are going to continue working for your parents and they're  going to keep managing and running the farm for the next 40 years until they're 70 years old and  you're 50, that is not appealing. You're exactly right, John.  
**[1:04:22-1:04:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=1:04:22):**  Gabe, this has been a fascinating interview. Thank you so much for joining us. I'm very honored that  you were able to share your thoughts here on the podcast and I will look forward to having you back  at some point in the future. Thank you very much. That's great, John. My pleasure. Nice visiting  
**[1:04:39-1:04:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=1:04:39):**  with you. This podcast was brought to you by a great company that I work for, Advancing  Eco-Agriculture, the leader in regenerative agriculture since 2006. At AA, we believe in  challenging the status quo to find more profitable and regenerative ways to grow crops. We also  
**[1:04:55-1:05:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=1:04:55):**  believe that healthy plants are resistant to pests and disease and that to grow healthy plants,  we must first think differently about agriculture, about empowering life instead of suppressing life,  about regeneration versus degeneration. To achieve this, we formulate and sell products that help  
**[1:05:13-1:05:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/social-impacts-of-regenerative-agriculture-with-gabe-brown/#t=1:05:13):**  growers produce higher quality yield with less risk of crop failure. In short, we help growers  make more money with less risk. If you aren't yet an AA customer, go to advancingecoag.com  and use the code REGENERATE5 for 5% off your first order. Thank you for listening.  