### Regenerative Agriculture Podcast  (2020-39-06)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:00:00):**  Hi friends, this is John and this is the Regenerative Agriculture Podcast where we talk about the  agronomic science and cultural management practices that regenerate plant health, soil  health, and ultimately public health.  My guest for this episode is Rick Haney, a name that you've probably heard or hopefully  you have heard and are familiar with over the last couple of years who developed the  
**[0:00:24-0:00:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:00:24):**  soil test that carries his name and a soil test that I'm quite intrigued by.  We started using it on our farms that we do consulting work on and I wanted to have this  conversation to learn more about how the assay came to be and what we can learn from it and  to hear from Rick's perspective directly.  So Rick, thank you very much for joining us and for sharing your wisdom.  
**[0:00:46-0:00:49](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:00:46):**  Oh, glad to be here.  Rick, you've become very well known for the soil test that carries your name now in the  last couple of years, but what was the pathway that led you to developing that soil test  and what brought you to this point?  I get that question from time to time.  
**[0:01:05-0:01:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:01:05):**  I grew up in Iowa as a kid and my grandfather farmed, well both my grandfathers farmed,  so I was around agriculture a lot, but until we moved to Oklahoma when I was like 15 or  16, I ended up starting working on farms.  I had worked on farms in Iowa, but I was young and I couldn't do much, but I went to work  for farmers and ranchers in Oklahoma and I watched them for years borrow a million dollars  
**[0:01:32-0:01:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:01:32):**  to fund their operations and I watched just the devastating effect of the way we do agriculture  on their ability to make any money.  I always felt bad for them because it was like, how can we help these guys?  How can we help these guys do better?  Because I'm watching them spend all this money, hardly make any money, and supposed to be  
**[0:01:54-0:01:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:01:54):**  feeding the world and all that, and yet why is it such a struggle?  So that really impacted me as a young man.  Then the opportunity later in life occurred to go back to college.  I had actually dropped out of college after a year and a half of high school and just  went to work on farms and ranches, did furniture upholstery, and I did a whole bunch of things.  
**[0:02:20-0:02:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:02:20):**  Came back to going back to college to get my degree and then it was like, what am I  going to do with my life?  I had an uncle in Austin, Texas that said, yes, why don't you get into agriculture?  That's what you're passionate about.  So I got into Texas A&M, which is a whole other story, but ended up getting my master's  
**[0:02:43-0:02:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:02:43):**  and PhD.  My focus was to give these farmers and ranchers some hope, give them some tools to help them  have the opportunity to make a living at what they were doing.  What happened after you left the university?  There's still a big distance there between leaving university and developing a soil assay.  
**[0:03:05-0:03:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:03:05):**  So what led you eventually to realize the need to have better tools to manage or to  measure soil nutrients?  Well, when I was in graduate school, I did a lot of experiments and testing on different  things, and I remember so clearly a colleague of mine, Dr. Alan Franzlubbers, showed me  an equation that he had worked on.  
**[0:03:25-0:03:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:03:25):**  He was doing these soil incubations.  So we're trying to look at the life in the soil, the microorganisms, breathing CO2, and  we were doing these long-term soil incubations like four, five, six weeks, six months, and  it was like, wow, look at that.  These soils are separating by this amount of CO2 that they respire.  
**[0:03:46-0:03:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:03:46):**  Their fertility was lengthened.  So the more they respired, the more fertile those soils were because we knew these soils.  He showed me this, and he said, you know what, I think we could do this test in one day.  I said, well, let's try it.  So I started doing it, and sure enough, we figured out you could do this 24-hour CO2  
**[0:04:06-0:04:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:04:06):**  release from a dried, re-weighed soil and get the same type of information you get from  a 30-day incubation.  That's when the light bulb went off, and I thought, well, here we go.  We can do something with this.  We started down that road, and that's when I really discovered soil testing.  
**[0:04:23-0:04:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:04:23):**  You can do 20 years of research and come up with something, a new crop variety or something,  and that's all great, but how can we impact these guys every year?  How can we help them every year?  In over-fertilization, everybody knows it's happening.  It seemed to be a key component that we could zero in on to really make an impact.  
**[0:04:45-0:04:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:04:45):**  I think over-fertilization is one of the most significant and one of the least appreciated  factors in agronomy and plant nutrition.  When we started using plant SAP analysis, which I consider to be pretty much the epitome  of nutrition management at this point, some of the best technology we have available,  it quickly became clear that agronomy is using the wrong frame of reference when thinking  
**[0:05:15-0:05:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:05:15):**  about nutrition management.  Our entire frame of thinking has been framed around the law of the minimum.  We need to run an assay, figure out what's missing, and add more.  We've completely missed the opposite, which is the law of the maximum, which is the nutrient  which is in excess that creates deficiencies of something else, and over and over and over  
**[0:05:36-0:05:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:05:36):**  again when we use SAP analysis, we see that in fact, the deficiencies that are showing  up in plants are a result of the excesses of nitrogen and potash, particularly sometimes  also phosphorus that growers apply.  It's actually the excesses that people are applying that are creating deficiencies.  It is these nutrient excesses that are at the foundation of most disease and insect  
**[0:06:02-0:06:06](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:06:02):**  challenges and most crop yield and quality challenges that many growers experience, and  it's largely unrecognized in mainstream agronomy today.  Oh, I agree with that.  We've got a pretty big dataset of soil health parameters and standard analysis and all that  stuff, and when we see really high nitrates in soil, the microbial soil respiration drops.  
**[0:06:26-0:06:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:06:26):**  I mean, it's a clear trend.  My whole thing about this is I've been a real big fan of nature.  I think nature's done research and development for quite a bit longer than we have, and has  the system figured out, and we came in and just really kind of ignored observation.  My mantra is that nature is trying to tell us the correct way to do farming, the correct  
**[0:06:50-0:06:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:06:50):**  way to interact with the earth, and we're ignoring that because of our so-called technology.  The best technology in the world is right out there in the field.  The best technology we have are our eyeballs and our brain.  I want to listen to what nature's telling me.  I want to stop and listen and observe and then try to apply fundamental rules that it  
**[0:07:12-0:07:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:07:12):**  uses to the way we do agriculture.  I think that's exactly what you're talking about, is that we're just missing this system  that's so eloquent and beautifully designed in front of us, and we're just going to go  on there and tear it up and do it through a weaver.  Let's speak about the soil assay a little bit.  
**[0:07:31-0:07:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:07:31):**  From your perspective, it's evolved over the years, you've worked on this for a number  of years.  What is the goal of the Haney soil analysis, and what does it do exceptionally well?  What's the hole that it fills that other assays are not delivering on?  Well, when I got into it, looking into all this in graduate school, the thing that struck  
**[0:07:54-0:07:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:07:54):**  me was that, and I talk about this in my talks, is that there were farmers that had tech samples  in their fields out there, and these guys were growing 100 bushel corn with no fertilizer.  At some of our research plots, we were growing 70, 80 bushel corn with no fertilizer in Texas,  which is odd, because I'm going to say for the record, a good crop in Texas is crop failure  in the Midwest.  
**[0:08:15-0:08:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:08:15):**  I don't know why we're growing corn, but anyway, that struck me.  Where's this nitrogen?  And why are we not accounting for it?  So I started looking into that more and more.  You look at all these long-term research plots that have got these tech samples that are  
**[0:08:30-0:08:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:08:30):**  year after year with no fertilizer still producing crops, and it's like, wait, why are we not  accounting for this?  How do we account for that?  You're not going to go through the growing season and then go back in time and apply  the right amount based on the tech sample yield results.  
**[0:08:46-0:08:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:08:46):**  We've got to have something out in front.  It seemed to me that the soil respiration being a representative of the fertility of  that soil was the key component to move forward in that, because carbon and nitrogen are coupled.  We measure them and act like they're separate, but those are coming from the same molecule.  So if you're getting this much respiration, you should be able to get this much nitrogen,  
**[0:09:13-0:09:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:09:13):**  especially if we know the CDN ratio.  So that's really the biggest impact that this has, is estimating how much organic nitrogen  is going to be released from a given soil.  As that number is roughly $20 an acre across the nation on average, not chump change.  You look at the millions upon millions of acres that we're currently farming.  
**[0:09:38-0:09:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:09:38):**  What is the $20 per acre number?  Is that the cost of over-applied nitrogen?  So that's how much you can save if you use this test average.  If you've been putting out, let's say 200 pounds of nitrogen to grow 200 bushel corn,  and our test comes back and says, look, you can grow 200 bushel corn on 160.  
**[0:09:59-0:10:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:09:59):**  That's a $20 an acre saving in nitrogen.  Only thing we seem to be able to control in ag is the amount of fertilizer.  Your seed prices are set, your management's probably set, your commodity prices are coming  up, you're kind of set.  The one thing that farmers can really have a control over is how much fertilizer they  
**[0:10:18-0:10:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:10:18):**  put out on their land.  I can certainly relate to the scenario that you describe.  We also have growers that we've worked with throughout the Midwest, but at the moment  there's one example that comes to mind, a very distinct example in southwest Kansas,  that was growing corn on corn, dry land, and for the three-year period that I have in mind,  
**[0:10:38-0:10:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:10:38):**  they were averaging in the neighborhood of 17 to 18 inches in rainfall per year, so it  was higher than their typical rainfall in that region.  They were averaging 180 to 200 bushel corn per year, three consecutive years, with no  cover crop, no manure, no liquid fish or anything else.  This was an organic operation.  
**[0:11:01-0:11:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:11:01):**  There was no nitrogen input other than a microbial inoculant that was known as zodobacter and  others that were known to have the capacity to fix nitrogen.  They were growing 180 to 200 bushel per acre corn crops with no additional outside-in inputs  year after year.  I can relate very much to the scenario that you're describing that there are these ecosystems  
**[0:11:26-0:11:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:11:26):**  that are supplying all the nitrogen that a crop requires without outside inputs.  The question of how we account for that and how we measure that is a critical one.  The next question that comes to mind for me on this assay, William Albrecht used to have  this saying about the state of soil science at the time.  He would say that you should read books and study nature, and when the two of them don't  
**[0:11:56-0:12:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:11:56):**  agree, you throw out the books.  In my opinion, I believe this also applies to soil reports, and I have my own perspective  on the mainstream soil reports of looking at Caddon exchange capacity and minerals that  are supposedly exchangeable.  I think that can provide us some useful information, but what I can say with complete confidence  
**[0:12:22-0:12:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:12:22):**  is that there is zero correlation between the minerals that show up on those types of  soil reports and actual plant absorption.  We have a database of hundreds of thousands of samples that shows that to be very clearly  the case.  There is no correlation.  
**[0:12:40-0:12:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:12:40):**  The correlation is much more strongly.  We can start lining up the dots and making correlations when we begin accounting for  biological activity, which is why I have the intrigue and the interest in the assay that  you have developed.  I'm giving a long explanation to ask the question, what percentage of the time does the Haney  
**[0:13:05-0:13:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:13:05):**  analysis not correspond to field observation?  How often do we need to throw out that report?  That's a good one right there.  So I'll answer that with a long-winded answer.  This will be fun.  
**[0:13:22-0:13:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:13:22):**  At our research farm at the USDA, we've got about 158, and we split that up into conditional  to the motel.  We've been tracking that.  We were tracking that every three months, pulling samples every three months.  It really got to be interesting because we were seeing these changes.  
**[0:13:39-0:13:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:13:39):**  So then we decided, let's just start pulling them out every month.  It's like, oh my God.  Because we were getting all these people sending us these questions like, well, I pulled this  sample and ran this test on it last year, and it's different this year.  My answer was, well, thank God.  
**[0:13:58-0:13:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:13:58):**  He said, what do you mean, thank God?  It should be the same.  I said, no, we're measuring a dynamic system.  We can't use static thinking to understand dynamic systems.  The thing that I enjoyed more than ever about all that sampling we did in analysis was that  
**[0:14:14-0:14:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:14:14):**  you could see that during the seasons when you had water, when temperature was up, when  water went away or when temperature went away or moisture went away, it's like watching  a heartbeat.  That dynamic system, the soil was alive, and it was responding to external stimuli, just  like an organism.  
**[0:14:31-0:14:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:14:31):**  That's the fun part about the test is that it takes into account many factors and it  gives you a different picture.  Now, I would stand by any recommendation that we make because we're not manipulating the  data.  We're using passive systems like drying and re-wetting and measuring the CO2 that comes  
**[0:14:51-0:14:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:14:51):**  off of it.  We're using water as an extract because that's what it rains.  It doesn't rain maleic 3, it doesn't rain KCEL, it doesn't rain things that we throw  out of oil in a lab.  My point is that if we can't mimic nature in a lab, we're wasting our time because in  
**[0:15:07-0:15:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:15:07):**  the field is where it's happening.  It's not happening in the lab.  We can get all kinds of different nutrients by changing the strength of our extractants  and that's just no problem.  If we want the right answer, we've got to do it as passively and as close to how nature  
**[0:15:23-0:15:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:15:23):**  is doing it as possible.  Your question being which ones do you throw out, well, if they don't line up with yield,  we make a recommendation based off that test.  For the record, I never called it the Haney test.  I called it the Soil Health Nutrient Test.  
**[0:15:42-0:15:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:15:42):**  The reason I called it that was because that's what it was about, accounting for nutrients  in the soil that we've been ignoring based on biology that are going to come available  based on biology.  This test is actually designed to mimic what happens when it rains because if it doesn't  rain, it doesn't matter.  
**[0:16:03-0:16:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:16:03):**  When do you throw it out?  Well, number one, I look at a lot of soil sample results from my lab, different labs  around the country that get sent to me and it's pretty quick to tell whether the numbers  look right or not.  There are some analysis that I've seen that are useless.  
**[0:16:22-0:16:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:16:22):**  Does that make any sense?  That's the first thing I look for.  Is there a balance here?  Do things make sense on what you're seeing?  Is the CDN ratio in the right ratio?  
**[0:16:33-0:16:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:16:33):**  What does respiration look like compared to the amount of carbon?  Those kind of things.  The first thing I look for is everything looked kosher and everything looked like it was balanced.  Now that's a tough question.  It should reflect, you should be able to get a yield response based on the fertilizer we're  
**[0:16:52-0:16:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:16:52):**  using.  So that's a tough question to answer.  It's just like when somebody sends us one sample to represent a thousand acres and they  don't understand why everything didn't work exactly right.  You make a very important point.  
**[0:17:05-0:17:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:17:05):**  It's a point that we've observed.  It's much the same as when we've started using SAP analysis very intensely and our history  before the HEMI analysis, actually before SAP analysis, we used to use soil saturated  paste analysis on our high value fruit and vegetable crops.  We would measure on these high value crops where it's important to understand what's  
**[0:17:27-0:17:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:17:27):**  happening and what's going on.  We would conduct a soil assay in the row every 14 days through the growing season.  Now we do that with a SAP analysis.  I think this is the historical use of soil analysis has allowed us to develop the paradigm  that it is okay to take one sample per season and have that reflect the entire year.  
**[0:17:54-0:18:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:17:54):**  When in reality that you couldn't possibly imagine a way to misrepresent living systems  more.  They are a dynamic system.  So with SAP analysis, we take samples constantly through the growing season and it's an incredibly  valuable exercise because you learn how nutrients are being released from the soil profile very  
**[0:18:16-0:18:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:18:16):**  clearly and you learn what the plant is actually absorbing.  So the scenario that you described of only pulling one sample per thousand acres, I would  say you're making an equal or bigger mistake to only pull one sample per year and expect  to understand what's going on in your entire soil profile because as you described, and  I'll actually pose this as a question, what happens when you get an inch and a half of  
**[0:18:38-0:18:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:18:38):**  rainfall three days before the sample is collected versus not having had any rain for three weeks  before the sample is collected?  How does that influence the results?  Well it does influence results.  The interesting part about this test is that when we put samples in the lab, we dry every  
**[0:18:53-0:18:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:18:53):**  one of them, we dried them pretty gently and we do that on purpose.  We don't want to destroy the aggregate that's sitting there, which you certainly do if you  overgrind it.  But what we see and why we dry it and grind it is to make it uniform, put everybody on  the same playing field moisture-wise because what we want to do, especially with the respiration  
**[0:19:15-0:19:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:19:15):**  test, we dry that sample and then we re-wet it.  That's an important thing because we stop the system by taking the water out of it by  drying it and then we rev it back up and let it tell us what it sees.  Because ballgame out in the field is not static.  It dries, soils dry out, they get re-wetted, there's a flush of nitrogen and phosphate.  
**[0:19:39-0:19:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:19:39):**  This is why plants green up after it rains because of the nitrogen that's available from  the organic fraction.  So we're trying to mimic that in the lab.  The whole test is based on let's stop this system and then rev it up and see what's happening.  Now in theory, if the soil is dry when you take the sample, we should see the flush and  
**[0:20:04-0:20:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:20:04):**  we should be able to estimate the nutrients.  If you took it when it was dry before it rained, we're hoping that we're mimicking what's going  to happen when it does rain.  Because one of the things we've also seen is when we get samples in and we've gotten  an unbelievable amount of different types of samples, some that are more water than  
**[0:20:25-0:20:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:20:25):**  soil, those don't work very well.  We have people take their contact information and put it inside of a wet bag of mud.  We don't know who they are because everything washes out.  I'm getting off track.  The point is we're trying to estimate what happens when it rains.  
**[0:20:49-0:20:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:20:49):**  That's where the ballgame is.  Soils dry out, they get re-wetted, they dry out, they get re-wetted, and that's where  the soil comes from.  That's how everything rains out.  So in essence, what you're describing is that if the amount of rainfall that you get during  
**[0:21:04-0:21:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:21:04):**  close proximity to the sample is going to influence the lab results.  Yes, but it really shouldn't matter whether you took it before it rained or after it rained  because we're trying to mimic what's going to happen when it rains.  So we get this question a lot, when should I sample?  My answer is when do you want to know something?  
**[0:21:23-0:21:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:21:23):**  What do you want to know?  If you're interested in reducing fertilizer inputs, then take a sample a couple weeks  before you put on fertilizer.  But if you're interested in what's the dynamics of my management system and soil health and  all that, then take two or three or four samples a year at different times and watch that trend  
**[0:21:43-0:21:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:21:43):**  and see what's happening.  The other thing we recommend is composite a bunch of samples in your field and then  go to your fenthrow and take a composite set of samples out of that because you're not  farming the fenthrow.  That's going to give you a benchmark as to where your farm could be opposed to where  
**[0:22:01-0:22:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:22:01):**  it is.  It's really been fascinating to see those results from around the country, the folks  that are doing that.  In my opinion, Rick, I actually believe that there is a lot of value in sampling even more  frequently than what you are describing.  
**[0:22:17-0:22:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:22:17):**  So I would propose that not necessarily, you don't need to do this across the entire farm,  but select a representative field that has been exposed to a certain crop rotation or  whatever is standard or maybe a couple of fields and measure them every 30 days during  the growing season.  I have experienced this on many different farms and in many different fields.  
**[0:22:43-0:22:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:22:43):**  When you take multiple samples in a season, you get to see the trends of how biology becomes  active.  You get to see nutrient release change at different periods of time.  You get to see crop nutrient demand.  All of a sudden, this picture of nutrient interactions and biological delivery becomes  
**[0:23:05-0:23:08](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:23:05):**  really, really clear.  It is so inexpensive for the information that you get.  This is, from my perspective, this is way more valuable knowledge and way more valuable  information than collecting a couple of samples per season over a lot of acres because you  get to see how your crops and soils truly interact in ways that you don't see if you  
**[0:23:28-0:23:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:23:28):**  just collect a couple snapshots in time.  You get to see the true trend lines.  I agree with that 100%.  You hit on something there.  I've had so many farmers say, why are these commercial ads charging $50 or whatever they  
**[0:23:41-0:23:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:23:41):**  charge for this test?  They say, I can get a standard test for $8 or $10.  I said, well, that's great if you didn't want to know anything.  To me, that's money wasted because it's not telling you anything about how the system  actually works.  
**[0:23:54-0:23:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:23:54):**  You're going at it blind.  I'm a big fan of more data that tells you that's what we started doing every month.  That was so eye opening to me.  It just absolutely shocked me.  The one thing that really struck, and I'll give you a quick scenario here.  
**[0:24:12-0:24:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:24:12):**  We had had wheat planted in our field.  We're in high pH soils, 8-2, a bunch of calcium.  You can still see the seashells in there.  It's 55% clay, so high pH, high clay.  So hardly ever get any phosphate when we extract it with pounds 8 pounds.  
**[0:24:31-0:24:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:24:31):**  Not enough to grow a crop.  However, it seems like we grow crops every year.  Oddly, it gets that.  One year when we were doing that monthly sampling, we had wheat growing out there.  It was rocking along there.  
**[0:24:47-0:24:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:24:47):**  We were seeing 8-10 pounds of phosphate.  Then when the head started to move up into the boot phase and really started to develop,  we had pulled samples and all of a sudden there was 30 pounds of phosphate.  Never seen that before ever.  That was a direct indication that those plant roots were dumping those organic acids out  
**[0:25:08-0:25:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:25:08):**  and volubilizing that phosphate and there it was.  Then the next month it was gone.  The head didn't already cut it.  It was just so eye opening to see validation of the theory that you think, we know they  release organic acids through the roots, but here it was.  
**[0:25:28-0:25:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:25:28):**  We had fertilized these soils in 20 years and boy that was neat to watch.  There is only one thing that is worse than no data and that is bad data.  Bad data or data that is based on a false premise gives you the expectation that something  is okay when it's really not.  I have perhaps a different opinion than the mainstream.  
**[0:26:02-0:26:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:26:02):**  I'm sure I do.  I would say that the mainstream Melek 3 extraction or ammonium acetate extraction is usually  bad data.  The reason it is usually bad data is because as I have commented a couple of times in this  conversation there is zero correlation between what shows up on the soil report and what  
**[0:26:26-0:26:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:26:26):**  the plant actually absorbs.  Does it really help you grow a better crop?  Does it really help you improve soil health?  The reality is I make that comment and I express that opinion and I do want to express that  we still use this assay on the growers that we work with because they are familiar with  
**[0:26:45-0:26:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:26:45):**  it.  We have been able to use those test results to produce positive crop outcomes and improve  yields and improve quality.  However we are doing that with a long, long list of caveats.  It's almost like learning the English language as a second language.  
**[0:27:03-0:27:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:27:03):**  All these rules apply except in all these special situations.  So we have this long list of special situations that we look at the soil report and we say  well what does the soil's mineral geological foundation look like?  How much sand, silt, and clay is in it?  What is the biological activity?  
**[0:27:20-0:27:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:27:20):**  We take all these other factors into consideration to try to interpret the results and sometimes  we're correct, sometimes we're not.  So I think the value that I see in the analysis that you have developed is removing some of  the external factors and the rules that we need to consider and the exceptions to the  rules that we need to consider when making recommendations.  
**[0:27:45-0:27:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:27:45):**  Well yeah, when I was developing the extract back in the early 2000s what struck me was  that we had like baleic 3, brae 1, mone mastate which is fairly neutral and we had olecine.  So we had these highly acidic acids and these highly alkaline extractants.  It's like where's the middle?  What's happening in the middle here?  
**[0:28:08-0:28:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:28:08):**  I wanted to develop an extractant based on what plant roots do and the fun part is it's  not highly buffered, the extractant.  So the pH of the soil tends to determine at what pH it gets extracted at and that just  made sense to me.  It's like if you over buffer and extract it then you're ripping out phosphate, potassium,  
**[0:28:29-0:28:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:28:29):**  and calcium that's not really present for a plant to deal with or if you're doing it  too alkaline again you get the same result.  I was also shocked at how easy it was to move all those numbers around based on just a little  bit of tweaking to an extractant.  It made no sense to me.  
**[0:28:50-0:28:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:28:50):**  So I really spent a lot of time developing that.  Earlier in our conversation we were speaking about the variability of data and when do  we throw out the lab report and you commented that sometimes you see numbers coming back  from laboratory assays that don't make sense.  So I know that as a government employee you have some sensitivity about making laboratory  
**[0:29:16-0:29:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:29:16):**  recommendations and I respect that.  I would like to ask the question, it's my understanding that the assay has evolved over  time.  You've developed different generations of it, you're constantly refining it and tweaking  it and improving it.  
**[0:29:30-0:29:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:29:30):**  Who are the laboratories that are running the most recent version?  Well to my knowledge there's this lab, Regen Ag Lab has contacted me and they've got the  most recent iteration.  Brookside Labs got the most recent iteration.  There's one called I think Next Level Ag in South Dakota that does.  
**[0:29:49-0:29:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:29:49):**  I don't tell these people this is what you should be doing because I'm a federal employee,  that's all up to them.  But if they contact me and want to inquire about where are we at, what are we doing,  I'm more than happy to give them all the information.  That's just not a problem.  
**[0:30:05-0:30:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:30:05):**  But there's quite a few labs that don't seem to have any contact with us at all.  It's odd to me because I've seen a lot of results that don't reflect what we originally  designed.  It gets to be challenging at times when we get results back and the numbers don't make  any sense.  
**[0:30:23-0:30:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:30:23):**  And you know the farmers will say, well what should I do?  You should call these labs and tell them and I'm like no, you call for your money, your  deal.  If they want to call me and ask me maybe we're doing something wrong, then I'm more than  happy to help them try to figure that out.  
**[0:30:42-0:30:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:30:42):**  That's out of my hands.  The assay that as you've developed it is relatively new.  I suppose you could say it's actually not that new given the amount of time that you've  been working on it.  How much calibration is still needed for this assay to become mainstream and to become accepted  
**[0:30:58-0:30:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:30:58):**  by the mainstream?  Oh, I'm so glad you brought that up because that's such a fun calibration.  I have looked and I spent a great deal of time in graduate school looking at the so-called,  and I'm going to say so, calibration from the standard test.  When you dig and you look, there is no calibration.  
**[0:31:21-0:31:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:31:21):**  They have so much variability in their data, it's mind-blowing.  I'm not bad-mouthing them, I'm just saying this is a daunting task because again, we're  trying to use static systems like when you put this recipe of NP and K down, you should  expect this yield.  That's fun.  
**[0:31:42-0:31:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:31:42):**  That is not how it works.  There should be tremendous variability.  They should not be calibrated very well.  Boy, they defend so fiercely that their data is calibrated.  I remember, I won't say who, but I got into a conversation with a scientist that was talking  
**[0:31:59-0:32:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:31:59):**  about their university calibrations were on the money and I found the paper.  It was written in 1953, there was six points on it for phosphate.  Phosphate added yield, six points.  R squared, which is just a number, was like 0.25.  I thought, that is terrible, but they were still using it to that day.  
**[0:32:22-0:32:24](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:32:22):**  To this day, they're still using that.  I thought, what's going on here?  Well, here's the reason.  Nobody wants to spend the time and the money to really get at this stuff.  My point of view was, we've got this new set of tests.  
**[0:32:39-0:32:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:32:39):**  I know that we can back off on nitrogen and phosphate because we have the evidence that  you can grow all this yield for various crops with no fertilizer.  We know that.  If we're showing that there is more nitrogen and phosphorus there based on this organic  fraction we're measuring in the water extract, that's good to go.  
**[0:33:00-0:33:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:33:00):**  We're good to go.  We can do that.  It doesn't have to be quote-unquote calibrated.  The biggest joy I have is when farmers call me and say, I grow 160 quicks of corn a year  and a year out and I did it with half the fertilizer in the last three years that I  
**[0:33:16-0:33:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:33:16):**  was using.  There's your validation.  We're going to get caught up in numbers where, oh, well, we get the soil test.  Here's the recommendation.  That's good to go.  
**[0:33:27-0:33:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:33:27):**  Calibrations, come on.  It's going to rain.  You might have a drought.  We can't tell.  Because I remember one guy one year said, well, I'll tell you what, if it don't rain,  
**[0:33:37-0:33:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:33:37):**  your fertilizer recommendations aren't going to work.  I said, well, neither is the fertilizer.  He just looked at me like, okay, got it point taken and walked off.  We don't think like that.  We just don't think about how nature does things and how is this test I developed perfect?  
**[0:33:57-0:33:58](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:33:57):**  No.  It's the beginning of the change.  We've been doing these standard soil test methods since the 40s and 50s.  This is the 21st century.  Surely to God, we can do better.  
**[0:34:10-0:34:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:34:10):**  Again, nature is telling us, look at the dead zone of the Gulf.  There's your calibrated data right there.  I told this in an audience a while back.  I said, so apparently our standard test is calibrated to the dead zone of the Gulf.  Everybody's kind of looked at me like, what?  
**[0:34:27-0:34:28](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:34:27):**  Think about that.  We supposedly had this calibrated data from all this stuff in 60 years, and the dead zone  of the Gulf gets bigger and bigger.  We're apparently calibrated to that.  That's not really what we're after.  
**[0:34:39-0:34:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:34:39):**  It's a very good point, Rick.  The reality is that any time you have a new innovation, new technology, whether it's a  new product or new soil assay or whatever it might be, there will always be detractors  and there will always be the defenders of the status quo.  The one question that comes to mind when I was thinking about this conversation is what  
**[0:35:03-0:35:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:35:03):**  would the detractors have to say about the presently existing soil assays if they were  being developed today as new technology?  I think you made a great point earlier.  Is that the quote-unquote calibrations, they're not based on agronomic reality and actual  crop required nutrients and soil required applications.  
**[0:35:24-0:35:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:35:24):**  We have lots of evidence for that.  Yeah, I've had several conversations, fairly heated at times, from folks and different  universities and I'm like, well, we can end this argument.  Just send me your calibrated data and I'd just like to see it for my own benefit.  Well, they can't ever seem to find it.  
**[0:35:45-0:35:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:35:45):**  It sure never gets to you.  I mean, that's the end of the conversation.  Then I followed up a couple of times and they were like, well, we don't know where it's  at.  I've had several conversations and I've also actively gone out to look for it in the literature  
**[0:35:58-0:36:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:35:58):**  and in the data.  If it exists, it sure is hiding very well.  Yeah, and I'm not down on any of that.  It's just that, come on now, if we're going to judge a new test by old standards that  didn't work and defend them, defend the old standards that don't work and try to make  
**[0:36:17-0:36:20](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:36:17):**  the new one fit into, that just doesn't make any sense to me.  We in ag research should be, we don't have to rely on growing a crop because all of us  researchers would be broke living on the street.  It's real easy for us to say this and that, but I want to help these guys, these farmers  and ranchers.  
**[0:36:38-0:36:39](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:36:38):**  We get paid to do ag research.  We should be doing everything we can to come up with solutions to help farmers be more  efficient.  That's on us and we've done a terrible job of education.  Our methods have not been well thought through and it's the 21st century for God's sake.  
**[0:36:54-0:36:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:36:54):**  I talk about in my talks, is anybody carrying around a rotary phone in their pocket?  But we're still carrying around soil testing methods from the 40s and 50s thinking we know  something.  We don't know hardly anything about how soil actually functions.  Rick, I very strongly agree with the perspective you just expressed and the same is true of  
**[0:37:18-0:37:19](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:37:18):**  plant analysis.  I've been a big advocate and champion of plant SAP analysis for the last decade, which all  the listeners of this podcast surely know.  And the reality is that dry matter based tissue analysis is also 60 to 70 year old technology.  And it's incredible to me how many conversations I've had with agronomists.  
**[0:37:39-0:37:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:37:39):**  It seems about every agronomist who has roughly a decade of experience, who pulls a lot of  tissue analysis and pays close attention to them somewhere between five and 10 years in,  depending on the crops and the context they're working with.  They say, you know what, this tissue analysis does not correlate to anything that we're  doing.  
**[0:37:59-0:38:00](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:37:59):**  It's worthless.  And yet many of us continue to have continued to use them because it is the technology that  we're familiar with and that is most widely used and known.  Well sure, and you know as well as I do that change is hard.  It's hard for all of us.  
**[0:38:17-0:38:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:38:17):**  And when we come along and say, you've been doing this soil testing wrong for 60 years,  that's a tough bill to swallow.  I'll get that.  Because somebody's going to come along and say, well Haney tried his best but that was  like a really pretty dumb set of tests he came up with in the future.  
**[0:38:33-0:38:34](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:38:33):**  That's going to be young.  I'm going to be like, well now wait a minute.  I don't want to be that guy.  I want to embrace and I hope before I die that somebody improves upon all this.  It has a better view that I didn't see because I can't see at all.  
**[0:38:49-0:38:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:38:49):**  I do know that what we've been doing isn't working because we have the evidence, again  the dead zone in the Gulf.  So we had to make a step in the right direction.  And what you're talking about with SAP analysis versus tissue is a step in the right direction.  This set of tests versus the standard test is a step in the right direction.  
**[0:39:10-0:39:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:39:10):**  We've got so much to learn.  Because I'll never forget when I got my PhD right before I left graduate school, there  was a talk given by an older gentleman and he basically said, and this is no kidding,  that I don't know what you grad students think you're doing because we've had all this figured  out since the 60s.  
**[0:39:30-0:39:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:39:30):**  And we were like, what?  Then why are we here?  Well, the reality was that's the monster that they believe, that they had it all figured  out back in the 60s and 70s and everything was just going to be fine from now on.  Let's ignore the fact that we do no tillage now.  
**[0:39:48-0:39:52](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:39:48):**  Let's ignore the fact that varieties have changed a little bit since the 60s.  Ignore the fact that all the chemicals that we use, let's ignore the fact that climate  is a little different.  We were just sitting there in stunned silence that anybody would be so bold.  There's even a more fundamental fact that is missing in those assumptions and that is  
**[0:40:11-0:40:16](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:40:11):**  the assumptions in the 60s and 70s were that we had figured out the system completely and  it was almost exclusively based on chemistry and genetics.  There was no consideration for soil microbiology and the capacity of biology to deliver nutrition.  With the emerging knowledge and information that is becoming more available today, as  we better understand how biology influences nutrient availability and as we better understand  
**[0:40:38-0:40:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:40:38):**  how the biophysics of organisms influence biology, then all of a sudden it becomes clear  that looking at these living processes and living systems through a lens that is exclusively  comprised of chemistry is a very shallow and short-sighted view.  It absolutely is.  I believe biology drives the chemistry.  
**[0:40:58-0:40:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:40:58):**  It's not the other way around.  It's just like plants.  Plants and microorganisms have the ability to respond to their environment and that's  not something fertilizer does.  In the example earlier, if a plant needs phosphate in a high pH soil, it has mechanisms that  
**[0:41:15-0:41:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:41:15):**  it can employ and we ignore those mechanisms.  Chemistry and physics is much, much easier to measure than biology.  I think that's a big reason why it was ignored for all these years.  There were guys back in the 20s and 30s that were headed down the road towards drying and  re-wetting and actually won the CO2.  
**[0:41:40-0:41:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:41:40):**  I mean, I've got the papers.  Then in the 70s they came along and said, oh no, it's all about microbial biomass.  My idea was who cares what microbial biomass is.  If it's all sitting there and nobody's doing anything, then who cares?  It's activity that's important.  
**[0:41:58-0:42:03](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:41:58):**  I give the example of it and people really love this example.  If you had a hundred government workers in a room and only one of them was working, you  can see them all nodding their heads like that's right.  We can measure the CO2 in that room.  I said as opposed to a hundred people in a room that are all working, the CO2 is highly  
**[0:42:22-0:42:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:42:22):**  elevated.  So, mass can be misleading.  Activity is not misleading.  That's a simple way to understand how important biology is and that we can measure it.  I agree with you.  
**[0:42:37-0:42:42](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:42:37):**  We comment that biology drives chemistry.  I believe there's emerging knowledge that is going to come to the forefront in the next  couple of years where we will learn that the biophysics of soil and plant ecosystems is  actually what drives the biology.  That's a bit of a different conversation for us to get into.  
**[0:43:03-0:43:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:43:03):**  I do want to go back to the comments that you made about new technology and how you  hope to see the soil analysis evolve in the future and field of soil analysis in general  evolve in the future.  A few episodes ago, I had the privilege of having a discussion with Rick Mulvaney from  the University of Illinois where he described how they are now measuring amino sugars in  
**[0:43:29-0:43:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:43:29):**  the soil profile with their, I think he called it the Illinois nitrogen test.  How does that soil nitrogen report compare to your soil nitrogen report and how should  growers think about the two of them?  For the record, I like what Dr. Mulvaney has done.  I think he's been out in front.  
**[0:43:50-0:43:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:43:50):**  I really admire the things that he's done.  He took on the standard issue thing.  I'm a big fan of the organic fraction of nitrogen.  His test was, I thought, a breakthrough thing.  I did a bunch of his tests with a bunch of soils many years ago and compared them with  
**[0:44:08-0:44:09](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:44:08):**  soil respiration.  I found some really strong correlations, which I thought was just awesome.  The thing that I thought was going to be very difficult was that I know a lot of farmers.  They're used to putting on X amount of nitrogen every year and they were not ready for us  to come in there and say, you don't need any nitrogen.  
**[0:44:29-0:44:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:44:29):**  Based on this Mulvaney test, you don't need any nitrogen.  They're not going to do that.  My deal was I wanted to be a little more specific.  That test, it uses sodium hydroxide.  It basically rips the nitrogen out of the soil and then traps it.  
**[0:44:47-0:44:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:44:47):**  Then you can back titrate to find out the answer of how much nitrogen is in there.  That's fine, but not all of that's in play.  What I was looking for with my test was what's in play right now.  That's really the difference.  It's going to show there's a lot more nitrogen there than we are and that's fine because  
**[0:45:07-0:45:13](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:45:07):**  he's got different ways to interpret what you're seeing than other people do.  I like what he's doing because I think that's the right road.  Until the farmers are ready to really accept that we can buy with quite a bit less than  what we're doing, I think this baby stepping them into this deal is one option.  Our chances, we're never going to recommend as little nitrogen as what the Mulvaney test  
**[0:45:32-0:45:33](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:45:32):**  might.  I guess that's really the difference.  He's looking at a big extract of nitrogen and we're looking at a smaller pool based  on a water extract.  That's what they do.  
**[0:45:43-0:45:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:45:43):**  Thanks for that response.  I don't have any experience with Rick Mulvaney's assay.  I'm looking forward to doing some experimentation in the coming growing season.  But what I do have extensive experience with, again, bringing up the plant sap analysis,  and we generally make recommendations to our growers to apply as little nitrogen as possible  
**[0:46:09-0:46:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:46:09):**  at planting.  We'll look at history and context and what's going on.  We prefer to apply none.  We will wait to make our recommendations for side dress nitrogen or nitrogen applications  later in the season if that capability exists.  
**[0:46:25-0:46:30](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:46:25):**  And then we make recommendations for nitrogen requirements based on actual measured crop  requirement.  And it's common for us to, in a single year, reduce nitrogen applications by 40 to 60 percent.  That's very common.  And to have yields go up at the same time as we're doing that.  
**[0:46:44-0:46:48](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:46:44):**  And the reason we are comfortable making those recommendations and the reason the growers  are comfortable applying those recommendations is because they can actually see it in the  field.  You get a sap analysis report back that shows that a crop has a desired value of, let's  just say, 1,500 parts per million nitrogen in the plant sap, and the actual level is  
**[0:47:04-0:47:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:47:04):**  3,000.  Then you're not going to gain or benefit anymore by adding any additional nitrogen.  So it's a real, really strong in-season, in-field validation of what's actually going on.  And I imagine you could do something similar to that with your soil analysis by measuring  every 30 days in the season and seeing what's actually going on.  
**[0:47:24-0:47:25](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:47:24):**  Yeah.  And I also think that in the future we're going to see a big impact from in-field sensors  that can be put in the field and measured periodically.  I think the future of a whole lot of this analysis is going to be in-field testing.  Again, if we can't figure out what's happening in the field, we're kind of wasting our time.  
**[0:47:47-0:47:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:47:47):**  And I think the sap stuff is awesome.  That's a great point because I'll tell you, I've been working on some of these in-field  sensors and I had a farmer that I've known, I used to work for him, and he's been farming  for 40 or 50 years, conventional tillage, monoculture weed, won't change, won't listen.  And I took some of these sensors up there to his farm a while back and showed him the  
**[0:48:12-0:48:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:48:12):**  microbial response in his till field versus 20 feet away in a pasture.  And I will never forget the look on his face because, I mean, I've known this guy a long  time, and he was stunned.  And I said, you see how those numbers fell off really badly when he went from your pasture  to your till field?  
**[0:48:27-0:48:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:48:27):**  He said, yeah, that's the effect of tillage.  I could have slapped him in the face and done less damage.  I mean, he was just stunned.  And I thought, there it is right there.  They need to see in their field in real time, from time to time, what this looks like, what  
**[0:48:45-0:48:46](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:48:45):**  is actually happening.  Because it wasn't me telling him anything.  He was watching the graph.  He was watching the movement.  And there it was.  
**[0:48:54-0:48:55](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:48:54):**  And boy, that is so important.  You hit on something there that's so important because it's the psychology of these farmers  that has got to be also helped, like all of us.  They've got to have a different perspective.  They've got to see these things differently.  
**[0:49:09-0:49:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:49:09):**  We've done a terrible job of educating farmers on how soil actually works and how plants  actually work and what's really going on.  And we just got to do a better job.  Rick, I'd like to change the conversation for just a moment to get your insights and  perspectives perhaps on a more macro level of where the world of agriculture is going  
**[0:49:29-0:49:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:49:29):**  and where the opportunity exists in the future.  What is something that you believe to be true about ag that is different from the mainstream  view?  That would kind of go towards the whole nutrient density of foods.  I believe that the way we're doing modern agriculture is producing a fairly poor nutrient  
**[0:49:46-0:49:47](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:49:46):**  dense food.  And we can do better.  Everybody knows that their garden grown tomatoes are better than soil.  Again, nature is telling us this is the wrong way to grow things.  We've got to do this differently.  
**[0:50:01-0:50:07](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:50:01):**  I don't know what it's going to take to change the mindset that the agronomic system that  we've got right now is not sustainable, especially for children and grandchildren.  We are at a place right now where I think we can turn the corner and start moving and  just admit that maybe we haven't done it perfectly and there's room for improvement here.  I'm not sure I even answered your question.  
**[0:50:27-0:50:35](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:50:27):**  Well I think in a general sense your assessment is that what is different from the mainstream  viewpoint is that you're indicting mainstream commodity food as not being nutritious, if  I'm understanding it correctly.  Yeah, I believe that.  We have a garden and my wife Liz does a fantastic job of growing gardens.  
**[0:50:51-0:50:54](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:50:51):**  I've never had such cantaloupe and watermelon.  It's just like my God, it's night and day compared to what we're buying.  And again, being a big fan of nature, there's never been a drop of fertilizer put in her  garden.  The only fertility that's been put in her garden is cover crops.  
**[0:51:07-0:51:11](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:51:07):**  And my goodness, what a change, what a difference.  Especially when it rains, we've never seen such quality of food coming out of that plot  of gardening.  We didn't use cover crops before.  We've never used fertilizer.  
**[0:51:21-0:51:26](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:51:21):**  We've had gardens for many years and when we introduced cover crops into that garden,  my God, everything changed.  This is something that nobody really believes yet mainstream-wise.  Cover crops are the key.  I've said many times that I'd rather see somebody conventionally till with cover crops using  
**[0:51:41-0:51:43](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:51:41):**  cover crops than no-till without them.  And I believe that, that it's the key.  Yeah, I agree with you on that.  I know that's a very controversial opinion.  There are many ecosystems and many crop production systems where no-till, a dogmatic no-till  
**[0:51:56-0:51:57](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:51:56):**  is not the answer.  It is not.  But that's a conversation for another day.  I'll give you a quick example.  We had a guy, a researcher, send us two samples that were composite samples, one for a convention  
**[0:52:08-0:52:10](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:52:08):**  till, one for no-till.  We ran the analysis, sent it back to him, he said, your test is wrong.  That was his first thought, your test is wrong.  I said, why?  He said the conventional till is higher in nutrients, soil health score, everything than  
**[0:52:21-0:52:22](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:52:21):**  the no-till.  I said, well, how long ago did you plow that field under?  He said, about two weeks before I sent the sample.  So again, he was just convinced that no-till was better.  So you've got this dogma on both sides, conventional till or no-till.  
**[0:52:39-0:52:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:52:39):**  The point is you've got to be versatile.  I know farmers in Oklahoma that are set up to go conditional till or no-till depending  on the year and the season and the moisture and all these things.  That is a more versatile thing.  If we want to develop truly regenerative agriculture ecosystems, there can be no room for idealism  
**[0:52:59-0:53:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:52:59):**  and there can be no room for dogma.  We have to be willing to take a very pragmatic and a very practical approach and always ask  the question, what truly produces the best outcomes for soil health, long-term and short-term,  and what truly produces the best crop quality and the best crop yield?  And if we're willing to ask that question and leave our biases behind, which is difficult  
**[0:53:24-0:53:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:53:24):**  for all of us because we're all human, we all have our own biases and we may not even  recognize them or know them, many times the answers we come up with may be different from  what we might anticipate.  Absolutely.  I've done a lot of work with soil respiration and I can't tell you the times that things  
**[0:53:40-0:53:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:53:40):**  have happened that were opposite of what I expected.  It's like, well, this is what's going to happen.  Based on my extensive knowledge, we're going to see this kind of soil respiration and it  was the opposite.  But I love that kind of stuff because, like, no, nature's throwing you a curveball and  
**[0:53:58-0:54:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:53:58):**  it's my job to figure out how to hit that curveball.  And that's where you learn.  It is.  Yeah, we've had the same.  We've uncovered a number of different, I won't call them science pieces because when you  
**[0:54:13-0:54:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:54:13):**  dig into them, you discover that they're actually not supported by evidence.  But there's been a lot of narratives in mainstream agronomy about certain nutrient interactions  or how nutrients behave and interact with each other, which when you develop a large  data set, as we have on sap analysis, all of a sudden the narrative becomes significantly,  it's not just unsupported, it's disproven.  
**[0:54:36-0:54:40](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:54:36):**  And there's lots of fun things to unwrap there.  Rick, what is something that you wish all farmers knew?  That's the easy one, that your soil is alive and that you should treat it like that.  And I think that soil respiration is an excellent educational tool to show them because, you  know, I have farmers and people that come through the lab, you know, we've got these  
**[0:54:58-0:55:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:54:58):**  CO2 sensors and I let them breathe into it, you know, immediate spike of CO2.  And it's like, well, look at that, you're alive.  And then we'll take it, put it on a jar of soil and it does the same thing.  And then they're like, whoa.  And that is such an important, I mean, if you're going to treat soil like it's just  
**[0:55:16-0:55:21](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:55:16):**  some inanimate object, like a machine, you're going to treat that very differently than  knowing that it's a living entity.  We've got to get that through everybody's head, that that's important.  You're the character, like it's your child.  Rick, what do you believe most limits farmers?  
**[0:55:34-0:55:41](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:55:34):**  The conversation we've been having, we're talking about the capacity and a lot of untapped  potential in soil ecosystems, a lot of untapped potential with crop development and yield  capacity.  What do you believe is most limiting farmers from achieving the potential they're capable  of?  
**[0:55:52-0:55:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:55:52):**  Well, you just said it.  It's an ecosystem.  We don't treat our soils and our lands, the farmers don't believe, understand or have  been taught or been exposed to the fact that this is a gigantic organism, that everything's  connected, water cycle is connected with soil, with plants, plants and soil are interconnected,  
**[0:56:14-0:56:18](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:56:14):**  plants and microorganisms are interconnected.  They don't know that.  Somehow we've got to get that message across, everything's interconnected and the methods  and the context that we use to describe farming is completely disconnected from nature.  Nature's got the better way.  
**[0:56:35-0:56:37](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:56:35):**  We think it doesn't, but it does.  Proving track record, we've had people tell us that, well, this doesn't mean anything.  They're like, well, what was the land like back when the buffalo were in the Midwest?  Well, you think it was pretty fertile?  It's like, oh my God, yeah, it was fertile, nobody was fertilizing.  
**[0:56:52-0:56:53](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:56:52):**  How's that possible?  Oh, they see simple things that they don't.  How do you grow 100 bushels of corn with no nitrogen?  Ask them that question.  It's an education gap.  
**[0:57:03-0:57:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:57:03):**  We've done a terrible job.  There are lots of education gaps.  How is it possible for trees to grow out of bare rocks with faces with no soil?  That's a great slide.  It's like, I'm acting much?  
**[0:57:14-0:57:15](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:57:14):**  Yes, it's true.  And that's another one.  I remember seeing those in grad school going, how does that happen?  Well, that's when you stumble onto the organic acids by the root system, dissolving minerals.  Again, observation.  
**[0:57:32-0:57:36](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:57:32):**  Ask nature what's going on here and try to figure out a way to find the answer.  Yeah, and asking the question, where does the nitrogen come from in that system?  Where does the phosphorus and potassium come from?  What if the rock that it's growing on contains no calcium?  Where does the calcium come from?  
**[0:57:48-0:57:51](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:57:48):**  Yet it's somehow all there in that tree.  Where did it come from?  It just blows the mind anyway to try to even comprehend how complex this system is.  And yet there are simple tools at our disposal to help us understand this.  And we want to reject those because they're new or different.  
**[0:58:10-0:58:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:58:10):**  So you've been a pioneer.  Pioneers are always known for having a target on their back and being the first to get the  arrows.  Being a pioneer means that you've also been fairly outspoken.  So I don't know how relevant this next question is going to be, but I still want to ask it.  
**[0:58:26-0:58:31](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:58:26):**  What is a topic that you would like to speak about more, but you often don't because you  sense people may not be ready to hear it yet?  Well, I think we've already hit on that.  You've already said it because you know this, that we can get by with half the fertilizer  we use right now.  
**[0:58:43-0:58:44](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:58:43):**  Half.  Easy.  I remember having a conversation with a person pretty high up in government and I said, we  can back off our nitrogen fertilizer and corn and wheat right now by 20 percent and nobody  will notice.  
**[0:58:56-0:58:59](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:58:56):**  He was like, well, yeah, I know that's right.  I said, yeah, so why aren't we?  Because we were looking at the test and I said, look, we've got the evidence here based  on this test that we can do that.  That we can do that right now.  
**[0:59:08-0:59:12](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:59:08):**  He said, well, politically we can.  They didn't want the government to step in and say this is how much fertilizer you're  going to get to put in.  In other words, they weren't going to strong arm the farmers.  I understand that.  
**[0:59:22-0:59:32](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:59:22):**  What we want is these farmers to understand that the economic health of their operation,  free will choice, this is the better way and not go down the road being forced to, I think  is also a very critical.  Well, I think ultimately the argument that you are making and the argument that I have  made many times is that it really can be simple economics.  
**[0:59:56-1:00:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=0:59:56):**  You earlier mentioned the number of reducing your, on average across the entire country,  reducing nitrogen applications by $20 an acre.  I know with complete confidence that the growers we actually do consulting work for across  the Midwest and well, across all of North America for that matter, we are reducing fertilizer  application costs, nitrogen applications by a whole lot more than $20 an acre.  
**[1:00:21-1:00:23](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=1:00:21):**  I believe that.  In many cases as well, as I said earlier, 40 to 60%, we're often exchanging those costs  with other things to improve overall soil health and improve overall plant health and  improve yields and so forth.  But you can look at this very directly and very clearly as a direct cost savings.  
**[1:00:41-1:00:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=1:00:41):**  And when you look at saving $20 or $40 an acre on nitrogen applications, how much does  a $50 assay actually cost?  It doesn't cost money.  It's making you money.  And SAP analysis makes you money.  
**[1:00:59-1:01:02](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=1:00:59):**  Soil analysis, good soil analysis makes you money.  It's just, we should actually not be looking at these things as an expense.  They're not really an expense.  They are a management tool, completely different perspective.  I agree with that.  
**[1:01:13-1:01:17](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=1:01:13):**  I had a farmer, I was up in Omaha, Nebraska, giving a talk and this guy stood up the front  row and he said, I'm not giving no $50 for a soil test.  He was ready.  It was awesome the way he did it.  I said, well, okay.  
**[1:01:25-1:01:27](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=1:01:25):**  I said, that's fine.  I said, what if that $50 soil test, I said, how many acres are you farming?  He said, 100.  I said, what if that $50 soil test saved you $20 an acre?  I said, so you're not willing to spend $50 to save $2,000?  
**[1:01:41-1:01:45](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=1:01:41):**  And he got real quiet and put his head down and he looked back up at me and he said, well,  I guess I'd be stupid if I wasn't willing to spend $50 for a soil test.  It's like we get locked into that, well, a soil test ought to cost $10.  Well, how about a better soil test?  You think that would cost more?  
**[1:01:59-1:02:01](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=1:01:59):**  Does a better car cost more?  Come on now.  But we've been so sucked into a soil test ought to cost $10 and here's the results and  this is what we do.  It's like, well, we don't want to change anything.  
**[1:02:13-1:02:14](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=1:02:13):**  Why are we going broke?  Surely we can do better.  We can do better.  Rick, thank you so much for sharing your wisdom and your insights and I look forward to having  more conversations with you in the future.  
**[1:02:24-1:02:29](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=1:02:24):**  All right, John, thank you for yours.  The team at AEA and I are dedicated to bringing this show to you because we believe that knowledge  and information is the foundation of successful regenerative systems.  At AEA, we believe that growing better quality food and making more money from your crops  is possible.  
**[1:02:45-1:02:50](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=1:02:45):**  And since 2006, we've worked with leading professional growers to help them do just  that.  At AEA, we don't guess, we test, we analyze, and we provide recommendations based on scientific  data, knowledge and experience.  We've developed products that are uniquely positioned to help growers make more money  
**[1:03:03-1:03:05](https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/regenerativeagriculture/S3EP18_RICK_HANEY_AUDIO_FINAL.mp3#t=1:03:03):**  with regenerative agriculture.  If you are a professional grower who believes in testing instead of guessing, someone who  believes in a better, more regenerative way to grow, visit advancingecoag.com and contact  us to see if AEA is right for you.  Thank you for listening and we look forward to working with you.  