---
title: Winning The Weed Control Challenge On Organic Crops With Klaas Martens
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

<script src="https://cdn.podlove.org/web-player/embed.js"></script>
    <script>
        document.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', function () {
          if (document.readyState === 'interactive' || document.readyState === 'complete') {
            podlovePlayer('#player', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/Regenerative Agriculture Podcast/Winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens.json', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/Regenerative Agriculture Podcast/config.json').then(registerExternalEvents('player'))
          }
        })
  </script>

### Regenerative Agriculture Podcast  (2018-05-12)  
### Author(s): John Kempf  

**[0:00:00-0:00:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:00:00):**  Hi friends, I'm Jon Kampf, hosting this podcast. I am passionate about developing regenerative  agriculture systems that improve soil health, produce crops that are completely resistant to  diseases and insects, and produce fruit of such an exceptional quality that we can have a legitimate  
**[0:00:16-0:00:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:00:16):**  conversation about growing food as medicine. I've discovered that there are many people with  incredible knowledge and information about soil and plant systems and how to develop regenerative  agriculture systems. However, much of this knowledge and this information is scattered,  
**[0:00:33-0:00:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:00:33):**  it's found all over the place. Some of it has been published in peer-reviewed publications,  but there are many incredible stories and a lot of knowledge that has not been published and that  hasn't been shared with many people. I started Advancing Eco-Agriculture in 2006 to bring this  
**[0:00:49-0:01:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:00:49):**  knowledge together in a more coherent fashion and incorporate it into products and growing systems  that growers can easily put into practice. It's my personal mission to have these regenerative  agricultural systems become adopted globally and become the mainstream, the status quo against  
**[0:01:07-0:01:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:01:07):**  which all other growing systems are compared. To help achieve this goal, I want to share the  knowledge that we have learned in the last decade and make it available to everyone. While we have  developed products at AEA that embody the principles of regenerative agriculture systems  
**[0:01:22-0:01:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:01:22):**  and make them easier for growers to apply, this knowledge and these principles can be applied  anywhere. And when they are applied properly, they will always increase farm profitability  and resilience to climate stress. If you have any questions, suggestions, comments, or ideas,  
**[0:01:40-0:01:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:01:40):**  topics that you would like for me to discuss, please connect on LinkedIn or on Twitter,  where my username is at visionbuilder7, or you can also email me at john at johnkempf.com. I would  very much like to hear from you and to hear your feedback. Be sure to subscribe to this podcast,  
**[0:01:58-0:02:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:01:58):**  and thank you very much for listening. Enjoy the show. In this podcast episode, I had a lot of fun  in an interview and discussion with Claus Martens, who is an organic  broadacre crop farmer from upstate New York, the Penn Yan region with Lakeview organic grains.  
**[0:02:14-0:02:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:02:14):**  Claus and I have a very fun discussion around weed management, using cultural management practices,  using appropriate tillage, using crop rotations to manage perennial weeds and annual weeds,  and to really shift the weed populations of a farm over time. At the beginning of the podcast,  
**[0:02:36-0:02:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:02:36):**  the audio quality is a bit of a challenge, but stick with us. As we get a little bit further  into it, the audio quality gets to be a lot better. And we have a fascinating topic. Claus  has some very key insights into how to manage a number of different key weed species that I know  
**[0:02:53-0:03:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:02:53):**  many of you will find very insightful and will enjoy a great deal. So thank you for staying with  us, and I hope you enjoy. Welcome to the Regenerative Agriculture podcast. On this podcast,  we explore the science and the practical application of regenerative agriculture ecosystem,  
**[0:03:09-0:03:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:03:09):**  how to regenerate soil health, crop health quality, and very importantly, how to increase  farm profitability. The goal that I have is to really give you clear and easy to understand and  actionable information that you can implement on your operation. In this episode, I'm very excited  
**[0:03:25-0:03:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:03:25):**  to welcome Claus Martens from Lakeview organic grain in upstate New York. Claus has been very  successful at developing organic farming systems to develop high quality, develop exceptional  yields, high quality small grains crops and various grain crops. He has also developed very  
**[0:03:43-0:04:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:03:43):**  effective weed control systems. So Claus, we're very honored to have you. Thank you for joining us.  All right. Thanks for asking. This has been quite a journey for us since the last 25 years  ago from being fully conventional farmers who used all the chemicals to completely  
**[0:04:01-0:04:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:04:01):**  convinced organic farmers, which I think is probably not unique in that I think you have  a similar experience, don't you? Well, certainly the farm that I grew up on, we were very mainstream  using very intense pesticide application. And today the farm is not organically certified,  
**[0:04:18-0:04:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:04:18):**  but there is no insecticide or fungicide or herbicide use at all. So no synthetic pesticides  of any kind. Yeah, it's a real journey in learning. And you wouldn't have had the handicap  that I did, wouldn't call it that of having gone through the land grant university system,  
**[0:04:33-0:04:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:04:33):**  learning how to farm correctly, and then having to unlearn a lot of things before things started  to work. Yeah, I've, several of the mentors that I've worked with have told me that I would not  have been able to learn what I've learned so far or in the speed that I learned it with the  
**[0:04:47-0:05:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:04:47):**  university education, which I don't have the context to be able to comment on that, but I  found that to be an intriguing observation for sure. I found it to be both handicap and help.  I found that there are people in the university who are really good, honest scientists who can  
**[0:05:02-0:05:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:05:02):**  have offered me a huge amount of help in figuring things out. The handicap more in what we were being  taught and how we were being taught to think and look at the farm. There's a real reductionist  way of looking at nature that I think prevents us from seeing the whole truth sometimes. And I  
**[0:05:19-0:05:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:05:19):**  had to step in that. In fact, one of the things that bothered me when we farmed conventionally  was that if you took the model that I had learned and the assumptions that I was farming under,  the observations contradicted them. And it was enough to drive me crazy sometimes because I  
**[0:05:33-0:05:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:05:33):**  either had to discount my observations or question my assumptions. For a lot of people, it's actually  not very comfortable to question your assumptions. I think it was a quote by William Albrecht,  University of Missouri back in the 50s, who said that the quote was, you read books and study  
**[0:05:50-0:06:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:05:50):**  nature and when the two of them don't agree, you throw away the books. I've always took them in  that way. And even there, I think there was some truth in the books, but not complete understanding.  We have to figure out what part of it is useful and which part is not, which asks more of us than  
**[0:06:07-0:06:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:06:07):**  just reading it back. Yeah. So, Claus, you've been on a very interesting pathway. You've  done some fascinating work on your farm. What have been some of the memorable moments that  led you to where you are today? Well, there's one that I talk about in a lot of our talks.  
**[0:06:23-0:06:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:06:23):**  It happened at the Cornell University Library. When we first converted to organic, like a lot  of people, we were looking for what organically approved inputs we could substitute for our  fertilizers and which organically approved techniques or machines or whatever we could  
**[0:06:39-0:06:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:06:39):**  substitute for our herbicides. And in searching the library stacks, it became obvious that we were  looking for weed control and fertility books from before 1945. And it seemed like there weren't any  until my wife suggested that maybe we should look in the archives and stacks the older stuff. And  
**[0:06:56-0:07:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:06:56):**  you know, it was almost funny that you couldn't find anything that was printed before then until  we went into the stuff that had been put away for storage. But there I ran into what had been my  egg peach result text written by Krafft and Rayner. And in the bibliography of that, I found a paper  
**[0:07:10-0:07:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:07:10):**  written by a German professor in the 30s, who was the pioneer in using chemicals to control weeds.  And the quote, I wasn't quoting it exactly right. I just reread it here a couple days ago. And what  he wrote was, cultural practices form the basis of all weed control, while the various chemical means  
**[0:07:29-0:07:45](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:07:29):**  should be regarded as auxiliary only. Kind of an interesting comment coming from the pioneer  of spraying weeds. We've certainly shifted from that paradigm substantially. Yes, we have. And  you know, here was the visionary who started a practice actually telling his students,  
**[0:07:45-0:08:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:07:45):**  do not rely on this. It tells me he saw a lot of things that maybe people since then haven't seen.  And that got me to read, does it turn my worldview upside down? You know, this is  practice that I had learned is always reactive, that you identify the weeds and then you figure  
**[0:08:00-0:08:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:08:00):**  out which poison will kill them and hopefully not hurt the crop as much as the weeds. And he was  telling us to look at cultural practice. So that made me ask, well, what are cultural practices?  And cultural practices are everything you do in the tending of that field. You know, how what we  
**[0:08:14-0:08:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:08:14):**  did is set up the situation that the crop was growing in. And the idea that what we had done  before had an impact on what the field was like was kind of radical and new to me, although it did  fit what I had observed. I saw patterns, they weren't making sense. And I kept having to ignore  
**[0:08:31-0:08:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:08:31):**  them. So, rotation is the obvious one. But in this paper, he went through all kinds of examples  of different practices that could impact what kind of which species were there. And also an  idea. This wasn't in the paper, but it was inspired by the paper, something that I had seen  
**[0:08:49-0:09:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:08:49):**  and observed. And that is what happens when you abandon a field. And I've used this example enough  so I think everyone gets tired of it. But it seems to always work, because it draws out what people  already know. First year after you abandon a field that's been in real crops, let's say it's  
**[0:09:02-0:09:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:09:02):**  in a cornfield, think about what weeds will grow. And, you know, obviously there'd be flams quarter,  pigweed, foxtail, velvet leaf, the whole range, they're mostly seeds, weeds that make huge numbers  of seeds. And you end up with a seed rain that could be millions of seeds per square foot,  
**[0:09:19-0:09:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:09:19):**  could be many millions of seeds per square foot that are falling on the field. But what grows the  second year? Now, from our reductionist way of thinking, we would assume that because we've just  made that many seeds, we should have a lot bigger problem with the same thing. But the second year,  
**[0:09:32-0:09:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:09:32):**  none of those plants are growing. We have other weeds growing there. And if you take that fast  forward several more years, you start seeing goldenrod, start getting woody plants, brambles,  sumac, you know, all the thorny stuff, multi-floor rows. And if you take it forward a few more years,  
**[0:09:50-0:10:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:09:50):**  you're going back to forest. This is something Dr. Albert wrote about. And if you let it go for 500  years, at least where we are, it would be back to old growth hardwood forest, mostly oak. And Dr.  Albert called that the climax crop. That's what nature, that's kind of a steady state that nature  
**[0:10:06-0:10:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:10:06):**  would put the land in. And if you think about it, this is how the land was made to work. It  creates this succession where all of the succession species and communities, each one  changed the soil. The reason all of those weeds that set seed, those seeds didn't grow the second  
**[0:10:20-0:10:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:10:20):**  year was that the plants that made them had changed the soil and that the right conditions  weren't there for those plants to grow the next year. So other plants grew. And that group, again,  changed the soil so that another group grew. Thinking back to Dr. Albert's growth, we talked  
**[0:10:35-0:10:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:10:35):**  about these successions as actually being more productive, more diverse, and more vibrant than  the climax crops so that the tall grass prairie and the oak would have been very stable, very  resistant to invasions and diseases, you know, the insects or then it was, but it really didn't have  
**[0:10:53-0:11:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:10:53):**  that much diversity in it. And it didn't, was not quite as productive as the succession communities,  but it was very, very resistant to any kind of problems. These plants didn't get sick, you know,  they could tolerate floods, storms, whatever, and just remain in very healthy good condition.  
**[0:11:09-0:11:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:11:09):**  And the reason I'm making all this description is that this is all part of what Halperst  used to tell his students, see what you're looking at, don't see how nature does its crop rotation.  So yeah, go ahead. Why did you look for books that were written prior to 1945? Well, I was looking  
**[0:11:25-0:11:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:11:25):**  for that because my father used to tell me, he used to laugh at me when I said, well, we need all  these chemicals. And he said, well, how do you think people fed themselves for most of history?  If those are needed, these things are all recent. And I just reasoned that if I look back at these  
**[0:11:39-0:11:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:11:39):**  agriculture books from before 1945, I might be able to learn how people farmed back then,  and how they actually made things work. And again, that was my reductionist thinking to some extent,  but I was reaching back to older knowledge. And we've lost a couple generations of people who  
**[0:11:54-0:12:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:11:54):**  passed down from, you know, one generation to the next all this stuff, because, you know, it all  suddenly became irrelevant when the chemicals came along. And I just didn't know what else to do. I  was in a situation, and I'll digress here, the reason we were wanting to make a better living,  
**[0:12:09-0:12:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:12:09):**  but partway through our transition, I went to pull up the sprayer, and found that my right arm was  paralyzed, it wouldn't move. And I spent the summer paralyzed, I went to a naturopath and a  chiropractor who finally restored the use of my arm. And we had a decision to make, because at  
**[0:12:25-0:12:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:12:25):**  this point, hiring somebody to do a job that I figured would probably kill me, or harm me in some  way, was not something that as a Christian, I could do. I mean, there was something, there's  something morally sick about hiring a job that you're convinced is going to harm you, hiring  
**[0:12:40-0:12:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:12:40):**  someone and telling them to do a job, you are convinced it's going to be harmful. So that placed  me in a spot of, if we want to do this for a living, we have to figure out how to do it without  using these things. So that puts some, puts a little more perspective on our visit to the library,  
**[0:12:54-0:13:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:12:54):**  where we were desperately trying to figure out how do we remain farmers, but do it in a different  way. With the pieces that you've learned from the research that you've done, and the description  that you've just shared about natural crop succession, and, or I guess I should say perhaps  
**[0:13:10-0:13:30](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:13:10):**  plant succession in developing soils, how have you found that useful for managing crops and for  managing weeds on your operation? Okay, that's, I'll have to digress a little here. I mentioned  that there was a conflict between my observations and our assumptions. All of these observations,  
**[0:13:30-0:13:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:13:30):**  when I think about them correctly, were pointing to a system that was very carefully engineered,  you know, with an intelligent design behind it that worked according to a logic and an order  that was not random. You know, I had to shift from thinking that these are all random occurrences  
**[0:13:46-0:14:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:13:46):**  that we're seeing, that these are the result of an order. And looking at that, looking at the world  that way, we were, we suddenly realized that this is all cause and effect, that what we do today,  we will see the results of later. So this really helped us in starting to understand what we had  
**[0:14:02-0:14:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:14:02):**  seen. You know, and Dr. Albrich used to love to say, let students see what you're looking at,  but not just see, it's, we have to understand it right. And in order to understand it right,  another mentor I had framed it this way. He said, if you want to get the right answers,  
**[0:14:15-0:14:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:14:15):**  you have to figure out how to, what are the right questions. So instead of seeing my field  of velvet leaf and just framing the question of how do I kill it, which is what I've been learned,  when I see these random events, that all it is, is a challenge that the only question I need to  
**[0:14:31-0:14:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:14:31):**  answer is how do I kill this? But I don't want it here. I needed to ask, why is it here? What's more,  what is it doing? What did the creator put this here to do? Why did he put it here? And what was  its function? A lot of questions. I could keep on coming up with these questions that I'd never  
**[0:14:48-0:15:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:14:48):**  thought about, but they're important. So when I saw, started looking at a pest, it forced me to  start asking why it's here and what exactly is it doing in the soil? Take this back to the succession  that we observed. Obviously these plants are changing the soil and left to their own device.  
**[0:15:05-0:15:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:15:05):**  They kind of work themselves out of the job. So something else grows. Where this took me in the  logic was that I had to look at every, everything that I could observe. I had to try to see  everything there was to see, but look at it through new eyes, look at it through something  
**[0:15:20-0:15:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:15:20):**  that is working exactly as it was intended to. And the problem was me. If I didn't like something,  I had to own it and say, this is the result of what I've done up until now. Now, how do I change  that? More importantly, how do I learn from it? So I started to study what do these different  
**[0:15:34-0:15:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:15:34):**  weeds and pests do in the soil? And from that, maybe have a hint. And that kind of grew into a  system of how do you read what the soil is telling and how you understand the language that your  fields are using to try to teach us. And from each of these things, there were observations made that  
**[0:15:52-0:16:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:15:52):**  I learned from. I'm going to shift gears for you and take this back to the university. I'm going  to jump a little bit. I'm going to tell two stories. One was about a weed that I thought was  going to make it impossible for us to farm organically. At one point, I was really frustrated  
**[0:16:08-0:16:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:16:08):**  and it was velvet leaf. And it seemed like the velvet leaf grew taller than the corn.  No matter how carefully I cultivated, there was always a lot of it survived. I had one spot in  particular where I ended up mowing it about one acre of it first year because the corn,  
**[0:16:22-0:16:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:16:22):**  there was going to be no crop. There was none there but velvet leaf. And as I, let's fast forward  this, I don't have time to go into all the details, but I wasn't even noticing that after about four,  three, four years, it wasn't quite as bad. And the spot where the crop didn't amount to much  
**[0:16:36-0:16:51](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:16:36):**  was smaller and went forward another three or four years. And lo and behold, my velvet leaf  was getting into mid-summer and then it was starting to turn yellow. The leaves were starting,  the lower leaves were turning brown and the lowest leaves had fallen off. And then as I watched it,  
**[0:16:51-0:17:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:16:51):**  there were more and more leaves falling off. And by before the end of the summer, it was dead. Not  only that, but instead of being taller than the corn, it was only about three to four feet tall.  So I called a friend at Cornell who was a weed ecologist, Tony, and I was still thinking  
**[0:17:05-0:17:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:17:05):**  completely wrong. I was saying, if I found a disease here that's going to make me a millionaire  and told Tony my brilliant idea and that we could catch these floors and make a product out of them.  And Tony came out and looked situational where he said, I'm familiar with this disease,  
**[0:17:18-0:17:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:17:18):**  or you can go ahead with your plan and before it can be successful, you need to explain this to me.  Why is it when that disease is in your neighbor's field on his velvet leaf, it doesn't hurt the  velvet leaf? And sure enough, this disease existed right across the road and it wasn't hurting the  
**[0:17:32-0:17:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:17:32):**  velvet leaf. Now that should have, it did bump me on the head with confusion, but I should have  been able to figure this out quicker than I did. I have to admit I was quite dense. I needed quite  a few lessons and noticed quite a few things before I started putting two and two together  
**[0:17:46-0:18:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:17:46):**  the way I'm explaining it. So the next thing we noticed, there was a second disease in that  velvet leaf. Another student, one of the students at Cornell identified a virus. And in the meantime,  because I was paying so much attention to this, thinking that this was going to be my new product,  
**[0:18:00-0:18:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:18:00):**  I noticed that those leaves were covered with white flags. The first time I saw it,  I called an agronomist and said, look at all these white flags. My weeds are just being eaten alive.  And the agronomist said, wait a minute, you better watch out. You're not going to have crap left with  
**[0:18:11-0:18:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:18:11):**  all these insects out here. But then we looked at the corn and there weren't any bugs on the corn.  Corn was perfectly healthy growing well. It was only the weeds that had bugs on them. So  to kind of jump ahead a little more, the insects were actually carrying the virus and the fungus  
**[0:18:26-0:18:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:18:26):**  was blowing on and killing them. But it wasn't this complex that was actually killing the plant.  Those were just opportunists. We had changed our system so that that was a very unhealthy soil  environment for the weeds. And because the weeds were unhealthy, all these pests were moving in  
**[0:18:40-0:18:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:18:40):**  and attacking the weeds. So it wasn't really the pests that killed the weeds. They were just there  because the weeds were sick and weren't fit to live. I think I paused there. I don't know if you  could think of any follow-up questions or things I missed on that piece. We've actually observed a  
**[0:18:57-0:19:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:18:57):**  very, very similar situation on farms that we've worked on after developing this little ecosystem  for a couple of years where this one farm that comes to mind had major challenges with Canadian  thistles. And after a couple of years of being in a small grain rotation, forage rotation, planted  
**[0:19:16-0:19:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:19:16):**  back into a corn crop, and I actually have a number of photos of this, we went back into an  organic corn crop, no herbicides applied, and it was cultivated. Cultivator got most of the Canadian  thistle, but there was still the Canadian thistles that were left right in the row. And by the time  
**[0:19:32-0:19:48](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:19:32):**  the corn was tasseling, all the Canadian thistles were dead. They were brown. We sent those into a  laboratory as well to try to identify if there was a pathogen or disease that had infected them,  and we weren't able to find anything on the dead plants. It was quite an interesting experience.  
**[0:19:49-0:20:04](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:19:49):**  Okay, that was actually a good example for you to bring up. How did you decide, or how did you  interpret that? How did we what? How did we discover that? Or how did you interpret what  you were seeing at that point? Did you figure it out right away what was going on? Well, our  
**[0:20:04-0:20:23](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:20:04):**  interpretation was that we had changed the biological profile of the soil biology to such a  degree that the rhizomes were no longer able to survive and that the plant ended up dying. Because  actually, the really interesting part was that it wasn't just the upper parts of the plant that were  
**[0:20:23-0:20:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:20:23):**  dead, but in fact, the entire root system, and you know how ubiquitous a Canadian thistle root system  can be. They were dead. They were completely decomposed. Yeah, so I could bring you a piece of this that might  be interesting to you then. I have a friend whose great uncle researched Canadian thistle in Germany  
**[0:20:40-0:20:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:20:40):**  at the university, and he discovered there is an organism that lives on the deeper  roots of the Canadian thistle and that the thistle needs this organism to survive. It's a symbiont,  and this particular organism can only live in anaerobic soil. The oxygen is deadly to it, and  
**[0:20:58-0:21:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:20:58):**  that's what you saw probably. Yeah, fascinating. Yeah, so the subsoil that was compacted and Canada  thistle tends to start in the wet spots and the low spots would be anaerobic, and when it had  everything it needed, it would grow and it would spread. There's also a poem, I don't  
**[0:21:16-0:21:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:21:16):**  know if you remember, farmers used to say cut them in May, they'll be back in a day, cut them in June,  they'll be back soon, cut them in July and tell them goodbye to Canada thistle. I've never heard that one  before, but yeah, it sounds interesting. Yeah, and that fits what an old farmer mentor of mine wants.  
**[0:21:31-0:21:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:21:31):**  I had a patch and he said, I want you to pay attention, I'm going to do something here,  and I want you to pay attention because you're going to learn something. So just about the time  those thistles were in full bloom, he took my mower and headed out there and mowed them down. That was  
**[0:21:43-0:21:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:21:43):**  in July. They said come in full bloom in July, and he said they're gone now and they won't come back,  and he was right. Well, that's best because those big roots in July when the plants blooming have  shrunk, that's when the most energy is in the top. So they, because they've shrunk, they created air  
**[0:21:58-0:22:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:21:58):**  passages that brought oxygen down, and when we cut the tops, they shrunk even more to try to  rebuild their tops, and that did away with the anaerobic conditions in the subsoil. Fascinating.  Yeah, you've seen the results of it. Yeah, the question that comes to mind for me on the  
**[0:22:16-0:22:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:22:16):**  discussion that you have, what you've shared with the velvet leaf, the story that you shared  regarding the velvet leaf is what do you attribute that shift and that success to? In other words,  if you were to give advice to other growers around the country, how can you replicate that success?  
**[0:22:32-0:22:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:22:32):**  What is the system or the process to follow to achieve those kinds of results? And perhaps not  just with velvet leaf, but possibly also with other weed species. Right, so we're asking that  question, and I told this story twice in a row now at a graduate class at Cornell, and the students  
**[0:22:49-0:23:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:22:49):**  in this class are hoping they can help answer this question exactly like you're asking it. And what  they've done is they've come out to our farm and they've collected soil that they're going, that  they planted in the greenhouse now and planted velvet leaf then, and they collected soil from  
**[0:23:01-0:23:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:23:01):**  a conventional farm that was suffering from really bad velvet leaf. They're putting them in the  greenhouse under the same conditions, and they're going to do microbiological assessments and every  measurement that they can think of, hoping that they can reproduce these results in the greenhouse  
**[0:23:14-0:23:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:23:14):**  side by side and start explaining to us on a very basic scientific level what's going on. The bigger  picture is what I'm attributing this to is I think the soil has a different biology. I know that the  velvet leaf at the same time my figweed in my lambsquarter has really been reduced. These are  
**[0:23:31-0:23:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:23:31):**  all non-microrhizal leaf, and in here, this is my guest talking. I'm hoping the university gives us  the true answer and can prove it, but my guess is that the mycorrhizae on our crop roots are actually  attacking the non-microrhizal leaves or somehow going after them to help the crop compete with  
**[0:23:50-0:24:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:23:50):**  them. The reason I'm guessing that is that a researcher from the University of Wisconsin,  once after I talked, talked about similar observations that he had in some of his plots,  had observed a 90 plus percent reduction in the growth of non-microrhizal leaves that he was  
**[0:24:05-0:24:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:24:05):**  guessing was due to the mycorrhizae on the crop plant, but he said he couldn't reproduce it  because the soil was doing it in different soils and it seemed only in certain soils  where the mycorrhizae were able to attack and throttle the growth of the non-microrhizal plants.  
**[0:24:19-0:24:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:24:19):**  My guess there is probably it was the healthier soils that were friendly to mycorrhizae were  giving him this extreme suppression of weeds and the unhealthier soils weren't, but when you do  statistics on single factor analysis, the result is you didn't see anything, which obviously we  
**[0:24:35-0:24:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:24:35):**  know he did see some. Does that fit what you've seen? We've observed it's been hard to identify  for us working in many different farms, many different types of environments and ecological  regions, but hard to identify consistent themes. So the way that I've usually presented this  
**[0:24:54-0:25:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:24:54):**  discussion is to say that as you shift soil biology, weed pressure shift and weed populations  shift and I would say 90 plus percent of the farms that we work on within the first two to three  years, their weed populations shift. What was once a dominant and major weed species is now subordinate  
**[0:25:15-0:25:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:25:15):**  and it has been displaced by another weed species entirely. Okay, so you're changing the microbiology  of the soil. I'm a little more, I'm trying to figure out exactly how we're changing it and get  the details. We don't really have to know the details to have that work in our favor just like  
**[0:25:31-0:25:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:25:31):**  I'm sure you and your any of your clients have figured out just taking benefit from it, whether  they know how it works or not. Yeah and I'd like to go back and ask you that question. You perhaps  haven't figured out exactly the casual mechanisms of the effect that you had on the velvet leaf,  
**[0:25:47-0:26:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:25:47):**  but what were the practices that you were doing that you believe led to this result and to this  outcome? Well, we were going to a much more diverse rotation. We had started putting cover crops on  everything so that we tried not to have the soil uncovered over winter. We were plowing a lot more  
**[0:26:03-0:26:20](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:26:03):**  green matter in, but as much as anything this diverse rotation changed our soil and something  that I've mentioned in the past and that was one of my early epiphanies was that I noticed after we  started converting to organic I was plowing a field and I smelled something that I hadn't  
**[0:26:20-0:26:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:26:20):**  smelled since I was a little boy and that was I used to love to ride with my father when he plowed.  The soil had this powerful smell that I just absolutely loved and I've learned since that  scientists have just discovered that smelling this material actually makes you feel happy.  
**[0:26:35-0:26:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:26:35):**  It has a psychological effect on people. Fascinating. Did you call it geos? You know the  smell. I don't have to describe it, do I? Yeah, I know the smell. I know exactly what you're talking  about. Yeah and that smell came back and that was actually my one of my first big observations,  
**[0:26:52-0:27:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:26:52):**  but I'm pretty sure that that smell is a vital sign that you can read on soil to tell you that  it's heading toward health, that it's healthier than it was. If you don't have that smell,  it should be a warning sign that something is not working right. I completely agree with you and  
**[0:27:07-0:27:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:27:07):**  that's actually an indicator that we use when we are scouting in a farmer's field as we want to  know what the soil smells like and you know it's incredible how fast it can change. I think perhaps  the fastest that I've observed or that I've personally experienced was working with a  
**[0:27:22-0:27:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:27:22):**  strawberry crop in California. It was relatively sandy soil and the biology could change fairly  quickly and that soil went from having no smell like it was the coolant of a sandbox to having  that rich earthy smell in two weeks. It was almost unbelievable. The biology is so powerful and can  
**[0:27:42-0:27:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:27:42):**  change so fast and I think that's really one thing we're missing is we're looking at the big plant.  First of all, we're looking above ground because that's what we see. We should be looking below  ground but also we're looking at the big things and we should be looking at the microscopic  
**[0:27:56-0:28:15](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:27:56):**  because it's kind of hard to see them. Out of sight, out of mind, I'm afraid is something that  ampers us but this biology of the soil, I'm going to recommend it to you and everyone else. Maybe  you've read it. It's called Healthy Soils, Sick Soils. It's a translation from German,  
**[0:28:15-0:28:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:28:15):**  a work done by an Austrian researcher back in the 40s and 50s. I think it was published in the 60s  by his widow. He actually took soil and put it on a dissecting microscope and was trying  very painstakingly to see what he could see. He used stains and what at that time was the most  
**[0:28:34-0:28:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:28:34):**  advanced techniques. He found an entire ecosystem in the soil in these pores that were in healthy  soil. What he discovered was the organisms in it were all aquatic. They were all water living  things. There was this whole world of thousands, possibly millions of different species when you  
**[0:28:52-0:29:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:28:52):**  count the bacteria but also the larger things that were all living in the water films in the soil.  What's more, they were being fed by the exudates from the crop roots. That's one of the mechanisms  that I think the crop is orchestrating biology with by the type of food that it's pumping out  
**[0:29:10-0:29:28](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:29:10):**  of the roots. Think about if people ever think that tithing is difficult and you have to use  some of our bounty to think about plants that are giving half as opposed to 10 percent.  Think about the number of species that these plants are cultivating around their roots  
**[0:29:28-0:29:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:29:28):**  and what they must be doing. Of course, we're only seeing the results.  Absolutely. In some cases, I think, of course, Marchner, actually in petromarchner, the third  edition of soil nutrition and higher plants refers to some plants in some conditions can  
**[0:29:43-0:29:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:29:43):**  actually contribute as much as 70 percent of their total photosynthate production back to the  rhizosphere as root exudates. That's an incredible number when you stop to think about it.  Yes, and it's not foolishness on the part of the plants. This giving gives back  
**[0:29:58-0:30:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:29:58):**  just enormous changes in how the soil is because these organisms are what builds the soil.  Another thing that was in this book by Sequeira was that they took soil that had good  aggregate stability and put it in the lab at 70 degrees just to sample. Within two months, the  
**[0:30:17-0:30:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:30:17):**  aggregate stability had broken down. That was the conclusion.  Breaking down at 70 degrees Fahrenheit is incredible when you consider that many  many soils are during the growing season or in the cropping season, they're exposed to the sunlight.  
**[0:30:36-0:30:54](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:30:36):**  In many cases, the top couple inches substantially exceed 70 degrees, sometimes as much as 120 degrees  or greater. Exactly. What Sequeira was saying was these organisms were physically what was  building the soil, the structure the way it was, but they were needing the sustenance from the  
**[0:30:54-0:31:09](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:30:54):**  plants. At 70 degrees, starvation set in. These plants couldn't hold the soil together or these  microbes couldn't hold the soil together anymore because they started that. They did the same  experiment with a pesticide dumped into the soil and the soil fell apart within days.  
**[0:31:09-0:31:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:31:09):**  What was the author's name of this book? This was Margaret Sequeira. It's an Acres USA book.  Healthy Soils and Sick Soils. Yes, and it talks about tillage and it talks about the building  and maintenance of crumb structure. It gives some rules for tillage. It says you should never  
**[0:31:27-0:31:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:31:27):**  disturb a soil deeper than what you can, than it already developed a healthy crumb structure to.  Because below that layer, it can't rebuild. I'm dreaming. So, I was going back to our conversation  about weeds and cultural management of an ecosystem and how that might lead to shifting  
**[0:31:46-0:32:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:31:46):**  weed populations. There's also an interaction, if you will, between weeds and the crop that we are  trying to produce. I know that in a previous conversation, you mentioned an experience that  you had with producing dry beans and mustard being present in the fields. Can you tell us  
**[0:32:05-0:32:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:32:05):**  a little bit about that? That was my second example. I'm glad you steered me back around  to the second case that I wanted to describe. When we first converted to organic, of course,  one of the things we noticed was that we suddenly had customers wanting to buy almost anything we  
**[0:32:19-0:32:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:32:19):**  could grow, which was quite a switch from taking corn to the elevator and seeing how bad the price  was going to be and if we could still make any money at it. When we went to organic, it was more  or less, well, what would you charge me to grow this? Or what would I have to pay you if I could  
**[0:32:32-0:32:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:32:32):**  buy some beans? So, dry beans was almost like printing our own money at first. They were so  profitable and the yields were terrific. I was very happy with them. But after about the second  time that I grew them, and even five or six years in between, when I planted them again,  
**[0:32:49-0:33:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:32:49):**  I decided I must have gotten bad seed or I had a bad, I got a new variety of seed and it was just  not as good because they weren't growing as well. By the third time I grew these beans, the roots  rotted off and the yield had collapsed and the crop really was awful. I went to Cornell again,  
**[0:33:07-0:33:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:33:07):**  an old friend there at Georgia Valley, was near retirement. He had studied nematodes and roots and  fungi. He said, you know, I've been in this business all my life and I've always wanted,  when farmers came to me with a problem, I always wanted to explain to them what was causing the  
**[0:33:22-0:33:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:33:22):**  problem. They always said, no, no, no, don't bother with that. Just tell me what to put on it  to kill these things. He said, finally, now that I'm ready to retire, someone's actually asking me  what's going on. He was very happy to help us. So, he explained to us that there were root fungi  
**[0:33:38-0:33:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:33:38):**  pathogens that were not just carried by this crop, but even though it might have been five or  six years since we'd grown dry beans, he said, what else did you plant in between? I told him  that we were growing red clover and that we would seed our small grains down to red clover. We were  
**[0:33:53-0:34:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:33:53):**  growing soybeans and we had this really nice, healthy, diverse rotation. He said, virtually  every crop you're growing either leaves the problem, the number of root disease organisms,  the same, or makes them worse. So, when you've rotated, by the time you're back into dry beans,  
**[0:34:10-0:34:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:34:10):**  you've multiplied the amount of disease pressure that's in there because not one of your crops  that you're growing in that rotation actually reduces these pathogens in the soil. They all  just promote them. He developed an interesting experiment. In his experiment, he asked the  
**[0:34:26-0:34:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:34:26):**  question of how will the previous crop affect the root rot complex in dry beans. He picked  a very susceptible variety of dry beans, one that had no root rot resistance. He took a field that  was fouled with a disease and he cut it into squares and he planted, I think, 20 different  
**[0:34:44-0:34:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:34:44):**  crops, had them in a random block so they turned up at random and different spots in the field.  He planted these susceptible dry beans and he noticed that some of the plots, the dry beans  looked great. They were growing from dry beans. There were other plots where the dry beans actually  
**[0:34:58-0:35:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:34:58):**  died because the roots totally rotted off. Then he started asking about, well, which crops,  what is the right previous crop for the dry beans? He noticed that there were some crops made the  problem a lot worse. Some made it a little worse. Some were neutral. Some helped it a little. Some  
**[0:35:14-0:35:34](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:35:14):**  helped it a lot. A couple of them devastated the disease complex and ended up with very healthy  dry beans. The best one he could recommend from that was yellow mustard. That's a talk in itself,  all the mechanisms of yellow mustard breakdown that kills the dry bean disease. We also realized  
**[0:35:34-0:35:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:35:34):**  later that it wasn't just the disease that was in the ground. There were nematodes. The nematodes  were braiding the roots and chewing them up, which allowed openings for the disease to move in,  which is why the dry beans had such terrible roots. As a side note, I looked when I was  
**[0:35:49-0:36:02](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:35:49):**  studying this problem. There were pictures of dry beans back when the Native Americans grew them  in their system. Some of those roots were four feet deep. I couldn't imagine dry beans with  roots four feet deep when the ones in my field had just rotted off and were about two inches deep.  
**[0:36:02-0:36:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:36:02):**  So this has to do with the health of the soil. By adding yellow mustard to the rotation,  and we looked for a place where we could add this to the rotation without losing a crop. We  discovered it'll grow at low temperature. We threw it in our corn where we'd grown corn the year  
**[0:36:18-0:36:35](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:36:18):**  before and let it grow until early June and then turned it under ahead of the dry beans. It worked  and it actually worked sufficiently to make quite a difference. George also said, now don't do all  of it. He said leave a few spots in the field and mark them where you didn't have mustard. He came  
**[0:36:35-0:36:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:36:35):**  back that summer and evaluated roots and he could tell me with a shovel where I'd had mustard and  where I hadn't just by how the roots looked on the dry beans. There was that dramatic difference.  So by adding one new species, the right one, we eliminated this whole problem. Actually,  
**[0:36:50-0:37:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:36:50):**  our whole system had no brassicas. How did your weed profile change once you incorporated  brassicas into your cover crop rotation? Okay, so that's yeah, I was just getting to that.  We had been seeing an increase in mustard growing in our fields. I'd never had mustard problems.  
**[0:37:10-0:37:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:37:10):**  And at the same time that these dry beans were failing on me, we were having mustard pop up in  the corn. Mustard is relatively easy to kill with a weeder and it's relatively easy to cultivate out,  except that you've got to be on the ball. If you miss it, it'll get very hard to get rid of  
**[0:37:25-0:37:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:37:25):**  if you're not there in the right window. So I should have noticed that this all goes back to  seeing what I'm looking at. I was seeing this problem in the dry beans and I was seeing this  annoying increase in mustard. If I had been paying attention to my soil, I would have said that, hey,  
**[0:37:39-0:37:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:37:39):**  that soil is trying to tell me something, it's trying to bring forth mustard. It's actually  looking back, it was created so that the soil was trying to heal itself from the sickness that I was  putting out with an unbalanced rotation by bringing up this weed. In fact, I add another  
**[0:37:53-0:38:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:37:53):**  story to that. I told this story some years ago in South Dakota and one of the farmers  popped up and said, you just explained one of my biggest mysteries. He said, I had this field that  was coming up in mustard and it kept getting worse. And the last time I planted oats there,  
**[0:38:07-0:38:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:38:07):**  it was such bad mustard. I just let it go to bloom and plowed it under and got done with it because  the mustard wasn't going to be an oats crop anyway. He said, you know, I haven't seen mustard in that  field since. Correct the problem that it was designed to correct. That's right. So do you  
**[0:38:22-0:38:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:38:22):**  still have mustard in your field since you've incorporated it into your rotation? No, and I've  been just throwing the mustard on and it doesn't even grow real well, but it's there. But I haven't  seen it come as a weed since. So that's another thing we can learn from the soil. Well, on a  
**[0:38:40-0:38:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:38:40):**  couple of different occasions, you've mentioned that you have a very diverse crop rotation. What  does your crop rotation look like? At this point, we have 20 to 30 different crops.  And it's very flexible because first of all, I can drive my son crazy and some other people  
**[0:38:56-0:39:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:38:56):**  I work with because of the changes that I make, but I like to be able to respond to what the soil  is showing me. So at this point, there's a basic rotation that we had started with that was very  profitable, but we kind of wore it out. And that was corn followed by soybeans followed by winter  
**[0:39:12-0:39:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:39:12):**  spelt under seeded to clover and then the over turned under the next year for corn. And that  rotation is actually was used by the university here and used by most of our neighbors. The  problem is after about 10 years of this rotation, that everyone started having the same problems.  
**[0:39:27-0:39:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:39:27):**  There was an increase in the Canada thistle on some farms that were doing this, there was this  increase in disease. Now the soybeans are much more resistant to the root rot in the nematodes  and dry beans. But if somebody were to substitute, and that's what we were doing, we were  
**[0:39:43-0:39:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:39:43):**  subjecting dry beans for some of the soybeans in that cycle, they would have had problems. So the  first thing we added to this was put in a second cover crop, you know, mustard in the corn, but  then we were starting to have more trouble in the clover. The other thing is clover wasn't growing  
**[0:39:59-0:40:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:39:59):**  as good. And we started seeing Canada thistle here and there. So we we actually added in the worst  fields, we went from the winter grain spelt to a second winter grain, winter barley, and then we  double crop that winter barley with buckwheat the first couple of years. And by double cropping, we  
**[0:40:18-0:40:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:40:18):**  were breaking the ground up in mid summer right in July, when you can hurt the dry, the Canada thistle  and the other perennials. We weren't doing a lot of tillage, we were doing a deep tillage, a deep  ripping, trying to leave the mulch on top. But then we discovered, well, buckwheat is not the most  
**[0:40:33-0:40:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:40:33):**  profitable crop in the world. And you know, making this change in this rotation helped our soil quite  a lot. So we just started we could plant dry beans, dinnel beans, actually, after the barley, and then  go back to a winter grain and then start over. So that stretched it out to a five year, six crop  
**[0:40:47-0:41:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:40:47):**  rotate or five years. And I'm not even counting there, there must be eight different species  growing in that rotation. And then from there, we've diversified further, we brought in vegetables  after the clover so that we're not growing corn quite as often that we plant cabbage, we've thrown  
**[0:41:05-0:41:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:41:05):**  in squash after the small grains or even after the corn sometimes. And then from the from that we've  had, we've gone and added flax, we've added oats, we've added barley, we instead of just felt we've  got rye, winter barley, spring barley, oats, wheat, tree to cow, and it seems like the fine tuning of  
**[0:41:27-0:41:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:41:27):**  this basic rotation makes it makes it kind of, I feel more comfortable if I don't put it in stone.  And if I just kind of let the weeds in the soil, tell me which one it wants to go to.  But it's still this old basic framework that can branch out in 100 different directions.  
**[0:41:43-0:41:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:41:43):**  And I'm letting the weeds and the soil direct me as to what I do with it. Sorry, it's not a very  satisfying answer for people who want to set a program or a formula. But I think the bigger  answer is we need to be open to what the soil is showing us and just be more flexible in our  
**[0:41:58-0:42:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:41:58):**  rotations and think first of what will make the soil healthy and second of what's bringing the  highest price. Yeah, in a, you know, prior conversation with Don Hubert, he described that 85%  of the benefit from crop rotation or from cover crops occurs from the immediately prior crop to  
**[0:42:18-0:42:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:42:18):**  the crop that is planted just before the crop you're growing. And I think the the follow up  question to your long explanation of what your current rotation is, Don, is your answer was  essentially, well, it depends based on what the soil and the weeds are telling me. And so this  
**[0:42:37-0:42:52](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:42:37):**  might be a topic for another conversation. But I would like to ask the question, okay, what are  the variables that you're monitoring? And how do you choose and select which crop you're planting  based on what you're observing in the field? Okay, I might be able to go at this from the other  
**[0:42:52-0:43:08](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:42:52):**  side, or what is it the soil is telling me based on some things that I look at? I don't know if  that's useful, or might be useful to you. But if I see, yeah, if I see a field that is dominated  by a certain color, this is something that biodynamic farmers brought us years ago,  
**[0:43:09-0:43:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:43:09):**  yellow blossoms, like sulfur, and of course, the yellow mustard, the compounds in the yellow  mustard that have the biggest big activity are sulfur compounds. And also, when we looked at our  soil test where we had mustard growing, we had our must we are sulfur was tied up, we were deficient  
**[0:43:24-0:43:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:43:24):**  in sulfur. And even though we thought we were putting plenty of sulfur on those weeds were  telling us no, you're not you're not you're not putting enough on we're still short. So that and  that's, you know, a lot of side stories to all these things. The blue flowers are quite often  
**[0:43:39-0:43:56](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:43:39):**  a phosphorus indicator, white flowers are potassium, but can be calcium depending on  situation. So that's just one of those general hints that we get looking at the field. If I see  corn chamomile overrunning a field, I can be quite sure that there's a there's a calcium issue. And  
**[0:43:56-0:44:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:43:56):**  if I seize milkweed, I'm 90% sure we're short of zinc, at least there might be zinc on the soil  test, but the crops aren't getting it could be complexed. And hemp dogbane is the same. And  these are all little I don't want people to take this instead of soil testing. This is these are  
**[0:44:13-0:44:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:44:13):**  little data points and observations that I've made that are parts of the conversation when the soil  is showing me things and Dave Maddox X, I have to credit Dave Maddox on the zinc. First time I saw  him this is way back I was still trying to figure out if he was someone I wanted to deal with. He  
**[0:44:29-0:44:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:44:29):**  was trying to figure out where I was coming from. And we were discovering that we were, at least in  theology very, very much in alignment with each other. And then he drove by a couple of fields and  he said, I see you got a zinc deficiency. And I said, What are you talking about, Dave? You haven't  
**[0:44:42-0:44:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:44:42):**  seen a soil test here yet. He said, I don't need a soil test. I see your milkweed. So I thought that  was an interesting little anecdote. But those those are things. If I see foxtail, I can guarantee  you that soil is suffocating, that it's not getting enough oxygen, and then it's not able to get rid of  
**[0:44:57-0:45:12](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:44:57):**  the carbon dioxide and the ethylene and some of the products of respirations that build up. So  it's I used to tell people it's tight soil, but it's actually more than tight. It's it's not just  if you have pure sand, be loaded with foxtail if you have enough rain that the soil is not  
**[0:45:12-0:45:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:45:12):**  breathing. So that I could go on and on with examples. But that's kind of where I'm coming from,  when I figure these things out. And if I see foxtail growing, for instance, and I've got an  opportunity in the rotation, I would love to grow millet. Because millet will do the same millet  
**[0:45:29-0:45:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:45:29):**  loves the same conditions that foxtail does, because it's genetically very similar to foxtail,  and it will come it'll repair the same maladies in the soil. So if I see the soil trying to grow  foxtail, I'm going to have some millet there the first chance I get for the next chance I get,  
**[0:45:44-0:46:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:45:44):**  because I know it'll the millet will love those that soil condition and the soil will be corrected  by the millet. And that's another thing we're doing is if we see certain weeds that either  have a given function or that are closely related to a crop, that's the soil telling me, well, this  
**[0:46:01-0:46:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:46:01):**  crop is going to do great here, but don't be trying to plant what you were planning on, because  I'm showing you with my weeds that it's not going to be happy here. Does that help any here?  Yeah, that's a great answer, Claus. Thank you. And I'd love to unravel that more. But perhaps in  
**[0:46:16-0:46:33](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:46:16):**  a future conversation, I'd like to shift gears for just a moment when essentially what we're talking  about, what we're describing is managing an ecosystem, looking at the entire soil plant  system and managing how that is developing and evolving both with crop rotations and with  
**[0:46:33-0:46:50](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:46:33):**  tillage and the various tools that we have. How have you seen the ecosystem evolve with in regards  to disease and insect resistance as you looked at managing the entire ecosystem? I know that  in earlier discussions, you've referenced a couple of examples of managing aphids on lettuce by  
**[0:46:50-0:47:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:46:50):**  managing the ecosystem. And I wondered what thoughts you would have to share on that?  Yeah, the aphid one on lettuce is one of those just absolutely amazing ones. This was research  in university research done in California, where there was an aphid that was getting into the heart  
**[0:47:05-0:47:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:47:05):**  of the romaine lettuce and making it totally unmarketable. And one of my friends there was  doing research on how do we control this in organic systems, because on the conventional  lettuce farms, there's all I'm sure anyone that's been in Salinas Valley, that some of those parts  
**[0:47:22-0:47:38](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:47:22):**  of California are just as vast wasteland of only one species, only lettuce. And what they did was  planted, they found out that sweet alyssum, the flower, promotes an insect that controls the aphid  that actually eats the aphid. They found out that if they had one sweet alyssum plant planted on  
**[0:47:38-0:47:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:47:38):**  every thousand square feet through the lettuce field, it did not reduce the yield of lettuce at  all. That was identical same yield of lettuce, but that one plant every thousand square feet  completely eliminated the from the field. That's just an example of how introducing the right plant  
**[0:47:53-0:48:07](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:47:53):**  at the right in the right place, right time, and completely removed one group of insects.  That's almost nothing. I mean, that's 44 plants per acre.  That's right. Yeah. And to have that dramatic an impact, I bet the cost of the spray that they  
**[0:48:07-0:48:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:48:07):**  would be putting on every what every week or 10 days at that point has got to far exceed the cost  of those flowers that they're playing out there. Which I can hear the problem.  What have you observed on your own farm in regards to disease and insect resistance over the years?  
**[0:48:22-0:48:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:48:22):**  Well, we're seeing, I think we're seeing some of what's behind people paying attention to pricks.  When we have healthy plants, the bugs just don't seem to hit them. Although I have seen in cabbage,  this is with a cabbage aphid, and to me the aphids must be a special case. They drove me crazy at  
**[0:48:41-0:48:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:48:41):**  first. And I noticed that where the corn where I had corn planted next cabbage, as long as the strips  were not more than 150 feet wide, I had no problems with soybean, or I had no problems with  cabbage. And what we learned afterwards was that the lady beetles were feeding on insects in the  
**[0:48:57-0:49:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:48:57):**  corn. And about the time the corn matured to the point where there was no food for the lady beetles,  they just hopped down into the cabbage and started hanging up the aphids in the cabbage field.  That was very similar to the mechanism mode of action that we saw in the lettuce, you know, even  
**[0:49:11-0:49:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:49:11):**  with that tiny amount. I'm wondering now after the lettuce experiment, if somebody could just  drop some sweet corn plants out in their cabbage field, that might be insurance against aphids. But  having the narrow strips certainly works good too. And that saves you having to cut  
**[0:49:25-0:49:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:49:25):**  roadways open. You've got a different crop right next to it. But another thing we've seen in  in our fields is if we start seeing leafhoppers, for instance, moving into either dry beans or  alfalfa, or potatoes, any of these crops that have leafhopper problems, I'm almost assured that these  
**[0:49:43-0:49:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:49:43):**  plants are low in magnesium. And I found that I can spray Epsom salts on the field instead of an  insecticide. And you'll see the plant crop greening up and perking up and looking better.  And in some cases, the insects just totally disappear. They just avoid those plants.  
**[0:49:57-0:50:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:49:57):**  Yeah, I have some I have a thought for you on the both aphids and the leafhoppers we have,  and it's been our experience working with a number of different crops, we've observed that there's  this this triode, if you will, these three different nutrients, magnesium, sulfur, and  
**[0:50:14-0:50:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:50:14):**  molybdenum. Those three needs to be an adequate supply. And if if you have adequate levels of two,  but the third one is low, you have challenges with aphids, for example, and leafhoppers. But  if you address if all three are adequate, yeah, those those insect pests just disappear. And it's  
**[0:50:32-0:50:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:50:32):**  it's pretty, it's pretty profound. Actually, I would say we have a 90 plus percent success rate.  Actually, I'm saying that just to be conservative and reality, it's probably close to 100% success  rate dealing with on a broad range of different crops. It's just  
**[0:50:46-0:50:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:50:46):**  Yeah, your Epsom salts are covering two of those bases.  Yeah, exactly.  So we may or may not know what we're doing, but we get the right result.  
**[0:50:57-0:51:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:50:57):**  Really, and that's really an interesting point for you to bring up because magnesium and sulfur  are quite often linked only over fertilize or we don't have the right fertilizer program,  we're being too high in magnesium will tie up magnesium, you can be either too high or too low  
**[0:51:14-0:51:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:51:14):**  in magnesium in the soil and end up with a deficiency in the plant. Or if you're short of  sulfur in the soil, you're but also end up being patient magnesium and calcium because they would  become insoluble. Exactly. Yes. So there's, you know, then then the big question is we need to get  
**[0:51:29-0:51:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:51:29):**  the need to get the missing element out there. But we also need to figure out why was it missing.  And in that case, we're doing two things. We're having to kill the bugs so that we actually have  a harvestable crop, but we really should be addressing the reason that we had to go in and do  
**[0:51:41-0:51:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:51:41):**  some. Well, the reality is, yeah, and I'm sure you've experienced this as you expressed as well.  But the some in many cases, we find that these foliar nutrient applications can be incredibly  effective as in pest removal. I don't want to say as a pesticide, but we have a number of experiences  
**[0:51:59-0:52:17](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:51:59):**  where we put on a nutritional application 100% nutrition doesn't contain any toxins at all of  any kind. And spider mites are dead in 48 hours, aphids, leaf hoppers disappear in 24 hours. It's  it's it's pretty profound. It happens really fast. And it's the plant is the plants able to  
**[0:52:17-0:52:31](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:52:17):**  launch a defense that was just crippled by the shortage of that nutrient. Exactly. Exactly.  These plants are they were created to be able to handle the past, you know, the past and the plant  were both created by the same. And if one can't live with the other one, it's usually an imbalance.  
**[0:52:31-0:52:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:52:31):**  So yeah, you're you're dealing with it right there. But But I would also say that we really  need to pay attention to why was this deficiency there. And we tended to see the soybean aphid in  spots that were very high potassium, high potassium tends to lock out magnesium, and we can  
**[0:52:46-0:53:01](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:52:46):**  have. And yeah, we have deficiencies that are induced by excess sometimes. And one of my one of  my favorite quips is that I've seen more farmers buy themselves expensive problems than expensive  solutions when somebody comes to sell you a huge amount of something, especially if it's out of the  
**[0:53:01-0:53:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:53:01):**  ordinary that careful, maybe buying yourself a different problem. Well, as you just mentioned,  a very, very key phrase is that you may actually have excesses being more of a problem in we  started first, we first began experimenting with the use of staff analysis in 2011. And we started  
**[0:53:19-0:53:40](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:53:19):**  using it on a very intense and broad scale in 2013. And now, after having several years of  experience with staff analysis, I can say that most of the nutritional imbalances that crops  experience are not a result of deficiencies, they are a result of the excesses of products that  
**[0:53:40-0:53:58](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:53:40):**  growers apply creating deficiencies of something else. 90% of nutrient imbalances are created by  the grower. It's incredible. It's absolutely incredible. Many of the recommendations that we  make consist of discontinuing product applications or positioning them at a different time. It's  
**[0:53:58-0:54:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:53:58):**  really profound. Yes. So hey, you put your finger on I think the biggest and most common problem  that I've run into. And that's over application of something that creates an imbalance. Yeah,  because if it's good, a whole lot might not be better. And if you take this in history,  
**[0:54:14-0:54:29](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:54:14):**  fun leaving wrote the law of the minimum, there's this illustration of the barrel with which Dave  is lowest. But just shortly after that, Andre de Guastin wrote a pamphlet called the law of the  maximum, which said that when any one is mineral is in excess, it can cause a shortage of one or  
**[0:54:29-0:54:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:54:29):**  more others. Yeah, exactly. Cause you think a lot about what is happening in agricultural ecosystems  in a macro from a macro perspective, what is something that you believe to be true about modern  agriculture that many other people do not believe to be true? Well, to me, modern agriculture,  
**[0:54:46-0:55:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:54:46):**  and I'm going to include genetic engineering is a series of enabling tools that allow the farmers to  continue bad management in a natural system, or a balanced system where farmers are in harmony with  the creation with the soil with their farm, when when they're doing something that they shouldn't  
**[0:55:03-0:55:19](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:55:03):**  be soil is basically screaming. If we persist in doing it to soil starts screaming very loudly,  and we'll see these problems pop up, you know, be it a weed, be it an insect, be it a disease,  whatever, but these are symptoms. And modern agriculture has gone to being a series of  
**[0:55:20-0:55:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:55:20):**  treatments, materials, things that we can buy that that make us able to continue the bad behavior,  your funding behavior, but never deal with the actual underlying problem, which is why it damages  the long term productivity of soil. And the analogy I like to use, it's a little bit like  
**[0:55:37-0:55:53](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:55:37):**  if the idiot light comes on on your car telling you there's low oil pressure, putting tape over  the light or flipping the wire takes care of the immediate symptom, the light goes back out.  That thing could deal with the reason that light was on, or if we take it on a spiritual level,  
**[0:55:54-0:56:11](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:55:54):**  let's say somebody is in an error or in sin, and the minister or the bishop are pointing out that  you really need to stop doing that. Well, we can ignore them, we cannot listen, we should go find  another bishop who will say something different. And it doesn't take away the problem, it really  
**[0:56:11-0:56:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:56:11):**  won't take away the long term results of the problem. So it's not a problem.  I don't know if that analogy makes sense to you. But to me, that's what it feels like.  Yeah, no, I think one of the pieces that we discuss often is that we've become addicted  
**[0:56:24-0:56:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:56:24):**  to point and shoot solutions rather than identifying the underlying causes and really  thinking about the underlying causes of various challenges.  Right. And those challenges that are seen as our enemy, instead of as the as nature,  
**[0:56:36-0:56:49](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:56:36):**  essentially pointing out error to us. Yeah, exactly.  It can actually be counter-use for improvement. Claus, you do a lot of reading and a lot of  thinking about what is happening on your operation, things that you see happening  
**[0:56:49-0:57:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:56:49):**  around the country. What are some books or resources that you would recommend to growers?  Well, I love the Albrecht papers, but they can be dense. They can take a lot of discipline  to learn from them. There was an old, not real well known anymore book, it was a Cornell tax  
**[0:57:06-0:57:24](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:57:06):**  on weeds that was used for 40 years. Conrad Minchner was the author. I know Acres reprinted  it. It was simply titled Weeds. And what I loved about that, it had the line drawings  of all the weeds, but it gave control methods. And on each one, it gave them in a community  
**[0:57:24-0:57:39](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:57:24):**  where if it was a family of plants, it would give all the members of the family, it would  describe the differences between them and descriptions to help you identify them.  But it would also say where it grows and when it grows and what conditions favor it.  
**[0:57:39-0:57:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:57:39):**  And then it gives a list of cultural practices in the back that could be used to eliminate  it or reduce it. And I found that to be, especially in my early years, really helpful because  instead of just identifying the weed and finding a chemical to kill it or a tool to kill it,  
**[0:57:55-0:58:06](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:57:55):**  this was identifying the weed and learning about it and trying to, you know, getting  some information that helps us understand what it's telling us. There's a book that  will be coming out. Pardon?  
**[0:58:06-0:58:22](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:58:06):**  Just to finish on that. I know that Acres has a book titled Weeds Control Without Poisons.  That was either authored by Charles Walters. Is that the one you're referring to?  Well, this is not the same one. This was an old Cornell text that I'm referring to by  
**[0:58:22-0:58:36](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:58:22):**  Conrad Minchner. I did have also Charles Walters book, which is a book that I'm going to read  from Charles Walters book, Control Without Poisons. And another one, Weeds and What They  Tell. I guess one of them is Weeds and What They Tell. The other one was Weeds and Control  
**[0:58:36-0:58:42](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:58:36):**  Without Poisons.  Right. Weeds and What They Tell is authored by Jay McCammon.  Right.  
**[0:58:42-0:58:59](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:58:42):**  And Weeds and What They Tell Without Poisons is authored by Charles Walters. Just one thing.  I would talk and I really like the Cornell text because it was more basic background  information without talking about more detail. It's kind of the 101 level. What I found  
**[0:58:59-0:59:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:58:59):**  is a caution with the two Acres books is we shouldn't get too hung up on that this is  the story this weed is telling me. They're more complex. So I use those as aids, but  I don't want to get so narrow that what it said in the book is the only thing that tells  
**[0:59:16-0:59:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:59:16):**  me in the field. I don't know if that helps. Each one becomes a piece of what could be  a much bigger story.  I apologize for interrupting. You were mentioning something else as well.  
**[0:59:27-0:59:47](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:59:27):**  Oh yeah. The Weeds. Now I lost it. I was just thinking of another book that has been  influential to me. But I would recommend people buying the Albers papers. Oh yes. Another  one that I would highly recommend everybody should have is Andre Buss and Soil, Grass  
**[0:59:47-1:00:05](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=0:59:47):**  and Cancer. And to me that's a really brilliant early piece of observation that was connecting  the minerals in the soil to some really bad diseases, both shortages and surpluses. This  is looking at diseases that modern medicine still can't get their finger around. And yet  
**[1:00:05-1:00:25](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=1:00:05):**  way back in the 1800s, this French veterinarian was making connections between soil fertility  and these can help. And again, I caution against looking at this as written in stone. If I  see this, this is happening. But more as a general framework for us. I think we all know  
**[1:00:25-1:00:43](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=1:00:25):**  a lot more than we give ourselves credit for. I'm hoping that the big thing I can teach  people is to use what they already know, to use what they've already seen, and then to  look forward and train ourselves to see more, to see the right things so that we can learn,  
**[1:00:43-1:00:55](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=1:00:43):**  so that we can draw our own conclusions about our own farm. Because nobody knows more about  your farm than you do. That's the one that you live on. That's the one that you see every  day. And you don't need an intercessor to talk to your soil. You can talk to your soil  
**[1:00:55-1:01:10](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=1:00:55):**  yourself and learn from it and pray for the Spirit to guide you to see the right things  and also pray for the discernment to figure out the right lessons from all of our team.  I love that thought, Claus, that we don't need an intercessor. And I think that is,  
**[1:01:10-1:01:27](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=1:01:10):**  we are the experts on our own operation. Nobody knows them as well as we do. I think that's  a very, very key thought that is often lost. I think it's very important for us as advisors  to, I need to remind myself that I am only a tool, you know, and that I've been given  
**[1:01:27-1:01:41](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=1:01:27):**  gifts of observation and gifts of knowledge. But I'm not the source of that knowledge.  I have to give credit to the source of the knowledge and just give thanks that I can  be the conductor of it, share some of it with other people.  
**[1:01:41-1:01:57](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=1:01:41):**  Claus, what is the question you wish I would have asked?  Well, that's a good one. I think maybe where do we find, the question would be where do we find  help and guidance and discernment in managing our farms? I think that's really the most important  
**[1:01:57-1:02:14](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=1:01:57):**  question. I really don't want anyone to come away thinking that any one person is the source of this.  You know, what's good.  Let's unwrap that a little bit, Claus. What are the sources that you have found useful and helpful  
**[1:02:14-1:02:26](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=1:02:14):**  for guidance and input and most important to you? And also what do you believe are important for the  growers that you are working with?  Okay, the most important source I have found has actually been having quiet time and  
**[1:02:26-1:02:44](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=1:02:26):**  prayer time in the field. You know, just asking for discernment and asking for that help. And to me,  that's been strong. But along with that, what was really important, and I'm sure you play this  role often in your work with farmers, is to have farmers or people that can give guidance to help  
**[1:02:44-1:03:00](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=1:02:44):**  me with the discernment and to help me get started in that. And for that, I find groups of farmers.  We have our group that meets every winter here in Geneva, NYCO, where because we're working together,  we can all share things. We can share observations, ideas, what worked, what didn't work.  
**[1:03:00-1:03:16](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=1:03:00):**  But we kind of need to keep each other grounded in doing this. So, you know, this becomes a community  thing. But we always have to include in that community the source of all that knowledge  and all that wisdom, which is not from any one of us. And to me, it's that kind of... I'm reminding  
**[1:03:16-1:03:32](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=1:03:16):**  myself more than anyone on this talk that I've been entrusted with a lot of insight and some  really great gifts, but none of them came from me. And all I can do is hope that I can steward them  correctly. Absolutely. Very powerful thoughts. And I completely agree with you. Claus, thank you so  
**[1:03:32-1:03:46](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=1:03:32):**  much for joining us and for sharing the wisdom that you've been given to steward. Very much  appreciate you being on here. And we look forward to speaking with you again at some point in the  future. Thank you very much. Thank you for doing this work. I'm sure this extends help to a lot of farmers.  
**[1:03:47-1:04:03](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=1:03:47):**  This podcast was brought to you by a great company that I happen to work for, AEA, Advancing ECo  Agriculture, the leader in regenerative agriculture since 2006. At AEA, we believe in challenging the  status quo to find more profitable and regenerative ways to grow crops. We also believe that healthy  
**[1:04:03-1:04:18](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=1:04:03):**  plants are resistant to pests and disease, that to grow healthy plants, we must first think different  about agriculture, about empowering life instead of suppressing life, about regeneration versus  degeneration. To achieve this, we formulate and sell products that help growers produce higher  
**[1:04:18-1:04:37](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=1:04:18):**  quality yield with less risk of crop failure. In short, we help growers make more money with less  risk. If you'd like to learn more about our programs and systems, call Jason Stoll, a highly  regarded AEA consultant and my teammate, at 800-495-6603, extension 344. Again, that number is  
**[1:04:37-1:05:13](https://podcast.vhostevents.com/uncategorized/winning-the-weed-control-challenge-on-organic-crops-with-klaas-martens/#t=1:04:37):**  800-495-6603, extension 344. And mention the code PODCAST10 to get a special incentive with your  first order. Thanks for listening.  