### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2016-08-20)
**[0:00:00-0:00:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com slash course or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  Welcome to another episode of investing in regenerative agriculture investing as if the  planet mattered.  
**[0:00:21-0:00:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:00:21):**  A podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  
**[0:00:42-0:00:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:00:42):**  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small and consumers, start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  Before we get started, I've been recording these interviews next to my day job and I  will definitely continue to do so and release about an episode a month.  
**[0:01:02-0:01:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:01:02):**  But at the same time, I would love to take this further, share more interviews.  There are many more stories to share on investing in regenerative food and agriculture.  More depth, improve the quality, maybe even doing some video series.  So I started a Patreon community, which makes it easy to support creators like myself.  If these podcasts have been of value to you and if you have the means, I invite you to  
**[0:01:24-0:01:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:01:24):**  support me and make this happen.  For more information, please find a link to my Patreon account in the description below.  And now, without further ado, the interview.  Enjoy.  So welcome to this podcast, Investing in Regenerative Agriculture, Agriculture as if the planet  
**[0:01:41-0:01:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:01:41):**  mattered.  I'm Konfans Heijen, I'm Senior Manager of Tonic, a global community of impact investors  and in my spare time, I host these podcasts.  I started doing these podcasts because I noticed that I was having quite some, at least for  me, interesting conversations around investing in regenerative agriculture.  
**[0:01:57-0:02:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:01:57):**  And every time after the conversation was finished, I thought, why didn't I record this  so I could actually share it with others who are interested in the space?  So why regenerative agriculture?  Because so many of the current issues we face as a world come together in this sector and  impact investing for me offers a way to scale the sector and reach the potential it has.  
**[0:02:18-0:02:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:02:18):**  In these interviews, I'm talking to people who are trying to scale up the regenerative  agriculture side, either by increasing the inflow of capital into the sector, or by increasing  the impact on the ground and scaling up the enterprises on the ground.  You're going to listen to an interview with Jürgen Reus, CEO and co-founder of the Landlife  company.  
**[0:02:37-0:02:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:02:37):**  We talked about many things in this interview, about large scale ecosystem restoration projects  and how to make them viable and how they all start with something extremely small, namely  a 10 centimeter seedling that should grow into an enormous tree.  But working with local partners now that's absolutely essential and about the enormous  challenge and opportunity of turning 2 billion hectares degraded land back into productive  
**[0:03:00-0:03:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:03:00):**  soil and nature.  Today in the podcast, we have Jürgen Reus, co-founder and CEO of the Landlife company,  a company dedicated to make large scale nature restoration projects viable.  Welcome, Jürgen.  Hello, Koen.  
**[0:03:13-0:03:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:03:13):**  Just to dive into it straight away, I would love to know why you're active in this sector  and you had a very successful career in the corporate world and you decided to change  that.  Yeah, in the end it's all about people.  For me it was also about the people in my life.  
**[0:03:33-0:03:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:03:33):**  I'm a father of three young children and you start to think about their world, the world  you leave behind for them.  I think at first I was really excited about the prospect that one day I could take them  to pieces of land all over the world that this organization, our company, had helped  restore.  
**[0:04:00-0:04:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:04:00):**  I thought it would be fantastic to take them into forests or restored steppes or deserts  and show basically how I contributed to society, to nature, to a better world for next generations.  That's a personal story for the people in my life.  But I think also on a larger scale, really if I think back about important decisions  I have to make for the company, I always think back, why did I start this?  
**[0:04:34-0:04:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:04:34):**  And it is in the end to make this repairing of the earth possible.  So the contribution to a technology or to a team of people or to a movement that will  make this planet fit again, for us mostly in terms of land, so the skin of the earth,  to heal the skin of the earth, to contribute to make that possible is a very important  driver for me and my partner, Edward Saanen, with whom I started this company.  
**[0:05:08-0:05:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:05:08):**  And what I noticed, you refer to my previous life in corporate world, I used to work in  energy when I graduated as a chemical engineer, and what I realize a lot now is how different  it is to work on something that society wants to help fulfill society's wishes versus doing  something that society actually has a more critical perspective on.  For me that was a big change and a very positive experience.  
**[0:05:43-0:05:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:05:43):**  So everybody I talk to about our company, about our activities, about what we do, about  our problems, I find people excited to listen and often to help.  And I hadn't expected that that would be so fulfilling and exciting.  So basically it's about to make that possible.  I'll admit that I also really like to work, so I like to travel, I like to go to new places,  
**[0:06:16-0:06:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:06:16):**  to very authentic pieces of the earth, and I'm also deep inside an engineer and I love  to work with technology to think about how we can improve technology.  And as an engineer the whole concept of basically restarting nature, to give it a new kickstart  where it has basically landed on some dead-end road, which is often the case in deserts,  in man-made deserts if you like, nature will not come back unaided.  
**[0:06:49-0:06:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:06:49):**  As an engineer to help bring back nature and let nature take its course after we've left  is something very thrilling and fulfilling as well.  Thank you for that.  Can you walk me through the steps that you did in your mind and probably also when you  were talking to people when you left the corporate world, how did you end up at healing the skin  
**[0:07:13-0:07:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:07:13):**  of the earth instead of renewable energy or mobility etc.  How did you end up at the skin of the earth?  I think it is more than 50% opportunity driven and less than 50% strategizing about who you  are and what you want.  But there was a bit of that.  
**[0:07:35-0:07:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:07:35):**  So I did realize, I was 45 at the time, I did realize that when you die and you look  back on your life, that's basically what matters, what you see and how much you like what you  see.  So I realized that if I was able with my experience, my network, to do something that I felt was  not only super exciting but also something I felt very good about at the end of my life,  
**[0:08:04-0:08:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:08:04):**  it was worthwhile to take a shot at it.  And I thought if I fail then I've done my giving back for a few years and it will cost  me some money probably but hopefully gained a lot as well.  But if I succeed then you've just created the most beautiful thing in your mind.  So that's the strategy part and that's as I said only that relevant.  
**[0:08:30-0:08:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:08:30):**  In the end it's about who you meet and what opportunities cross your path.  So I had been working with the director of the International Union of Conservation of  Nature when I was a consultant for many years on the site Pro Bono Advising and when he  mentioned he was going to a foundation to help restoring the earth, it basically triggered  this whole concept and then he introduced me to some people and in the end that led  
**[0:08:56-0:09:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:08:56):**  to the founding of this company.  And so when you look at what you've been doing so far it's really focused on we need to get  CO2 out of the air and what's the best, fastest and most natural way basically of doing that.  How did you end up at founding this technology, the cocoon and can you explain a bit more  about that?  
**[0:09:22-0:09:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:09:22):**  Yeah actually the CO2 was never and I would say is still not the driving force behind  this initiative, this company.  It is a very important collateral benefit if you like.  But basically it is about healing this planet and I think it's part of a bigger story of  which CO2 is a very important part.  
**[0:09:44-0:09:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:09:44):**  But it includes taking the plastic out of the oceans, putting the fish back where they  belong and taking out of the air what doesn't belong there and repair the skin of the earth.  And this is for multiple reasons.  It's basically I believe that we as the inhabitants of this planet and even more the younger generations,  for us it makes total sense to at least make the earth that we live on healthy and providing  
**[0:10:14-0:10:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:10:14):**  to us and to nature in general and not live on two thirds of a planet which is currently  the case, one third being degraded in terms of land.  Whereas we need three planets to survive.  We consume three planets and we have only two thirds of one planet.  That doesn't make sense.  
**[0:10:34-0:10:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:10:34):**  So the story is much about the planets and the space where you live in and it's like  your house, it's like your garden, you want to live in a beautiful, in a providing, in  a healthy space.  So that's the starting point.  How we got to the idea of the cocoon is one of the other things that struck me is as a  
**[0:10:57-0:11:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:10:57):**  Dutch person I live in a country with a huge legacy of agriculture knowledge.  But very few of my circle at least were working in that industry.  And maybe it's because the industry has not been very popular over the last decades, it's  been seen as part of the problem rather than the solution.  People were going to tech or investments or consulting like myself.  
**[0:11:28-0:11:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:11:28):**  And it felt like a waste of built up skills and business and global reputation.  So I was really intrigued to do something in this area and to build on the people who  have built this sector over all those decades.  I also was intrigued by the philosophy, the theory of permaculture and all the great inventions  that had been done in that area.  
**[0:11:56-0:12:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:11:56):**  There are thousands of patrons out there, there are thousands of people, of organizations  who have been planting trees everywhere in dry areas and all had their own ideas and  practices.  And basically what we did, Edward my business partner being an engineer, a designer himself,  and me as a chemical engineer, we put together all those theories of how to plant a tree  
**[0:12:24-0:12:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:12:24):**  and we said ok there's no innovation there but we can innovate on a tool that is low  cost, biodegradable and scalable that can be used to actually do the planting in the  best possible way.  So we were thinking about taking the best practices globally and providing them globally  in a way that we can now start to do this at scale.  
**[0:12:47-0:12:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:12:47):**  And so that's what the cocoon is about, it's how to plant trees, plant and forget and basically  you don't have to add any maintenance to it right?  It's just the main asset and in very difficult circumstances.  Can you explain a bit where you've started and where you're doing projects now and where  the cocoon is of benefit at the moment?  
**[0:13:09-0:13:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:13:09):**  Sure, so the cocoon is basically a paper pulp product that is strong and watertight and  it provides all the elements that a young seedling in a healthy ecosystem receives.  So in a healthy ecosystem you have a larger tree providing some shade, there's some organic  material in the soil, there's some soil life, there's some protection from the wind and  basically what we do is we mimic all of the natural defenses for a young seedling.  
**[0:13:47-0:13:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:13:47):**  Because where they're planted it's not a natural or healthy ecosystem.  Exactly.  Because the desert is too uninhabited.  Those are absent in a desertified area so in that desert in the first summer the sun  will burn dead everything that is not deeply rooted including the seedlings.  
**[0:14:07-0:14:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:14:07):**  And what we do is we are basically an incubator that protects the young tree from those elements  in the first 6 to 12 months but the philosophy is very much not to just make it survive but  also to stimulate the plant to continue an independent life in nature.  So it is all about helping in the beginning but letting go after the first 12 to 18 months.  And that's very important because what we don't want as you say is that you have to  
**[0:14:39-0:14:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:14:39):**  go back to water or to provide nutrients or any other help.  The approach for us is we plant the tree and we never come back.  There is no, you don't have to remove the material, it all degrades.  It used to be at some point tree material and it will become tree material again after  it is degraded and processed.  
**[0:15:04-0:15:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:15:04):**  And that makes it scalable because otherwise we will never reach the billions of hectares  we need to reach.  Exactly, exactly.  That's the only way to use it at large scale.  That's what we believe.  
**[0:15:17-0:15:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:15:17):**  The technology by the way is based on very ancient practices.  So we found practices in old Babylonia in China and India where people, farmers used  clay pots with cotton wigs.  And the clay pots would be filled before the dry season and would sweat water basically  to the soil that the trees, the young fruit trees would use.  
**[0:15:43-0:15:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:15:43):**  The wigs, like an oil lamp, would deliver the water drip by drip to the plants.  And basically what we've done is use that principle at large scale.  So you can't of course produce clay pots without a lot of energy and you can't transport them  very easily and hand handle them.  But our product can be handled and transported and produced at low cost, completely sustainable  
**[0:16:09-0:16:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:16:09):**  and relatively easily.  And can you walk us through one of the example projects or one of the projects you are most  proud of the last few years where these cocoons and thus the trees have been used in a very  beneficial way?  Yeah, like you say it's in very dry areas but sometimes also very harsh areas.  
**[0:16:27-0:16:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:16:27):**  So one of the very captivating projects that we have been lucky enough to be involved in  the last year is the monarch butterfly breeding grounds in Mexico.  It's an amazing story about this butterfly that spends the winter in this mountainous  area in the middle of Mexico and then in spring it migrates towards the United States.  And in four generations it reaches Canada and then the fifth generation flies back all  
**[0:17:01-0:17:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:17:01):**  the way from Canada to exactly the same 10 to 100 hectares of land in Mexico.  No one knows how that is possible, we don't even know that long ago that they do this.  It's an amazing story.  It's also a bit of a sad story because the breeding grounds and also the living grounds  of this butterfly are endangered and there's less and less every year.  
**[0:17:27-0:17:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:17:27):**  So a wildfire, erosion, illegal logging has caused the habitat of this butterfly that  only breeds in one specific type of tree has been diminished.  And when we arrived there we saw the area and they told us that a few years ago they  had planted 100,000 trees.  And I looked around and I said where are the trees?  
**[0:17:54-0:17:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:17:54):**  Well only 3,000 trees survived, 97% died.  And we see this a lot unfortunately.  We see in many projects at significant budgets people planting trees with a passion to bring  back nature at survival rates between 0 and 15%.  Which is an enormous waste.  
**[0:18:14-0:18:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:18:14):**  It's a waste but it's even more important, it's hugely demotivating for everybody involved.  Even if you are a volunteer or paid worker to do the hard work of planting and you come  back the next fall and everything is gone.  And you can say okay.  Yeah, you won't come back the next time.  
**[0:18:31-0:18:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:18:31):**  Yeah, and maybe you do but then yeah you have to be happy with 5 or 10% surviving.  But also if you are providing the budgets for these projects you're not going to be  super excited to hear that 90% has died.  And still we are doing it day in day out.  So when we were there and we saw the first, second, third results and now we see 95% plus  
**[0:18:52-0:18:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:18:52):**  has survived.  There were people there who were crying and had like tears in their eyes seeing the results  of this planting.  And this is something for me where everything comes together.  It's about habitats of animals, it's about the health of the planet, the skin of the  
**[0:19:10-0:19:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:19:10):**  earth.  But it's also mostly about the people who live there who are proud and who want to bring  it back.  And who are personally touched when they see success.  Extremely inspiring.  
**[0:19:23-0:19:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:19:23):**  And when you look at, when we become a bit more practical at your, not maybe your daily  work, but what have you been busy over.  What if you look back one year for instance and you look at the current moment, what has  changed dramatically in a company.  I know you're a startup so a lot of things have changed, but what is the most important  
**[0:19:43-0:19:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:19:43):**  thing that has changed in the last year?  So the last year we've really built up scale and the scale is extremely small from a global  challenge perspective, but it is significant from a startup perspective.  So it's very important for us.  We have now projects in the ground for three years.  
**[0:20:05-0:20:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:20:05):**  We have large projects in the ground.  We have structural good results that the people, the partners, the customers we work with have  seen with our own eyes.  And that is something extremely important because the challenge of the business that  we are in is that the cycles are very long.  
**[0:20:25-0:20:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:20:25):**  It takes a season to basically see the result of your planting and it takes often two or  three seasons for your partners, your customers to get enough confidence that this can be  used at large scale.  You're often spending money that comes from government budgets or philanthropy.  So people are rightfully very careful spending that money.  
**[0:20:49-0:20:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:20:49):**  So you go through a lot of time and working together and also failures and then solving  them together to convince people that this is something that really works and is a solution  for them.  Over the last year, I saw a lot of these moments where customers told me, yeah, it works.  We've seen it at large scale.  
**[0:21:10-0:21:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:21:10):**  We're happy about it.  We're going to use this now.  And this is now one of the technologies in our pocket that we can use to fight this problem.  And when you look, because I think that that process will only increase because you're  doing so many projects that come to that three year or four season mark.  
**[0:21:31-0:21:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:21:31):**  When you look one year from now, what do you think is the one thing that will have changed  your company the most?  The topic we work on is a sensitive topic as I explained.  It touches people.  It's sometimes even a religious topic.  
**[0:21:47-0:21:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:21:47):**  And our philosophy is that we should not from Amsterdam basically ship out the technology  and the experts and the people to do projects all over the world.  We should facilitate people all over the world to do this.  So our philosophy is very much to grow in the countries where we are active, to set  up local companies with local people, with local production, with local skills.  
**[0:22:13-0:22:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:22:13):**  Of course, we will develop more skills here in Amsterdam and we will make sure skills  and expertise are shared.  But what I hope to see a year from now is that in more than today, we have people in  many countries, we have local presence and we are seen locally as local companies.  Because that I think is required to be successful in those countries and to be embraced and  
**[0:22:40-0:22:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:22:40):**  to grow very fast.  And can you tell a bit about how that would work practically?  Because I saw that you are working on a project to also do local production and that of course  will prevent shipping cocoons all over the planet.  Can you explain a bit more how that project, if it succeeds, would work and what that would  
**[0:23:01-0:23:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:23:01):**  mean for the company?  Yes, so today we produce in a factory in Germany, which is fantastic from a technology development  point of view, but it is not great from a cost point of view.  As you can imagine, all the ingredients are relatively expensive, energy, labor, material,  etc.  
**[0:23:20-0:23:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:23:20):**  But as you said, half of the reason to go local is to be local.  And it's financial, but it's also about the pride and building of local knowledge.  It's of course also about fast supply chains, etc.  So we have now a second factory in Mexico, where we will start up in the next two months,  where we will be able to produce locally.  
**[0:23:47-0:23:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:23:47):**  And we are now working on a factory in China.  Every country that is large enough to justify a factory, we will build a factory.  The first step is that we work with local pilb manufacturers and we have our own process  so we can couple our own process to an existing process.  When the volumes go up further, we will start to build 100% dedicated production lines for  
**[0:24:13-0:24:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:24:13):**  our products.  Extremely interesting.  And when you, because you refer to that for the next few months, but it might be that  there's something else that in the next few months will take most of your attention, what  will keep you up for the next few months as the year comes to a close or the first month  
**[0:24:31-0:24:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:24:31):**  of the next year?  What's the main exciting but also stressful point?  I think what is going to be a defining moment for our company is how we deliver on the projects  that we have landed.  It's interesting to see the phases of a startup company.  
**[0:24:49-0:24:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:24:49):**  Like in the beginning, you have no idea, you have no clue, you just try everything and  talk to everybody and everybody wants to work with you, you're fine and yes, let's try something.  Then you get to a point where you have a bit more focus, okay, this is my market, this  is my product.  Then you work a lot on your products because it's not good yet so you have to improve it  
**[0:25:05-0:25:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:25:05):**  and improve it and improve it.  It's a painful process because you don't want to sell a bad product of course.  Then once your product, you feel comfortable about it, then you need to sell it.  So it's all about sales to sales to sales.  Then you have all your sales, you need to produce it.  
**[0:25:19-0:25:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:25:19):**  You have to produce at low cost.  But now we're getting to a new phase where we say, okay, we have the sales, we have the  product, we have the low cost, but now we have to deliver on a project where we plant  tens of thousands of trees in a very remote area.  How are we going to ensure that this project is going to be successful?  
**[0:25:40-0:25:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:25:40):**  Because it's one thing to lose a couple of hundred trees because you were unlucky about  XYZ, but you can't afford to have that when you are planting at that large scale.  So you need to have in place a lot of operational excellence and dedication and focus and be  very careful with the delegation to make sure that these projects will continue to be successful  because those will build the reputation of our company maybe even more than the inventions  
**[0:26:04-0:26:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:26:04):**  that you do and the sales stories that you have.  So that's one thing that will get a lot of my and my team's attention.  The second thing is in this whole process that I just described, and especially in a  young company, the eagerness to become profitable and to prove that this is a viable business,  one should not overlook the value of the intangibles.  
**[0:26:27-0:26:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:26:27):**  So those are the skills and the information, the knowledge that you build up.  So it's almost against the trend of operations and the sales, et cetera.  At the same time, I have to make sure that we as a company have sufficient people and  attention to improve the knowledge on restoration.  And in the end, it is not just about selling a great product that you can use to plant  
**[0:26:55-0:27:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:26:55):**  a tree, but the purpose of this company is to restore land.  So really our scope should be how can we over the entire value chain help our customers  to have better results in nature restoration at a lower overall cost.  And it starts with, okay, where do I plant which species?  Then which seeds do I use?  
**[0:27:20-0:27:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:27:20):**  Can I breed seeds that are more likely to be successful in these specific situations?  Again a topic that we have a wealth of knowledge of in the Netherlands from the agriculture  experiences.  It's about how do you germinate those seeds?  What kind of natural fungi and bacteria is the ideal mix for a specific planting, for  
**[0:27:43-0:27:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:27:43):**  a specific location on this planet in a certain time of the seasons?  It's about the greenhouse practices.  It's about how do you harden these plants in the end?  These are not going to be placed in house.  These are going to be in nature.  
**[0:27:56-0:28:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:27:56):**  And then it's about the planting tool itself, which could be the cocoon, but sometimes it  can be something else.  And finally, how do you monitor these plants?  That entire value chain is still in its infancy and it is our aspiration to be impactful over  the entire value chain.  
**[0:28:15-0:28:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:28:15):**  That requires years and years of research, understanding what works, what doesn't work,  sharing information.  But in the end, we believe that that is a process that should be started as soon as  possible not to waste time because much of this research has lead time of course.  So, when you look at the biggest barrier for you in terms of scaling up this regenerative  
**[0:28:40-0:28:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:28:40):**  agriculture or ecosystem restoration sector, is that that value chain overview, that research  that has not been done or has not been continued fast enough, is that what you think is necessary  and is essential to make this sector reach its potential?  It has?  Well, if I for the moment only talk about nature restoration and not regenerative agriculture,  
**[0:29:02-0:29:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:29:02):**  which we can talk about, but I think it's a bit of a separate story.  But if I talk about the nature restoration, its full potential is basically making itself  unnecessary, right?  It's basically restoring this planet and then we're done.  I think it's important to think about this sector, this activity, as a one-off activity  
**[0:29:23-0:29:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:29:23):**  that we do.  It will take us decades, but still it has to have a start and an end.  Now to get to the end, there is no organization, not an NGO, not a company, there's not an  organization big enough to provide the funding to restore the 1 billion hectares in all these  countries in dry areas.  
**[0:29:46-0:29:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:29:46):**  But the funding is only a small part, it's even more about the stakeholders.  So if you would have a single company or even a number of organizations lead all this restoration  work without the strong involvement and the support and excitement and commitment from  the people that live in or around those areas, it is likely going to fail and if it succeeds,  it may in the end get lost again.  
**[0:30:15-0:30:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:30:15):**  It may be lost.  That's how we degrade a lot of soils, by basically not having people committed to the health  of those soils.  So it's our strong conviction that we have to involve everybody on this planet to repair  these planets.  
**[0:30:33-0:30:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:30:33):**  It has to be an initiative carried by individuals in the end, not only about organizations.  So one of the big investments we are making is to translate this into something meaningful  for you and for me and for everybody we know and for everybody who lives around degraded  drylands.  That is something that has huge potential.  
**[0:30:56-0:31:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:30:56):**  We see very positive signs that people are interested, are willing to participate, to  donate but also to be mentally committed to doing good for society at large.  The United States in 2015, 250 billion US dollars were donated by individuals on many  different topics.  So you see there is a lot of potential and a lot of excitement to do this and I think  
**[0:31:24-0:31:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:31:24):**  unless we are able to tap into those people, we will not be able to reach the targets for  nature restoration at least.  If I think about regenerative agriculture, again that's a very different story, we are  a little bit active in agriculture but our main focus, I would say 90% is today about  nature restoration.  
**[0:31:49-0:31:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:31:49):**  We do see of course that the technologies that we are developing also have applicability  in agriculture.  We do have some projects on fodder trees, we have projects on productive trees.  The challenges we often face there is that for the smaller scale projects, people are  very interested to use our technologies and see the benefits.  
**[0:32:11-0:32:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:32:11):**  For the really large scale regenerative agriculture projects, the problem is that if you let go  of a lot of control that we have currently over the production of these crops, of these  trees, the off takers of these products, of the fruits, of the nuts, they won't be guaranteed  anymore how much will be produced in what year and what the size and the quality of  the product is.  
**[0:32:38-0:32:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:32:38):**  Because you let nature basically take its course and one year will be great, the next  year will be different.  And what I observed and in the discussions I had with these large investors, they said  yeah I've sold my table grapes 10 years out at this amount per year at this quality level  and we need to be able to control the irrigation and the fertilizers and the pesticides and  
**[0:33:00-0:33:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:33:00):**  et cetera, et cetera, et cetera, to basically make those cash flow streams.  I think that's a big challenge.  How do we solve that?  I don't know.  But that's for us at least one of the limitations that we are running into if we want to use  
**[0:33:15-0:33:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:33:15):**  our product at a large scale for productive trees.  Yeah, I can imagine.  Although it's of course ironic in a world where climate changing is doing a lot of things,  people are selling their harvest for the next 10 years while they probably know that in  year 7 or 6 or 5 or maybe in all of those something terrible will happen or some storm  
**[0:33:34-0:33:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:33:34):**  will destroy everything.  So it's a very risky move.  You would imagine they would think more longer term and look at solutions like this to at  least make sure they have a harvest at all.  Well it's easy for me to say that not being in their business, if I would be in their  
**[0:33:52-0:33:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:33:52):**  shoes, I probably would make the same decisions.  You're telling me that my business is uncertain and you're giving me something uncertain in  return and then yeah, why would I think your uncertainty is better than the uncertainty  you tell me that I will have in the future.  So it is a hard transition, I can see that.  
**[0:34:13-0:34:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:34:13):**  Definitely it's a really rough one and at the end that's probably a big link with the  ecosystem restoration and the nature restoration where you're working in.  It's the people that are working on the land and the smaller farmers or that are living  on the land or around the land that is degraded that are suffering the most.  And it's not the big landowners, they will get away with it.  
**[0:34:34-0:34:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:34:34):**  But it's the people actually on the land working on it that are gonna suffer and are already  suffering the most.  Yeah I guess the second thing that we are also seeing is that especially if you plant  trees it takes a very long time to make a fair comparison, current practice, intense  agriculture versus the cocoon technology without chemical fertilizers etc.  
**[0:35:03-0:35:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:35:03):**  It'll take years and years if you at all can actually do a fully comparison to compare  one versus the other.  So in the end it will also be a little bit about philosophy and principle almost.  I think it'll take some people who have a gut feel that this is the right thing to do  and that are willing to be the vanguard and start the project and it will take years for  
**[0:35:34-0:35:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:35:34):**  everybody else to acknowledge or not that this is indeed the right way to go.  So what we are doing is we are starting to plant the productive trees, not so much with  the view that okay that will be the business in the next 3-4 years, but more like those  are going to be really interesting proof points in 10 years from now.  So it's a very long term investment for us.  
**[0:35:58-0:36:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:35:58):**  Then again none of these problems will be solved short term, so long term is also relevant.  For sure in 10 years we need the technology and to use it in many other ways we couldn't  imagine right now.  So if you look at impact investors or investors in general that want to get into or that feel  the same urge and need like you feel to restore nature and maybe it's on the agriculture side  
**[0:36:23-0:36:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:36:23):**  or maybe it's on the nature side, what would you advise them, what would be your principle  advice to get into this sector and to do something meaningful with their investments?  Yeah I think on a more holistic perspective I would say it is a cliché, but put the people  first, start from the perspective of the people.  And with the people I mean the customers that are buying the products in the end, what do  
**[0:36:52-0:36:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:36:52):**  you think that those people will do in 10-20 years from now?  How much will change in the relationship that people have with the food that they eat?  What will they require to know about it?  What will they decide once they know everything about the food that is available to them?  But also the people who work in the sector on the farms, the people who own the land,  
**[0:37:16-0:37:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:37:16):**  the people that regulate the business.  The world is changing very fast and it's not in one direction always, but in the end I  believe very much that the voice of the people is getting stronger rather than weaker.  It's not anymore a few people or organisations that will determine what is best for society  and for the world.  
**[0:37:36-0:37:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:37:36):**  It's going to be very much linked into what people at large think and want.  So that would be for me a big starting point.  Do you do something that's consistent with the wish of society?  It's a very basic principle, but for me it drives a lot of decisions.  And I say maybe more specifically if I look at the land again, the topic that we are working  
**[0:37:58-0:38:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:37:58):**  on, I see a lot of emphasis on getting more out of APs of land.  It's efficiency based often, it's the big promise of precision agriculture, of Internet  of Things, more crop per drop and all those things.  And of course those are very, very important.  But there's also a story about how much land do you have?  
**[0:38:20-0:38:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:38:20):**  Where can you make more land available?  I was in the Kobukchi Desert in Inner Mongolia a few weeks ago and this desert is man-made,  so actually it's pretty wet and there's a lot of water underneath, but the top is all  sand dunes so nothing grows because of the erosion.  Then when these people started to plant trees, they planted licorice trees, 50,000 hectares,  
**[0:38:46-0:38:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:38:46):**  huge piece of land.  And once planted in the right way, these trees can establish there.  And this has now become agriculture land, something very scarce in China.  I thought it was a fantastic example of how we can increase the size of our solution rather  than just the effectiveness or efficiency, if you like, of the solution.  
**[0:39:05-0:39:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:39:05):**  And my hope is that with the reducing erosion of this planet and an increasing restoration  of this planet, we can make the earth more providing in terms of nature, biodiversity,  enjoyment of nature, but also in terms of productive land for our food consumption.  I think that's an excellent advice to finish off this interview.  Thank you so much, Julian, for your time and your knowledge today and I hope to check in  
**[0:39:35-0:39:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:39:35):**  with you soon and to follow up on the many interesting projects you're involved in.  Thank you, Koen.  You're welcome and thank you for inviting me.  You just listened to Investing in Regenerative Agriculture, Agriculture as if the planet  mattered, an interview with Julian Raus, co-founder of the Land Life Company, working on large  
**[0:39:57-0:40:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:39:57):**  scale ecosystem restoration projects and basically making sure that the trees you plant actually  survive.  I hope you enjoyed it and I hope to see you back soon.  If you found the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  
**[0:40:13-0:40:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:40:13):**  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few  seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  
**[0:40:30-0:40:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:40:30):**  join my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or in the description  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  
**[0:41:14-0:41:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:41:14):**  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After a hundred interviews and more than a hundred hours of audio asking the question  how to put money to work in regenerating soils and I've been following the space since 2011  
**[0:41:33-0:41:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:41:33):**  and recording these podcasts since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision-making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  
**[0:41:48-0:41:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:41:48):**  What questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  
**[0:41:55-0:41:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:41:55):**  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  You the soil builders and investors in this space, the soil builders, people working in  this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers, vehicle builders, crowd investing,  platform builders, agtech companies, farm to gut food companies, permaculture, key line  
**[0:42:13-0:42:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:42:13):**  designers, holistic management, consultants, et cetera, et cetera.  People that are building soil at scale and the investors who are putting their own money  to work through their family office or as private individuals or people who are putting  other people's money to work through foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies,  et cetera.  
**[0:42:31-0:42:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:42:31):**  Is this course free?  No, this is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you.  And I'm very aware that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very  different means.  
**[0:42:45-0:42:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:42:45):**  So I'm inviting you if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides.  
**[0:43:01-0:43:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:43:01):**  So you don't have to ride along.  We're going to look into why investing regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in and what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could  find if you're a soil builder.  
**[0:43:20-0:43:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:43:20):**  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  
**[0:43:37-0:43:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:43:37):**  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking, click on  
**[0:43:54-0:43:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/21/jurriaan-ruys/#t=0:43:54):**  the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  