### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2016-10-20)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  Welcome to another episode of investing in regenerative agriculture, investing as if  the planet mattered.  
**[0:00:21-0:00:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:00:21):**  A podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  
**[0:00:42-0:00:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:00:42):**  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  In March last year, we launched our Patreon community to make it easy for fans to support  our work.  
**[0:00:59-0:01:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:00:59):**  And so many of you have joined as a member.  We've launched different types of benefits, exclusive content, Q&A webinars with former  guests, ask me anything sessions plus so much more to come in the future.  For more information on the different tiers, benefits and how to become a member, check  patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or find the link below.  
**[0:01:17-0:01:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:01:17):**  Thank you.  So welcome to this podcast, regenerative agriculture investing in agriculture as if the planet  mattered.  I started doing these podcasts because I noticed that I was having quite some, at least for  me, interesting conversations around investing in regenerative agriculture.  
**[0:01:34-0:01:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:01:34):**  And every time after the conversation was finished, I thought, why didn't I record this  so I could actually share it with others who are interested in this space?  I'm Kun von Saehe.  I'm a senior manager at Tonic, where we work with a community of impact investors.  And in my spare time, I record these interviews.  
**[0:01:52-0:01:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:01:52):**  So why regenerative agriculture?  Because so many of the current issues we face as a world come together in this sector and  impact investing for me offers a way to scale the sector and reach the potential it has.  In these interviews, I'm talking to people who are trying to scale up the regenerative  agriculture side, either by increasing the inflow of capital into the sector or by increasing  
**[0:02:14-0:02:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:02:14):**  the impact on the ground and scaling up the enterprises on the ground.  You're going to listen to an interview with Paul McMahon, co-founder of SLM Partners.  We discussed a lot of things in this interview, among them their current projects in Australia,  who are benefiting from a good year of rain, and the new projects in Ireland and Chile.  We also spent some time with the White Paper.  
**[0:02:39-0:02:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:02:39):**  He wrote about ecological farming and the investment case, looking at the main risks  for the current farming industry and the main opportunities and barriers that are slowly  being taken away, luckily.  Enjoy.  I'm here today with Paul McMahon, co-founder and managing partner of SLM Partners, an asset  
**[0:02:59-0:03:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:02:59):**  manager that acquires and manages rural land on behalf of institutional investors to scale  up regenerative ecological farming and forestry systems that deliver financial returns and  environmental benefits.  He's also the writer of a white paper called The Investment Case for Ecological Farming.  Very warm welcome, Paul.  
**[0:03:17-0:03:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:03:17):**  Thank you for joining us.  Thank you.  I would like to start with why are you in this business and how did you end up here?  I think we see land at the center of a number of overlapping and increasingly important  environmental issues.  
**[0:03:39-0:03:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:03:39):**  For example, climate change, land is going to be a huge role as a carbon sink as you  try and get greenhouse gas emissions out of the atmosphere, whether that's in soil, in  trees or biomass on the land.  But terrestrial carbon, we think it's got a huge future of the next 50 to 100 years.  But looking more broadly, looking at water quality, the water we drink coming out of  
**[0:04:03-0:04:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:04:03):**  our taps is hugely influenced by what flows into it from agricultural and forest landscapes  upstream and issues like nitrate pollution, pesticides, runoff, sedimentation, all play  a big role in that.  Biodiversity, of course, is another huge issue.  Agriculture and deforestation are responsible for some of the biggest biodiversity losses.  
**[0:04:27-0:04:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:04:27):**  We have all these overlapping environmental pressures which are just intensifying as time  goes by.  We decided to get into it from an investment point of view because although there are these  threats, you also see some huge opportunities where we found that there are more ecological  farming systems out there which are able to address those environmental issues, able to  
**[0:04:52-0:04:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:04:52):**  put carbon in the soil, able to improve water quality, increase biodiversity, improve soil  health while also generating really good yields at a low cost in a very profitable way.  We think those systems are proven at a small scale and there are some fantastic case studies  out there.  Often driven just by innovative farmers, not necessarily coming out of academia or research  
**[0:05:16-0:05:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:05:16):**  institutes but by really innovative farmers trying out new ideas and creating things from  the ground up.  They're proven at a small scale but they need to be scaled up.  That's where we think investment capital can play a role.  We help turbocharge a transition from let's say more extractive, conventional, industrial,  
**[0:05:34-0:05:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:05:34):**  agricultural systems to more ecological, sustainable, resilient agricultural systems.  When you look at the current situation, because often investors are asking the question why  now and what has changed in a sector to make it extremely interesting to enter at the moment,  what makes the sector at the moment, except for all the huge issues you mentioned before,  so interesting to start?  
**[0:06:00-0:06:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:06:00):**  Is it that the pioneers are ready?  Is it that the systems are tried and now is the moment to scale them up or is there something  else as well?  Yeah, I think there's two things changing at the moment.  I think the first, going back to those environmental issues I talked about, what we're seeing is  
**[0:06:14-0:06:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:06:14):**  that those, let's say what were previously externalities which people got away with for  free are increasingly being price regulated.  Actually farmers, land managers have been forced by policy regulation to actually take  into account the impacts they're having on carbon, on water, on soils and biodiversity.  That's leading to restrictive regulations in some places where you just can't do what  
**[0:06:40-0:06:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:06:40):**  you could do before.  Take antibiotic use in intensive livestock production.  That was absolutely widespread prophylactic use of low-dose antibiotics, completely mainstream  in a lot of feedlot in the US for example.  That's going to change because everyone has seen antibiotic resistant diseases, massive  
**[0:07:01-0:07:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:07:01):**  human health implications and the regulations are tightening and that practice will have  to change and people will have to take antibiotics out of use.  We're seeing those regulations tightening up.  On the flip side, the environmental side, we're also seeing some positive signals coming along,  some potential rewards for doing things the right way.  
**[0:07:21-0:07:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:07:21):**  For example, carbon markets, more talk than action so far when it comes to land in particular.  We are seeing the emergence of these markets.  For example, in Australia where we work, the government's emissions reduction fund is putting  2.5 billion Australian dollars to work, paying mostly farmers to store carbon in trees, low  soil on rural landscapes.  
**[0:07:44-0:07:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:07:44):**  That's starting to generate some really interesting economic consensus to change practices.  I think that's the first part around those environmental externalities are getting priced,  getting regulated.  The farmers have to take into account more now than in the past.  I think a second and maybe even a more powerful driver, a more immediate driver is shifting  
**[0:08:01-0:08:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:08:01):**  consumer demands and consumer trends.  The modern consumer, particularly young millennial consumer, is very aware of all these environmental  issues, very concerned about where their food comes from.  They're motivated by issues of sustainability but also of health, nutrition, flavor.  That's creating massive demand in markets like organic foods, grass-fed beef, grass-fed  
**[0:08:27-0:08:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:08:27):**  dairy products.  They're the fastest growing sectors in food at the moment.  A lot of the traditional food companies have seen that and are scrambling to respond.  Consumers are driving very, very quickly.  Then on the other side, you have environmental regulation and markets kicking in as well.  
**[0:08:44-0:08:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:08:44):**  We think the shift is just beginning and a long way to go.  When you look at what drove you personally into the sector, was there a specific moment  or was it something that grew over time, how you ended up on the regenerative or ecological  farming side?  I first came to this while working at a company called Climate Change Capital in London.  
**[0:09:08-0:09:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:09:08):**  It was an investment manager which had at that time the world's largest carbon fund.  We were given the task of looking at land through a climate change lens.  When you do that, you actually come to quite some conclusions because you're looking at  it in terms of A, mitigation, so how you put carbon back into the landscape, but B, adaptation  and resilience.  
**[0:09:31-0:09:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:09:31):**  How do you make land more resilient to a changing climate where there's going to be more extremes  of drought and flooding and heat waves and storms?  If you look at it through that lens, you realize that what we need to do is build healthier  soil, put soil organic matter back in the soil, have more resilient ecosystems and landscapes,  more diverse landscapes as well.  
**[0:09:53-0:09:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:09:53):**  You end up gravitating towards these more ecological farming systems.  It was a process of discovery which I began probably about eight, nine years ago now where  we developed these initial ideas.  I think the good thing is the more we've worked in this sector, we've worked in this now since  2008, the more we find that those ideas have been validated.  
**[0:10:14-0:10:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:10:14):**  There's more and more case studies of farmers proving these systems can work economically  and environmentally all around the world.  Those consumer trends are intensifying as are those efforts to regulate the environmental  impacts as well.  It began eight years ago, but the nice thing is that we just think it's a train that's  
**[0:10:36-0:10:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:10:36):**  sort of gathering momentum year by year.  Yeah, I completely agree obviously.  To come back to one of your points, you mentioned resilience in the farmland.  I can imagine from an investor point of view, and you mentioned that in the white paper  as well, it's very interesting to be invested in farms or farmland or farmland operations  
**[0:11:01-0:11:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:11:01):**  that are more resilient, especially in a time where climate change starts to kick in.  Can you explain a bit more about how that changes a business model of a farm and how  that's different from the traditional slash chemical way of farming?  Farming is the ultimate biological business.  The fundamental business of farming is taking sunlight, energy, combining with water and  
**[0:11:29-0:11:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:11:29):**  the properties and minerals of the soils to grow things.  It's a biological system.  You're always going to be exposed to fluctuations in weather and climate.  That's always been the case or it will be the case.  We do see that those extremes are getting more dangerous as time goes by.  
**[0:11:49-0:11:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:11:49):**  The more conventional systems can be very stressed by that.  There's quite a few examples of that, for example, organic coffee systems, which are  able to out-produce in terms of yield, conventional coffee systems during droughts.  There's been a number of case studies in 2012 in the US where that was the case with corn  production.  
**[0:12:08-0:12:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:12:08):**  We've also seen it when it comes to pasture-based systems, grass-based systems, where the landscapes  that have healthier soils, healthier grasses, using forms of rotational grazing or multi-pave  grazing are able to ride out those droughts and floods an awful lot better.  It's an interesting scene because economically from a financial point of view, you can take  out some of those fluctuations in yield and production when those weather extremes hit,  
**[0:12:39-0:12:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:12:39):**  but also take off some of the reliance on input costs as well.  You can just smooth out the returns and the profitability and income from the land.  I remember one example, I think, where in the drought, one ecological farm was still  producing about 80% of their normal yield, but their neighbors were probably hardly harvesting  anything, which would for them, of course, mean a completely lost year.  
**[0:13:08-0:13:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:13:08):**  But for the ecological farm, they were still having, although 20% less than normal, but  actually a proper yield to sell, probably at far higher prices because of the drought.  Exactly, yeah.  There's quite a few examples.  There was also a great example, I think, from Central America when after one of the big  
**[0:13:25-0:13:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:13:25):**  hurricanes hit, they examined a whole range of farms on the hillsides and found that those  using more ecological practices, better soil health, they're the ones that survived.  There's the ones that were more chemical based, more conventional, huge problems with erosion,  a lot of crops that people wiped out.  I think there's growing body evidence around that theme.  
**[0:13:48-0:13:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:13:48):**  There's also diversity.  I think you find that those more ecological farms tend to be growing a broader mix of  crops or raising a broader mix of animals.  You're getting some resilience just from diversity, which really reflects and mimics nature.  Nature likes diversity.  
**[0:14:03-0:14:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:14:03):**  Nature abhors a monoculture.  That gives you resilience environmentally, but also in terms of markets as well, where  you're going to have good years and bad years for different products.  Nature gets bored when there's a monoculture and starts annoying it with pests, etc.  Fights back rather effectively.  
**[0:14:22-0:14:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:14:22):**  In the long run, you don't win that.  If you look, we'll make it a bit more concrete.  You co-founded SLM Partners to dive into this trend and to see the opportunities.  When was that?  We founded SLM Partners in 2009.  
**[0:14:42-0:14:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:14:42):**  Our vision is building an asset management firm that focuses on sustainable regenerative  agriculture and forestry.  We take a real assets approach.  We're in most cases looking to acquire land or invest in land as the primary asset.  We look to really accelerate the shift in management from, let's say, more conventional  
**[0:15:05-0:15:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:15:05):**  and sustainable practices to more sustainable regenerative practices.  What we've done so far, we've raised an Australian beef cattle fund in 2012.  We have about 100 million Australian dollars in equity and debt in that structure in Australia.  We've acquired over a million acres of land in Australia for grass-fed beef cattle production  using a form of rotational grazing called adaptive multi-paddock grazing or holistic  
**[0:15:32-0:15:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:15:32):**  grazing to take somewhat degraded land and to regenerate it and bring back the health  of the soil from the grasses just by managing cattle in a slightly different way.  We're also working some new ideas.  We're raising an Irish forestry fund at the moment.  We've got backing from the European Investment Bank for that.  
**[0:15:51-0:15:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:15:51):**  The idea there is we're looking to acquire existing mid-rotation commercial forest in  Ireland, all of which are destined to clear fell, which can be destructive in terms of  impacts on soils and water and biodiversity and even carbon storage.  We want to transform where possible to a more sustainable type of forest management called  continuous cover forestry where you never clear the forest, you maintain forest cover,  
**[0:16:16-0:16:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:16:16):**  you selectively harvest, you get a more natural diverse forest.  We're also working on some investment strategies in Chile and Patagonia, looking at sheep  production and looking at a couple of ideas in North America as well.  Global focus, but everything comes back to a more ecological, let's say, farming or forestry  system which is proven at a smaller scale and looking to scale it up through ownership  
**[0:16:41-0:16:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:16:41):**  of controlled land and then also partnering with really great farmers and foresters.  I mean, that's the other key thing.  There's lots of people running around, former bankers with presentations and spreadsheets  and that's kind of easy to do, but the hard part is actually making it happen on the ground  and for that you need great technical people, great operational managers, people who've  
**[0:17:03-0:17:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:17:03):**  got dirt on their fingernails and really have done this before.  So we always try and partner with those people locally wherever we're operating.  When you look at the last few months and what kept you up at night, what have you been working  on and of course what you are allowed and possible to share, but what kept you up and  what are you proud of that worked in the last few months?  
**[0:17:30-0:17:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:17:30):**  I think in terms of progress we've made the last few months, I think we've done some quite  interesting carbon deals in Australia.  We're quite proud of it, we're participating in the Australian Emissions Reduction Fund.  I mentioned it before where we've actually won contracts to supply quite a large amount  of carbon credits from the land that we own in Australia, mostly through regeneration  
**[0:17:52-0:17:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:17:52):**  of native woodlands and a savannah type woodland ecosystem, which is very consistent with the  kind of grazing approach that we're using down there.  So that's been exciting to see that market develop and to be able to participate in that.  I think the other thing that's quite exciting, we're on the verge of launching our Irish  Forestry Fund, which will be a bit of a new departure for us in September, but I'm originally  
**[0:18:14-0:18:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:18:14):**  from Ireland so it's close to my heart.  I think we have the chance to really catalyse a change in how forests are managed, not just  in Ireland but potentially across north-west Europe where there's a kind of reliance in  clear felling and we think there might be a slightly better way to do it.  So that's been two of the more exciting things to be involved with over the last few years.  
**[0:18:36-0:18:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:18:36):**  An ongoing challenge, a lot of work we have put into is raising capital and educating  investors and finding investors who are willing to back the kind of strategies that we're  developing.  I think it's an overall lack of understanding of agriculture actually, just full stop.  It's quite new as an asset class for many investors.  
**[0:18:59-0:19:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:18:59):**  And it has not tended to attract much institutional capital actually until quite recently.  So a huge amount of education has to be done just to get people comfortable with the dynamic  of the sector.  And then beyond that, a few things a little bit more ecological, something which is maybe  not quite the mainstream.  
**[0:19:17-0:19:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:19:17):**  There's an extra level then of education to show people evidence, get people comfortable  that this can be scaled up.  Yeah, I think that's an excellent point you make because I think in the white paper you  mentioned since 2009 that the boom in agriculture investment really started.  But of course it was all traditional agriculture and the time of easy money or the days of  
**[0:19:39-0:19:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:19:39):**  easy money are over.  So it's almost educating investors in how agriculture actually should be done, but they  either don't know it or they're used to something else or to get different presentations with  slightly different time horizons, et cetera.  So how do you find, because what's the big difference in the presentations you're giving  
**[0:20:00-0:20:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:20:00):**  and other fund managers in the agriculture space are giving?  And what's the response to that?  Sure.  Yeah.  Well, I think there's a small number of groups like ours who are trying to attract investment  
**[0:20:14-0:20:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:20:14):**  in these more ecological regenerative agriculture systems.  In our white paper we identify I think six or seven different groups, probably in total  we managed about $500 million in assets.  So it's not insignificant.  At the same time, if you look at the total money raised for agriculture investment over  
**[0:20:31-0:20:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:20:31):**  the last 10 years, it's probably more than 20 billion.  So it's still a small percent of that.  I think most of the money has been flowing into conventional and more industrial farming  systems.  It kind of appeals in a way to a financial mindset where everything gets reduced to a  
**[0:20:47-0:20:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:20:47):**  really linear process where you acquire an asset, you work out what it costs in terms  of inputs to put things in and what you might get to take things out the other end.  And the more simplified it can seem and the more industrial it can seem, the more it can  look like a factory, for example, the easier it is in some ways to convince people that  this is the way to go.  
**[0:21:08-0:21:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:21:08):**  So I think there's a small number of us who are trying to show that there's quite a ferocious  debate going on within farming around the future of agriculture and that there are some  really interesting and compelling strategies that have a more ecological leaning.  I think though that that space is opening up more and more now actually and that will  be the third factor.  
**[0:21:26-0:21:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:21:26):**  I mentioned about the environmental regulation and consumer trends, but actually the third  thing that's happening on the investment side is if you look at where money flowed in agriculture  over the last five to 10 years, it mostly went into quite passive buying and lease strategies.  So if you focus on North America, where people land banking, acquiring land, leasing it out,  not really caring too much what happened on the land and just riding up a secular upswing  
**[0:21:51-0:21:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:21:51):**  in land prices.  And there was some pretty aggressive land depreciation, especially in the US, in many  parts of the world over the last decade, and that produced good returns.  But that started to run out of steam now because land prices are actually coming down, they're  correcting cash rates are coming down, if you look at conventional corn, soybean wheat  
**[0:22:11-0:22:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:22:11):**  prices, they're low, farmers are actually losing money, most of them this year in the  US.  So it's a pretty tough time actually in conventional agriculture to make any money.  And at the same time, you look at what's happening in organic space in these more, let's say,  consumer friendly markets, that's where all the growth is, that's where premiums are available,  
**[0:22:32-0:22:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:22:32):**  that's where people are still making good money.  I think investors are waking up to that, they're seeing it as more passive conventional strategies  are maybe running out of puff a little bit and they're looking for, say, a higher value  add, more active, more niche strategies where they can get behind the team and propel some  changes in how the land is managed and capture more returns from that.  
**[0:22:54-0:23:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:22:54):**  Yeah, it seems like the perfect storm for the traditional agriculture system has arrived.  If you look at what do you see as the biggest risk or the biggest hidden overlooked risk  of the traditional agriculture side?  You mentioned a number of them in the white paper, what for you is the number one overlooked  risk there?  
**[0:23:17-0:23:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:23:17):**  Well, I think it depends on your timeframe.  I think if you look over a very long timeframe, I think the degradation of natural assets,  in particular soil degradation, I think it's a huge issue for humankind of the next century.  It's one of these slow run problems that you can ignore, especially if you're in a very  fertile area with very deep topsoil, but eventually it will come back to bite you.  
**[0:23:45-0:23:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:23:45):**  For example, Iowa is a great example, one of the most fertile, wonderful soils in the  world, but Iowa's lost half of its topsoil over the last 150 years through erosion.  Now, it's still got many feet left because it's incredibly deep, but that just keeps  going on.  Eventually, you will hit bedrock and you will see declining yields and problems cropping  
**[0:24:05-0:24:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:24:05):**  up.  I think that soil degradation is one of these things that doesn't get a huge amount of attention,  but it's a big issue.  If you go to more, let's say, more brittle parts of the world, which didn't start out  with such abundant resources, natural resources, and soil resources, you are seeing it really  
**[0:24:22-0:24:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:24:22):**  kicking in where erosion, loss of nutrients, loss of soil structure is leading to collapse  of systems.  Climate change is aggravating that to a large extent.  I think that's the long-term thing.  I think in the immediate term, the bigger risk of the more conventional systems is the  
**[0:24:42-0:24:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:24:42):**  changing consumer.  The consumer, whether you agree or disagree, wants something different from what conventional  ag is selling.  The consumer wants something green and healthy, flavorsome with a story behind it, and that's  good for the environment.  
**[0:25:02-0:25:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:25:02):**  I think that the more conventional system has a real struggle on the hands trying to  overcome that.  I think that's what's going to propel immediate shifts back on the supply chain via the food  company, via the restaurants, via the chipotle's and Whole Foods of the world who are recognizing  that and trying to follow it.  
**[0:25:23-0:25:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:25:23):**  When you look at the sector, the regenerative agriculture sector as it's scaling, what are  the two most important barriers you see for the sector to reach its potential?  I think the question we always get, and I think lots of people get working in this space,  is where is the track record?  Where is the proof?  
**[0:25:43-0:25:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:25:43):**  A lot of these systems have been proven, sometimes at a small and medium scale, usually by individual  farmers, but there can be a bit of a leap to go from that to actually an investment  product, a fund or a company doing it at a larger scale.  I think that's probably the biggest challenge still, just being able to show evidence and  data that this can be done at a scale.  
**[0:26:08-0:26:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:26:08):**  I think there's enough proof that...  Nature has done it for a few billion years, but...  I think there's enough proof at that medium scale, economic proof as well, of really great  medium to large scale producers doing it on their own funds.  I think that is there, and then I think it is possible to go from there to a slightly  
**[0:26:27-0:26:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:26:27):**  larger version of that, a more institutional investment version of that.  I think as time goes by, we will fill in more of the gaps and we'll have more successful  funds out there with track records, and then it becomes much, much easier.  I think that's probably still the biggest obstacle is that question of track record  and the proof.  
**[0:26:45-0:26:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:26:45):**  I think the second is just a more general one for the sector, and that just agriculture  of any type is still unfamiliar territory for most investors.  You don't have education required to get people used to the dynamics of the sector.  It tends to be capital intensive.  The returns are lower.  
**[0:27:07-0:27:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:27:07):**  You're not going to get your VC, private equity, 20%, 25% net IRRs.  It's just not possible.  By the same thing, you've got a lot of downside protection because you have real assets, you  have land, you have biological assets, which are also appreciating assets usually over  time rather than depreciating.  
**[0:27:25-0:27:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:27:25):**  I think just getting people to understand the dynamics of the sector is the other obstacle.  Some have got there and are allocating and investing heavily, but a lot are still working  their way through the education process.  They're still in the return vision of Silicon Valley.  The illusion of the 20%, 25% that it's possible outside software.  
**[0:27:46-0:27:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:27:46):**  Yeah, exactly.  When you look at the barrier of scaling the few pioneers or the pioneers with a few hundred  or a few thousand hectares to a fund like S&M, like you're managing now, how did you  overcome that barrier to investors?  Because I know the fundraising hasn't been easy.  
**[0:28:07-0:28:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:28:07):**  Is there any key lesson, any key takeaway on how to overcome that and be one of the  first to raise such a fund?  Yeah.  Well, I think the first thing is building a great team.  So actually building a team with real farmers who've actually done it before and who can  
**[0:28:25-0:28:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:28:25):**  point in a way to their own personal track record.  There may not be a traditional financial track record of IRRs and multiples and the like,  but it's an operational track record.  I think having those people on the team is critical.  I think the second then is being able then to identify and research and the capital out  
**[0:28:47-0:28:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:28:47):**  in a way, the case studies that do exist in that particular region and be able to present  them to investors and take investors to those farms and show them, that's what we did.  We took investors to farms in Australia using the same ideas, having done it with great  success and so they could see it in their own eyes, yeah, this has been done on let's  say 10,000, 20,000 acres.  
**[0:29:08-0:29:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:29:08):**  Well, there's no reason it can't be done on 100,000 or 500,000 acres.  So I think having those real life case studies is very important.  And if you look at your coming months, let's say six months, what are you working on mainly  and what are your main goals for the next half a year?  So we'll be continuing operations in Australia and looking to take advantage of the really  
**[0:29:41-0:29:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:29:41):**  good year in terms of rainfall and growth down there.  So very much focused on operations in Australia and then raising capital for our new projects  in Ireland and forestry and also in Chile and livestock.  And then we're starting to think about some ideas in North America as well where I think  it is possible to do things at even probably an even greater scale given the dynamics that  
**[0:30:03-0:30:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:30:03):**  are there.  So we're putting a lot of effort quietly into developing some strategies for the US.  And for Ireland, do you see, because you've been for six, seven years talking about livestock  to investors and to your network and now you're talking about trees and forests, is that difficult  for them to get their heads around or are you already into the door because you've built  
**[0:30:29-0:30:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:30:29):**  up this track record in agriculture in general?  So a couple of things.  I think we always said at the beginning that we want to look at agriculture and forestry.  If you look at our philosophy is around rural land and harnessing sunlight, water and soils  to grow things.  
**[0:30:49-0:30:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:30:49):**  And it seems to me that financial investors like to think in asset classes but nature  doesn't think that way.  The boundaries are fluid and everything is interlinked.  So we actually can see a time in the future where we may even try and combine some agriculture  and forestry strategies together.  
**[0:31:07-0:31:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:31:07):**  So they've always been kept apart but we see some really interesting potential agroforestry  systems in some parts of the world.  So I think our new step into forestry is always something we had in mind and I think in the  future we could see some very complimentary things in the agriculture side and the forestry  side.  
**[0:31:26-0:31:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:31:26):**  I think the second thing is we've also been building up a team of people who have this  real forestry experience.  So we have a guy who's joined our team in London who spent his whole life in forestry  who helped run a $250 million forestry fund in Asia and we're working with a great team  of forest planners in Ireland too.  
**[0:31:45-0:31:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:31:45):**  So again without that team there'd be no point in even trying because we have the right people  in place and it is credible.  And for the teams on the ground is it difficult or challenging maybe to see a future where  those two worlds collide or it's very natural to imagine livestock and forestry in the  same system at some point?  
**[0:32:07-0:32:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:32:07):**  It depends where you go.  I think it's interesting I think in educational terms where people go to college and learn  about agroforestry, they're often quite separate and actually one of the unfortunate implications  of policy has also been to keep the two very apart as well.  Especially in Europe where you have a common agriculture policy which is all about farming  
**[0:32:29-0:32:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:32:29):**  and you have forest policies which are all about forestry and never the twain shall meet  and God forbid you fall in between because then you might lose out on your subsidies  on both sides and that wouldn't be good.  So I think there's also some unintended consequences from the policy side where keeping those worlds  apart.  
**[0:32:46-0:32:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:32:46):**  Having said that, there are some again fantastic innovators out there doing agroforestry and  silvopalatial systems very successfully at a decent scale.  Examples in the US, examples in Spain, examples in other parts of the world.  So we think that's a really exciting area actually, agroforestry and that there is enough  of those conditions in place in terms of case studies, technical experts that will be possibly  
**[0:33:15-0:33:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:33:15):**  there in the future.  Extremely interesting.  So I would like to conclude with the last question.  If you could give advice to smart investors that want to get into the regenerative agriculture  space, what would be your number one advice?  
**[0:33:32-0:33:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:33:32):**  I think only invest with teams who have real farmers on board.  It's too easy to come up and sell a concept but farming is actually really hard and it's  actually hard managing a fund for example.  So unless you've got people on a team who've actually done this and have made mistakes  and have the scars to show it, then I'd be a little bit wary.  
**[0:33:58-0:34:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:33:58):**  So I think having that technical operational element is so important in the world of agriculture.  Are there moments in the last six, seven years that you, because you don't have farming experience,  right?  No, but thankfully I partner with people who do.  Have you had any experiences where the lack of farming experience of you was awkward or  
**[0:34:21-0:34:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:34:21):**  painful or?  Really, because I know when to defer to the experts on our teams.  So I think it's important that people bring a diverse range of skills to a team.  Those with the technical knowledge are given the space to make those decisions and drive  strategy when appropriate.  
**[0:34:43-0:34:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:34:43):**  At the same time, it is also important to have people with investment financial experience  as well who know what investors want, who can structure things, who can report back,  who can make it work as an investment.  So there's a certain amount of translation has to go on between the world of farming  and the world of finance, which speaks very different languages.  
**[0:35:04-0:35:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:35:04):**  That's actually exactly the type of people I would like to interview in this podcast  who are with one leg in the farming world and with the other leg in the finance world  to scale the regenerative agriculture space.  So thank you, Paul, so much for your time and your knowledge today.  And I speak to you soon.  
**[0:35:25-0:35:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:35:25):**  Great.  Thank you very much.  You just listened to an interview with Paul McMahon, co-founder of SLM Partners, who is  scaling up the regenerative agriculture sector in Australia, Ireland and Chile.  I hope you will join us again soon with many more interviews with people in the finance  
**[0:35:41-0:35:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:35:41):**  sector and practitioners on the ground, all working to scale up the regenerative agriculture  industry.  If you found the investing in regenerative agriculture and food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  
**[0:35:57-0:36:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:35:57):**  It's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast, and it only takes a few  seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  join my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  
**[0:36:16-0:36:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:36:16):**  You can find all the details on Patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or in the description  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  
**[0:36:43-0:36:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:36:43):**  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to put money  to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011 and recording  this podcast since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  
**[0:37:03-0:37:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:37:03):**  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  What questions should you ask?  
**[0:37:14-0:37:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:37:14):**  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  
**[0:37:22-0:37:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:37:22):**  For whom is this course?  You, the soil builders and investors in the space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management, consultants, etc.  
**[0:37:40-0:37:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:37:40):**  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  
**[0:37:56-0:37:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:37:56):**  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you.  And I'm very aware that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very  different means.  
**[0:38:09-0:38:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:38:09):**  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you, and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  
**[0:38:26-0:38:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:38:26):**  so you don't have to write along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find, or what kind of investors you could  find if you're a soil builder.  
**[0:38:45-0:38:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:38:45):**  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design, and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  
**[0:39:01-0:39:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:39:01):**  Unfortunately, that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea, or whatever you're drinking.  
**[0:39:18-0:39:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:39:18):**  Click on the link below, sign up, and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  