### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2017-02-05)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  We're going to listen to an interview with Michiel Dumas, Strategy Director at Common  Land.  
**[0:00:18-0:00:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:00:18):**  We're going to talk about many different things in this interview, ranging from how  impact investors can get involved, what the difficulties are and how we could maybe overcome  them.  We're going to talk about regenerative elements and how to work with many farmers in one of  the driest regions in Spain.  
**[0:00:35-0:00:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:00:35):**  And we're going to look into the fur return model, which is the cornerstone model of Common  Land.  Enjoy.  Welcome to another episode of investing in regenerative agriculture, investing as if  the planet mattered.  
**[0:00:48-0:00:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:00:48):**  A podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why my focus on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  
**[0:01:09-0:01:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:01:09):**  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small and consumers, start paying much more  attention to the dirt, soil underneath our feet.  Before we get started, I've been recording these interviews next to my day job and I  will definitely continue to do so and release about an episode a month.  
**[0:01:28-0:01:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:01:28):**  But at the same time, I would love to take this further, share more interviews.  There are many more stories to share on investing in regenerative food and agriculture, more  depth, improve the quality, maybe even doing some video series.  So I started a Patreon community, which makes it easy to support creators like myself.  If these podcasts have been of value to you and if you have the means, I invite you to  
**[0:01:51-0:01:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:01:51):**  support me and make this happen.  For more information, please find the link to my Patreon account in the description below.  And now without further ado, the interview.  Enjoy.  Welcome to investing in regenerative agriculture, agriculture as if the planet mattered.  
**[0:02:07-0:02:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:02:07):**  I'm Koen van Sijen, the host of today.  In the podcast today, I'm talking to Michiel de Man, Strategy Director of Commonland.  Commonland is one of the leading organizations working on business cases to restore landscapes.  Welcome Michiel.  Thank you Koen.  
**[0:02:20-0:02:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:02:20):**  Thanks for the introduction.  Yeah, to start with a personal question, why are you doing what you're doing?  I guess this started when I graduated at high school.  I moved to Australia for a year and traveled around, had a lot of fun and I continued traveling  for another year in Europe.  
**[0:02:44-0:02:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:02:44):**  And what struck me was that everywhere we came in those old VW vans, we saw either nature  because we spend a lot of time in nature or in economically developed areas, so to speak,  where nature had gone.  And we basically saw in many cases, a lot of destruction.  And the question arose then already in me, why is economic development always going at  
**[0:03:18-0:03:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:03:18):**  the cost of our natural environment and can't we find other ways?  And that sort of determined my career, I guess.  For that reason, I've always tried to focus on the business world at the one side, understanding  how business works and what are its impacts on people and on the planet, but especially  also, can we find ways to do business that instead of further trashing the planet, actively  
**[0:03:46-0:03:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:03:46):**  contribute to restoring it?  And that's been basically my quest in my career.  And that's also has led me about four years back to, together with Bidde and Fereda, establish  what has now become Commonland.  Commonland basically believes that we need to develop a large scale landscape restoration  
**[0:04:11-0:04:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:04:11):**  industry.  And we actually don't see an alternative to counter the crisis of biodiversity loss of  losing soils worldwide, of water stress, but also climate change.  And not to even mention the food security questions, we don't see there's any other  way than by restoring land, both on productive lands, so farms, and also of ecological zones.  
**[0:04:42-0:04:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:04:42):**  And that sort of has been the basis of the model we've developed and also the projects  that we have developed over the last couple of years.  Projects that promote large scale land restoration and large scale regenerative agriculture.  We really see that the only way to do that is by actively involving the private sector.  And also, another really important ingredient is to do this on the long term.  
**[0:05:13-0:05:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:05:13):**  So next quarter profits, they won't make this happen.  We really try and have a long term vision, a 20 year vision, actually.  And that sort of scares off some people, but it's very attractive to others.  For instance, we are seeing that many family offices, people who think cross generationally  are really interested in this.  
**[0:05:36-0:05:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:05:36):**  And also those are probably the people who are going to actually contribute to this development  of large scale restoration and regenerative agriculture.  So the model that we have been developing over the last couple of years, not only conceptually,  but especially in projects, making it happen, has been the four returns, three zones, 20  year model.  
**[0:05:59-0:06:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:05:59):**  And the four returns, and I'm sure you've probably seen that we've talked about this  before, in our view, it starts with inspiration.  It starts with finding motivated farmers and land managers to do things differently on  their land, to actively start restoring soils, to change the way of production.  But the crux is to make it fun, to make it inspiring, to touch people's hearts.  
**[0:06:30-0:06:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:06:30):**  And it's not us who do that.  It's those people in the fields that are already convinced.  And what we do is we connect them to others and that our mobilization is a very important  part of our project.  And it starts with inspiration.  
**[0:06:45-0:06:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:06:45):**  The second thing, of course, is the social capital, what we call jobs, people wanting  to work together.  We think that's paramount.  There is no way we can restore the planet without getting the people actively involved  in making a buck out of it.  
**[0:07:04-0:07:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:07:04):**  And obviously the natural impacts are a result of that.  So if we are able to restore the soil, biodiversity and water, that's obviously key.  I think in the end our whole economy depends on that.  Well, and if you do all of that well, so if you create restoration that's based on meaningful  activities on agricultural lands, people making money, that can also provide an investment  
**[0:07:35-0:07:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:07:35):**  case and in financial returns.  And yeah, for that model, so the four returns model, that was the concept that Willem basically  developed four years back.  And since then has been at the basis of four projects that we have developed now.  And increasingly we see other organizations adapting it and there's a lot of interest  
**[0:08:01-0:08:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:08:01):**  in applying it.  I think it's probably because it's quite simple to use.  Basically the 3P model, people plan a profit, but I think the inspirational aspect to it  is what matters most.  At least it makes me still wanting to do this work every day.  
**[0:08:19-0:08:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:08:19):**  And when you look at the projects and the practical level, can you dive a bit deeper  into the ones you've been working on for the last few years and maybe pick out one  example to really explain how these four returns model work in practice?  Yeah, so I've been personally involved most in our Spanish project.  We have developed or helped develop projects in Australia, South Africa, Spain and the  
**[0:08:46-0:08:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:08:46):**  Netherlands.  Last year I've been very deeply involved in our Spanish project.  It's great fun to travel, to have an excuse to travel south every now and then.  What we've done here, and then I'm talking about the Altiplano region north of Granada,  we have basically identified a small group of front runner farmers, farmers who are in  
**[0:09:13-0:09:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:09:13):**  the almond business, almond production.  And what we saw there was among this group there were people really good at composting,  other people were really good at integrated pest management, others were really good at  sophisticated green infrastructures to save more water.  This is a very desert area, very degraded area.  
**[0:09:36-0:09:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:09:36):**  Almost no soils anymore, about 300 millimeters of rainfall per year.  So all of these things are really important ingredients of what we would call regenerative  agriculture.  And we found people doing parts of that and what we started to see was that well these  people they are doing great stuff but no one knows about it and they don't even know each  
**[0:09:55-0:09:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:09:55):**  other.  So we started to connect them to each other and that group of front runners quickly grew  up to about 20 people and 40 people.  And then we started to do a process with them to develop a long term vision.  As I said we have a 20 year horizon and what we did with this group was well if you look  
**[0:10:19-0:10:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:10:19):**  deep in your heart and you know look into the future so if we think about this same  place this trashed semi arid step area highly degraded, you know people have moved to the  cities almost no young people there anymore.  How would you see this evolve over the next 20 years and what can we do to make that happen  as a second step?  
**[0:10:42-0:10:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:10:42):**  And out of that process what we call a U-curve process it's a methodology that has been developed  by Otto Scharmer at the MIT and that's been a super powerful thing and that basically  created the basis for our project.  And the vision was really inspiring actually.  People well together came up with this future version of this territory that was green where  
**[0:11:17-0:11:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:11:17):**  young people have jobs that are sustainable regenerative agriculture has become the norm.  There is marketing going on of high quality products that actively restore the landscape.  All of the you know there's great interconnectivity with the cities it's high tech and low tech  combined you know there's respect all the sort of these things came out of this and  that have sort of been leading of the whole process since then.  
**[0:11:50-0:11:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:11:50):**  I think this mobilization effort has been really important for the success so far of  the project and out of this shared vision well we basically together with these Andalusian  farmers developed you know a plan just activities what are we going to do so we are going to  promote regenerative farming we are going to develop businesses that have a positive  impact on nature and on people we're going to restore degraded natural areas we're going  
**[0:12:22-0:12:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:12:22):**  to communicate about this we're going to have inspirational workshops and all that sort  of stuff you know and we started doing it and the great thing was that our job was basically  that of a catalyst so we helped this emerge out of the local initiative and we sort of  helped channel some of the energies and for instance there was one farmer he started to  organize composting workshops and those composting workshops they were tremendously popular because  
**[0:12:54-0:13:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:12:54):**  you know composting is a thing that directly activates your soil so it becomes fertile  again it's cheap to do it's not that complicated and you get financial returns within a year  because you know it really can boost your productivity now so we saw more and more of  those initiatives emerging and yeah basically what we did was just you know making sure  that people were informed about this and connected to it and get out of the way and well so we  
**[0:13:24-0:13:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:13:24):**  since then you know several business cases have emerged last year we started a company  which is a marketing company for regeneratively produced elements so the 20 farmers have committed  to produce for this company and increasingly apply regenerative practices these include  composting erosion control water harvesting via green infrastructures like swales they're  doing windbreaks all the life that sort of things of course based on a planning for their  
**[0:14:03-0:14:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:14:03):**  farms so that's what the farmers committed to and we established basically a marketing  company to also get a better return on this product produce and we think that this year  well we hope to create the proof in the markets that it's actually possible to not only well  restore your land productively but also to create better commercial returns on these  regeneratively produced rain fed elements so we'll be at several trade shows this year  
**[0:14:38-0:14:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:14:38):**  to promote the project to promote the product well that's just one example the company is  called Lao Mendressa well I won't get into too much detail now why that name was chosen  but at least it's you know represents basically an integrated form of production where you  also not only apply these regenerative practices but also you try and integrate with you know  other productive crops like aromatics and honey that you can all do at the same place  
**[0:15:04-0:15:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:15:04):**  and that sort of reinforce the ecological functionality of the system and basically  so did this this is one of the business cases that we helped establish and yeah so far so  good I think a lot has happened over the last years and we really think that this is this  has the potential to take off in the upcoming period.  And it sounds great and if you look at I mean this is a very specific project you have been  
**[0:15:33-0:15:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:15:33):**  working on in the last year what has changed at common land I think after probably COP21  there's at least I've seen a lot more interest in soil and the role it plays in society and  energy and CO2 and water management etc. and have you seen a lot of increased interest  and how if so how did that change common land and the structures you've been working on  and partners etc.  
**[0:16:00-0:16:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:16:00):**  Yeah we're obviously super happy with developments in the international climate arena well not  the very recent one obviously but you know the COP meetings yeah I think it's a very  important step I think it's we are moving out of a niche towards you know large scale  appreciation of the importance of this topic and we definitely notice this in our field  as well we're also seeing that well for common land nothing much changes as a result of that  
**[0:16:32-0:16:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:16:32):**  we're sort of an impact company and impact foundation basically and we will do this regardless  of international policy developments because we think it's needed at the same time it definitely  helps with the sort of overall consideration for not only climate issues but also the need  for integrated approaches like regenerative agriculture I think is probably the most important  way to you know capture large quantities of carbon you know saving biodiversity saving  
**[0:17:07-0:17:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:17:07):**  soils saving others you know fixing our food problems so that's really key but what we  are not really seeing is how it's translating so these policy developments into you know  actual support for the type of activities that we're developing so what we're seeing  is there is still a big gap between the large committed allocations of you know the hundreds  of millions of euros and dollars that have sort of been allocated to tackle the climate  
**[0:17:44-0:17:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:17:44):**  change problem and activity in the field we still see there's a big gap there's many investment  funds being established that don't reach the initiatives that are there because they are  simply not bankable enough so there's sort of still a missing link and of course what  we try to do is to make the non-bankable initiatives bankable but to do that you would need you  know seed capital or things like that and we are not seeing that that link is being  
**[0:18:16-0:18:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:18:16):**  made at a scale large enough I think we really need many more organizations to fill that  gap and also the right types of money to make those small initiatives typically but have  potential to make them bankable that's my perception of the markets but it may well  be that there's initiatives that are missing but I sort of see that as a big commitment  big money and small initiatives but you know lack of you know small initiatives can reach  
**[0:18:48-0:18:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:18:48):**  scale as a result of what part partially as a result of lacking of finance.  And when you look at because I completely agree I think there's a lot of money floating  or flooding into the space I mean not flooding in terms of water but flooding into the space  looking for places to get to work and it turns out to be incredibly difficult to put money  to work in the regenerative agriculture space a lot of times they're too small too hidden  
**[0:19:16-0:19:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:19:16):**  not bankable yet not coordinated enough to not connect it to the market and so there  are many great small pockets of examples but not too many that reach up high enough to  reach financing what if you would look a year from now and you had a magic wand what would  you do to change that?  That's a good one well I think I would probably keep doing what we do that sounds strange  
**[0:19:48-0:19:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:19:48):**  but I really think that the solution that we are trying to create makes sense right  and the solution from my point of view is or part of it is at least and that's also  what we're good at I think is to create the projects that are able to within time absorb  bigger finance not because that's the goal per se but it's because it's a requirement  in order to create impact at scale so we started with as I refer back to the project I just  
**[0:20:18-0:20:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:20:18):**  explained a bit in Spain we started with you know a handful of committed farmers and where  we're trying to move to is to well a selection of bankable business cases that are ready  to well not necessarily absorb a lot of external finance that could be one of the goals but  at least that are solid business that can become solid businesses that are financed  with a variety of sources right and we think it's showing that showing that it's possible  
**[0:20:49-0:20:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:20:49):**  to basically restore land based on business cases for everybody involved that's probably  I think that still is the most important role that we foresee at least for the project side  of common land but I think it's really important that for people at the investor side realize  this that it's not always you know sufficient to wait until bankable cases emerge I think  if you want to create impact it may could make a lot of sense to also to look into the  
**[0:21:24-0:21:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:21:24):**  pre-commercial side of business development so for instance last year the element company  that we helped establish you know it wasn't there we hired a guy who knows a lot about  element marketing and is a great biodynamic farmer so he knows enough about the commercial  side and the production side to do this well and we paid him to together with the farmers  create a business model and a business plan and that business plan when that was finished  
**[0:21:55-0:22:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:21:55):**  it took about half a year to redo that properly based on that the farmers actually asked him  to establish this company with them now when the company was established all the farmers  they were so committed they put in their own cash to end their own elements to get through  the first year so that shows the commitment of these guys  basically not having a necessity for outside funding  
**[0:22:20-0:22:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:22:20):**  no so they don't they didn't have a necessity for outside funding and our impact investment  basically has been that well we paid a few bucks to develop this business plan and to  find the right guy to manage the project to manage the business and we're now not even  part of it aside from sort of more strategic sparing role and yeah so I don't know if this  is good message for impact investors but perhaps if impact is more important than investment  
**[0:22:48-0:22:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:22:48):**  well these are definitely opportunities to look into  yeah the impact is potentially enormous and I think that we from the impact investing  space have to figure out ways to alternative ways of putting money to work and together  with in this case local farmers and together in structures that make sense for all stakeholders  and not just for the investor so that's a challenge and an opportunity because the same  
**[0:23:15-0:23:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:23:15):**  time with some investments a lot of these companies could grow maybe slightly faster  or have a bigger impact or do more things than they do because it still costs money  but yeah if it's locally available the resources to start I mean there's no obvious need for  outside investments of any case or sort  well yeah I think that that could be I think that's partly true at the same time I don't  
**[0:23:39-0:23:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:23:39):**  want to disencourage anyone I think in this case we as common land we acted basically  as a business development support so you could see this initiative more sort of an incubator  environment that we created right to help this company well start and become present  in the market we can also still participate in it so actually the other members of the  company would probably appreciate that and that would obviously provide an investment  
**[0:24:13-0:24:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:24:13):**  opportunity for us so it's still it's not an either or but I do think that what I would  like to raise the attention to is that it's not well if you want to create impact maybe  the pre-commercial side of business development is sometimes well it's often neglected as  an important place to create a lot of impact with not too much risk you know the risk is  very high but the overall investments are typically low and then you create opportunities  
**[0:24:41-0:24:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:24:41):**  to later on in hybrid structures etc still participate in in the businesses you helped  create obviously yeah and exactly because especially in this agricultural field where  there's not much density of investments right so there's not much innovation like this company  is very innovative so to speak for the andalusian reference right it's you know there's not  much happening there which provides great opportunity I think if you are slightly better  
**[0:25:09-0:25:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:25:09):**  at marketing than everybody else and well in marketing is not a very strongly developed  capacity within most agricultural businesses if you move it there's not many producers  who know anything about you know consumers for instance well if you have a company that  understands consumers and knows about farmers you can combine the two well there's no it's  sort of a pond where there's not many else not many other people fishing right so you  
**[0:25:36-0:25:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:25:36):**  can create an advantage of being in that place and I think that's what we try to do at common  land as well to you know create opportunity because it's very different if you are in  silicon valley where you're competing to the next next big everyone around you is doing  more or less the same or if you're in in rural Spain where basically nothing's happening  still aside from you know big conglomerates and slow moving companies  
**[0:26:03-0:26:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:26:03):**  yeah it does it's all about the context and the relativity of your competitors and and  if you look just to switch the conversation a bit to what have you been working on and  what it kept you busy and maybe even up at night in the last few months and what is or  will keep you busy in the next few months just to give a bit of an idea of what you  are working on and common land is busy with in this period well I tend to sleep well still  
**[0:26:34-0:26:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:26:34):**  I've recently moved moved out of the crying babies period of my life and sort of now the  you US government things that are keeping me away but awake sometimes but I'm sort of  trying to neglect them of course with the establishing these new companies in the different  projects is yeah there's always a lot of things going on so it keeps us busy aside from the  like the marketing company for regenerative production that are being established in the  
**[0:27:09-0:27:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:27:09):**  different projects at the same time basically so in Australia South Africa and Spain we  are developing you know more or less similar concepts in Australia Australian concept wide  open agriculture is much bigger than what we're doing in Spain currently probably that's  going to have an IPO this year so we're quite stoked about that in South Africa we have  established an aromatics company that allows farmers to set aside large pieces of their  
**[0:27:41-0:27:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:27:41):**  land for restoration we're very happy that that's also materializing I think it's a great  achievement also here we're talking about a very remote area with a number of farmers  who have never been in the business before so it's a big transition it's great to see  that's happening so those things that are not keeping me awake but they are very you  know they're great to be part of basically and especially to see well with all the difficulties  
**[0:28:04-0:28:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:28:04):**  that we face that it is possible to make this happen aside from that we are have recently  established an impact consultancy company which is called for returns partners with  the aim to support companies who want to do something with landscape restoration and with  regenerative agriculture as an example last year we have established projects with Heineken  also in Spain it's a well I'm not sure if I can tell that I can say that that name but  
**[0:28:36-0:28:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:28:36):**  there's other brands of course like Carlsberg and stuff but but anyway this beer brewery  in southern Spain they wanted us to help them with you know balancing their water use via  landscape restoration activities and regenerative agriculture was part of that and so we helped  them with developing for restoration projects for each of their breweries in in the in Spain  and yeah so that shows that there is increasing interest of big brands also to be involved  
**[0:29:07-0:29:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:29:07):**  in yeah in regenerative agriculture and that's and sometimes it's really you know you can't  really predict where that interest is but it is there and we thought well why not establish  a company that sort of caters for that need so those companies who want to do something  with this let's help them with you know connecting to the right guy right partners developing  the right projects or tying into existing initiatives that they don't know about and  
**[0:29:37-0:29:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:29:37):**  sort of advise them on that and that's that's basically what we're doing there and currently  that's that's going quite well so we are at this stage connecting with well dredging companies  that want to create more added value for their dredging activities quite interesting I never  thought of this opportunity but it's of course you know they move around a lot of soil and  what do you do with the soil after moving it around well what are the value creation  
**[0:30:04-0:30:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:30:04):**  you know potential value creating activities that you can do with that and of course they're  called regenerative agriculture is an important well opportunity we're also looking into the  palm oil sector we're looking at large-scale agricultural planning activities in Brazil  so well all of these are all leads at this stage but we think that we can develop a number  of increasing number of projects over the next couple of years so I'm sure that thought  
**[0:30:32-0:30:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:30:32):**  that that's something that will keep us busy for the upcoming period as well it sounds  extremely interesting and I'll be sure to to be checking in and to to get more updates  on on those projects as well you know we talk with each other more often there's there's  a lot happening and I think you have a lot of interesting well references as well I mean  you I'm trying to get them to do interviews also that's that's definitely to open source  
**[0:30:59-0:31:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:30:59):**  that so I want to thank you for that and also be conscious of time and I'm sure I'll be  checking in more often on the different projects and go deeper into that and I want to thank  you for your for your time your openness and and the willingness to share the work of common  land but most welcome I hope this has been useful and more than glad for anyone to to  share more experiences this is it's been exciting and thanks so much for setting this up I think  
**[0:31:26-0:31:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:31:26):**  it's you know you're right on the right spot I think with this and I really look forward  to to well to hearing additional items in the same series.  You just listened to an interview investing in regenerative agriculture agriculture as  if the planet mattered an interview with Michiel de Man, Strategy Director at Common Land we  talked about elements about marketing about farmers very dry areas in Spain and how we  
**[0:31:54-0:32:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:31:54):**  can put money to work to change that I hope you join us again soon for more of these interviews.  If you found the investing in regenerative agriculture and food podcast valuable there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it number one rate and review the podcast  on your podcast app that's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it  only takes a few seconds number two share this podcast on social media or email it to  
**[0:32:17-0:32:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:32:17):**  your friends and colleagues number three if this podcast has been of value to you and  if you have the means please join my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow  me to take it further you can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative  agriculture or in the description below thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  
**[0:32:52-0:32:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:32:52):**  investing in regenerative agriculture and food how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it why are we doing this  course after a hundred interviews and more than a hundred hours of audio asking the question  how to put money to work in regenerating soils and I've been following the space since 2011  and recording these podcasts since 2016 we thought it was time to share our lessons learned  
**[0:33:15-0:33:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:33:15):**  what have we seen in the space over the last years how have we built our decision making  framework what to focus on with the podcast how have we picked interviewees and what questions  should you ask what is happening in the space what should you read what should you listen  what should you watch how to approach this space for whom is this course you the soil  builders and investors in the space the soil builders people working in this space entrepreneurial  
**[0:33:41-0:33:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:33:41):**  farmers fund managers vehicle builders crowd investing platform builders agtech companies  farm to gut food companies permaculture key line designers holistic management consultants  etc etc people that are building soil at scale and the investors who are putting their own  money to work through their family office or as private individuals or people who are  putting other people's money to work through foundations institutional capital banks insurance  
**[0:34:06-0:34:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:34:06):**  companies etc is this course free no this is pay what you think it's worth meaning I  have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware that among  the listeners of this podcast and we have people with very different means so I'm inviting  you if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to consider paying  what you think it's worth thank you so what is this course it's currently a series of  
**[0:34:33-0:34:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:34:33):**  seventeen videos mostly ranging from ten to fifteen minutes plus PDF slides so you don't  have to ride along we're gonna look into why investing regenerative agriculture and why  extractive agriculture is so risky how to invest what kind of frameworks you could and  I think should build what to invest in what kind of co-investors you could find or what  kind of investors you could find if you're a soil builder every lesson will have a digging  
**[0:34:59-0:35:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:34:59):**  deeper part where I will share what kind of reports what kind of interviews what kind  of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper we're gonna look at nutrient density  landscape design and a lot more so what is it not it's not a list of investable deals  unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world we're really at the beginning of the regenerative  agriculture and food revolution it's also not investment advice before making any investment  
**[0:35:23-0:35:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/30/michiel-de-man/#t=0:35:23):**  please find professional investment advice so get ready get a cup of coffee a cup of  tea or whatever you're drinking click on the link below sign up and I'm really looking  forward to your feedback.  