### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2017-11-25)
**[0:00:00-0:00:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com slash course or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  Welcome to another episode of investing in regenerative agriculture investing as if the  planet mattered.  
**[0:00:21-0:00:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:00:21):**  A podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  
**[0:00:42-0:00:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:00:42):**  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small and consumers, start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  Before we get started, I've been recording these interviews next to my day job and I  will definitely continue to do so and release about an episode a month.  
**[0:01:02-0:01:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:01:02):**  But at the same time, I would love to take this further, share more interviews.  There are many more stories to share on investing in regenerative food and agriculture, more  depth, improve the quality, maybe even doing some video series.  So I started a Patreon community, which makes it easy to support creators like myself.  If these podcasts have been of value to you and if you have the means, I invite you to  
**[0:01:24-0:01:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:01:24):**  support me and make this happen.  For more information, please find the link to my Patreon account in the description below.  And now without further ado, the interview.  Enjoy.  Welcome to investing in regenerative agriculture, agriculture as if the planet mattered.  
**[0:01:41-0:01:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:01:41):**  In these interviews, I'm talking to people who are scaling up the sector, either by increasing  the influx of capital or by working on the ground to scale up the enterprises on the  ground.  Why regenerative agriculture?  Because so many of the world current issues come together in this subject from drought  
**[0:01:56-0:02:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:01:56):**  to water scarcity, climate change, social issues, hunger, obesity, all have a connection  to how we grow food and what we eat.  You're going to listen to an interview with Michiel Entstra, partner at the Wire Group  and impact investor, and we'll be talking about the role of smallholder farmers in the  regenerative agriculture revolution.  
**[0:02:15-0:02:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:02:15):**  Enjoy.  It's a very warm welcome.  I'm your host of today.  Today in the podcast, we have Michiel Entstra impact investor and partner at the Wire Group,  a group who helps high net worth individuals and families in the Netherlands to move their  
**[0:02:27-0:02:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:02:27):**  capital to impact.  And we have a slightly different angle today, looking mostly at the role of smallholder  farmers in the agriculture agriculture transition that we are in.  Welcome Michiel.  Hello, I'm Koen.  
**[0:02:39-0:02:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:02:39):**  So to start off immediately with a personal question, why are you in this space and why  you're doing what you're doing?  Yeah, to answer that, I think it's good to explain that I'm wearing two hats today, as  you already said, as partner at the Wire Group and as impact investor.  The work that I do with the Wire Group where we help families to do their impact investments  
**[0:03:09-0:03:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:03:09):**  and the reason for doing that is because I just see an enormous potential for re deploying  capital in much more productive and much more impactful ways.  When I was KPMG, I already started seeing this potential and then I decided to make  that a full time full time occupation.  When I look at capital and the potential of deploying that in the real economy as opposed  
**[0:03:40-0:03:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:03:40):**  to the kind of more fictional economy of numbers and financial terms as numbers, then I think  that that's enormously valuable.  So that's the work that I'm doing with Wire Group.  The background to all this is when I was doing some work for Philips in Brazil and I was  sitting in my hotel in Brasilia and looking out the window, there were a group of homeless  
**[0:04:19-0:04:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:04:19):**  people sitting in the park that I could see from my room and it was at that point that  I kind of these different streams of thought came together and the intention or the ambition  to kind of help a significant number of people to improve their lives through private markets  kind of came up and the work with Wire Group is kind of flows out of that.  In addition, I'm also an impact investor myself and the focus that I've chosen for that is  
**[0:04:56-0:05:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:04:56):**  agriculture.  Again this starts quite a few years back when I was doing at KPMG a number of projects in  the agriculture space.  We were doing calculations of the costs and benefits of making a transition of value change  agriculture value change to more sustainable value change and that kind of brought me in  
**[0:05:23-0:05:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:05:23):**  touch with the whole smallholder theme that I became increasingly interested in and I  think for me this is really where kind of the environmental challenges that we face  and the social challenges that we face come together in a very unique way.  So why smallholder farmers?  Why was that part of the sector of the agriculture sector so interesting to you?  
**[0:05:58-0:06:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:05:58):**  Like I said the potential for impact there is to my mind just really incredible because  while at KPMG we were doing these calculations of like I said the costs and benefits of transitioning  the sector.  It was very clear in those calculations that with quite minor changes in how these farmers  work their agricultural practices or their access to particular inputs or what have you  
**[0:06:35-0:06:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:06:35):**  that quite minor changes had such a huge impact on their income for example on their productivity  and their income.  So I really saw that potential and the more I started looking into it the more I realized  that so many different themes that I care about at least come together there.  If you consider that about 65% of the world poor are either farmers or the family of farmers  
**[0:07:10-0:07:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:07:10):**  and you realize that 75% of the people that are hungry in this world are also living in  rural areas and therefore also directly or indirectly dependent on agriculture.  And then you look at the environmental side of things and you realize that about depending  on the figures you look at but nearly 30% of greenhouse gases come from agriculture,  80-90% of water is used in agriculture.  
**[0:07:38-0:07:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:07:38):**  The list goes on and on.  So really for me agriculture is at the heart of the social and environmental challenges  that we face today and within that the smallholder really represents both the challenges because  they face enormous challenges.  If you look at the kind of life of an average smallholder farmer it's really quite daunting  
**[0:08:10-0:08:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:08:10):**  to see what kind of reality they face but also in terms of the potential.  So again some statistics suggesting that smallholder farmers as a group and there's about 500  billion of them so there are an enormous number of them but as a group they can increase their  productivity by 50-60% and obviously these are kind of quite broad stroke figures but  I think the message is clear that there's an enormous potential which looking at the  
**[0:08:53-0:09:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:08:53):**  potential for contributing to food security for example the question of how do we feed  the billions of people on earth by 2050 that is constantly raised I think smallholders  hold the key to answering that question.  Yeah they really seem to be at the crossroad of many many movements and especially I mean  with 500 million the social angle is extremely important and it's extremely sad that most  
**[0:09:26-0:09:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:09:26):**  poor people are farmers and most undernourished people are also farmers which of course should  be completely different so if you look at it from an angle from the social perspective  in a smallholder farmers at regenerative agriculture what do you think are a few logical steps  that should happen if we look five or even ten years I mean agriculture is a long-term  play 15-20 years from now where do you see movements and would you like to see movements  
**[0:09:55-0:09:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:09:55):**  going?  Well I think again it's a story of challenge and opportunity and the challenge is as I  see it to unlock that potential that is there you know for farmers to become much more productive  in all senses of the word which also translates then to a much more stable and much more higher  level of income and thereby also contribute to the food security question so to unlock  
**[0:10:41-0:10:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:10:41):**  that potential while at the same time not repeating many of the mistakes that have been  made in agriculture over the last decades whereby you know the earth has just been taken  as a receptacle for the crops that we want to grow you have the soil you put in some  chemical inputs and a seed and then you harvest the crop and you repeat that year after year  not really paying any attention to the health of the soil so if we you know unlock that  
**[0:11:21-0:11:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:11:21):**  potential of smallholder farmers but go down that road that we have gone down before then  I think it's not the win-win opportunity that I think exists in the smallholder farmer space.  So it's really balancing not making the same mistakes we have made or in hindsight when  we made them of course they were very logical steps we took but in hindsight we learned  a lot of things and hopefully we can prevent another big group of farmers from making the  
**[0:11:56-0:11:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:11:56):**  same mistakes.  Yeah and that's obviously difficult because it is very hard to ask from somebody who is  very poor and who has an opportunity to improve their situation to say okay you know but we  would like you to do it in such and such a way so that you know you're not repeating  the mistakes that we've made before and that you save our earth.  
**[0:12:27-0:12:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:12:27):**  It's kind of a parallel to the climate change discussion where you know we've put all these  climate gases into the atmosphere and now we're asking developing economies to say okay  well there's too much climate gas in the atmosphere can you stay in place.  Yeah so it's a similar discussion but I think kind of paradigmatically we need to change  that discussion and realize and I think many smallholder farmers realize that anyway whether  
**[0:13:07-0:13:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:13:07):**  it's explicitly or implicitly that the ecosystem services that are provided are essential to  their success and in some ways maybe even more so than it is for the larger scale farmers  in more developed economies because simply said smallholder farmers just don't have the  means the financial means to replace ecosystem services whether it's organic material or  nutrition for the crops or whether it's pest management or water etc.  
**[0:13:53-0:13:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:13:53):**  They just don't have you know the money to invest to replace those ecosystem services  which are provided in a healthy ecosystem.  So I think if we look at it from that mindset then the two actually go hand in hand.  Yeah and they have to because what gives us the right to tell somebody to not develop  in a certain way actually nothing probably gives us the right to do that but if it fits  
**[0:14:23-0:14:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:14:23):**  into the most logical steps and hopefully we can make it in such a way and we with local  farmers that the only way or the only logical way forward is the regenerative agriculture  the sustainable agriculture or ecological agriculture or whatever stamp we put on it  but yeah we can't ask anybody to make a sacrifice like that especially if you're a smaller farmer  that literally lives from one season to the next and please don't put this fertilizer  
**[0:14:55-0:15:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:14:55):**  because it's bad from five years from now which is incredibly arrogant thing to say.  Yeah absolutely and again the good news is that empirical studies have shown that it's  not a zero-sum game in the sense that productivity growth and regeneration or kind of ecologically  centered agriculture kind of are mutually exclusive.  In fact they're not and studies have shown that you can have significant productivity  
**[0:15:32-0:15:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:15:32):**  increase through ecosystem centric farming practices so I mean I think that's definitely  very encouraging and I think the interesting challenge is how do we kind of put that into  practice as we scale solutions for smallholder farming.  How can we embed that kind of ecosystem centric farming into the products and services that  I think are the key to smallholder farmers reaching their potential because I mean I  
**[0:16:13-0:16:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:16:13):**  think you know we can talk about that more in a minute but I think that's where I see  a real gap at the moment for reaching that potential the lack of appropriate products  and services geared to smallholders.  Yeah because you've been looking at this sector for quite a bit you've been investing in it  you've been working on agriculture also from the perspective of at the wire group so what  
**[0:16:44-0:16:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:16:44):**  have you been seeing the gap you just mentioned can you explain a bit more about that and  maybe one or two examples of companies or solutions that are trying to fill that gap.  Yeah I mean I think the first thing to kind of realize and understand is that smallholder  farmers are not farmers by choice most of the time they're just they're farmers by legacy  because their families their forefathers were farmers and that's you know that's what they  
**[0:17:17-0:17:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:17:17):**  were born into and they're working the land but it's really a hand to mouth existence  they're subsistence farmers.  So I think that that's an important point to start from and if you start from that then  you can also start to kind of understand that you know many smallholder farmers don't want  to be on the farm they actually want to move to the urban areas and seek out different  
**[0:17:50-0:17:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:17:50):**  opportunities.  On the other hand there will be farmers smallholder farmers who do want to be in farming but then  probably not under the conditions that they are doing it right now and I think what stands  between the conditions within which they're doing it right now that subsistence hand to  mouth existence is it comes from a number of gaps in the marketplace which means that  
**[0:18:24-0:18:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:18:24):**  smallholder farmers just have very limited access to the market and that you know shows  itself in different ways whether it's access to the market for land, access to the market  for knowledge and technology, whether it's access to the financial markets or access  to the actual you know product markets.  Many farmers smallholder farmers don't know don't have a good idea of what price they  
**[0:18:54-0:19:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:18:54):**  should be asking for their produce and actually end up underselling which you know is to their  to the detriment of their income so I think there's a lot of struggle to enter markets  and I think that gap can be filled by innovative approaches by companies that are providing  products and services that make those linkages and you asked about examples so one of the  companies that you and I have both invested in is Landmap and Landmap is a Dutch company  
**[0:19:41-0:19:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:19:41):**  that works with farmers in initially Ghana but they have plans to go to other countries  but initially Ghana they're working with farmers to literally map out their land because  most land entitlement in Ghana and many other countries is based on customary practices  so there are you know understandings about who has what land but it's not documented  and it's not official which makes these farmers very vulnerable because if a government official  
**[0:20:14-0:20:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:20:14):**  or chief comes along and says hey you know this land is mine they don't really have  any recourse and it also makes it harder for them to invest in their land because of that  risk and also issues around kind of how do you pass land on from one generation to the  next so this company is using some you know not very pioneering technology but using it  in a pioneering way namely to use GPS to map out the land and then they have a whole process  
**[0:20:48-0:20:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:20:48):**  whereby they get to earn that digital map of the land into an official title for the  land which then helps them get access to things like credit and maybe you know in time can  also help stimulate a market for agricultural land whereby those farmers that don't want  to be farmers they can sell or lease their land to those farmers that do want to be and  give those farmers that are wanting to be farming and wanting to be entrepreneurial  
**[0:21:24-0:21:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:21:24):**  in doing that to expand the land that they manage and work on a slightly bigger scale  not to say that scale is everything but at least it allows some more flexibility in how  they operate.  Yeah I think it's an excellent example of really to start at the bottom of the pyramid  in this case cocoa farmers in Ghana that are among the poorest of the poorest while we  
**[0:22:01-0:22:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:22:01):**  are paying a really hefty sum for our chocolate bar so there's something in the value chain  that has to change and hopefully it starts with land ownership and land titles.  Yeah one of the other challenges like I said is access to knowledge and to technology because  most of the smallholder farming is very labor intensive which on the one hand I think can  be seen as a positive thing in the sense that it supports local jobs but in more and more  
**[0:22:37-0:22:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:22:37):**  rural economies the reality is actually that there is an increasing shortage of labor or  that labor is becoming more and more expensive particularly when you get on a seasonal basis  because a lot of people are moving off the land and into the cities and also because  of the aging of the population of the rural population this manual labor is actually becoming  more scarce and more expensive which leaves the farmers that are dependent on that with  
**[0:23:09-0:23:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:23:09):**  another challenge namely how do I work the land and make that economically viable.  Another company that I've looked at is Hello Tractor.  They are setting up in Nigeria to provide tractor services so they sell tractors which  are GPS enabled.  They sell them to small entrepreneurs who in turn rent out the tractor on a job by job  
**[0:23:45-0:23:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:23:45):**  basis so that the farmers can get access to this technology which on its own is not affordable  for a single farmer to put up the capital for a tractor even if it is a small low horsepower  tractor but it gives them access to the services of the tractor and thereby able to work their  land much more efficiently and also to much lower cost.  So those are just a couple of examples of companies that are coming up and entering  
**[0:24:24-0:24:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:24:24):**  this smallholder market.  An extremely interesting example from another angle and if you look at, we bring it to a  bit more, this was already extremely practical but if you look at your work in the past year,  you both had your own impact investing and also as partners the wire group.  If you look a year ago and until now what has changed in the sector, in your work, what  
**[0:24:55-0:25:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:24:55):**  has kept you busy and what are you happy that you basically concluded maybe as we are approaching  initially the end of the year?  So let me take the two strands then from a wire group perspective, a huge amount has  changed over the last year simply because we have seen amongst our client base an interest  to kind of start putting up more capital and moving more capital into the impact investing  
**[0:25:31-0:25:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:25:31):**  space but at the same time not really knowing how to deploy that and with wire group that's  the role that we are taking to kind of do the hand holding and provide the services  around making the impact investments.  So that's I think, I mean obviously the figures are there from the work that Jin and JP Morgan  are doing yearly so they are showing the yearly growth in impact investing but for me personally  
**[0:26:06-0:26:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:26:06):**  it's really great to see that kind of translated very concretely into our client base over  the past year.  So that's very exciting and then from an investment point of view I think, yeah I mean  I just gave those two examples, I think there are more examples.  I think there has been a realization and this is going back definitely more than a year  
**[0:26:39-0:26:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:26:39):**  but in the past kind of five years or so there's been a realization in lots of different levels  of society from the UN down to the international NGOs but also I think within impact investing  there's been a realization that there is this promise of the smallholder farmers and that  is now translating into an increasing number of opportunities in that field because we  also have to be realistic and understand that this is also a very difficult market.  
**[0:27:19-0:27:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:27:19):**  I mean the market of selling products and services to smallholders is possibly one of  the most difficult markets to be in because as we've said the smallholders are poor, they  don't have a very high level of professionalization, they're not used to buying products and services,  they're obviously incredibly geographically dispersed often in very not very densely populated  areas so distribution is an issue.  
**[0:27:57-0:28:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:27:57):**  Their incomes even when they do have an income are extremely volatile living from harvest  to harvest.  So I think we also have to be very realistic that this is a very difficult market to be  in and despite that there are now an increasing number of initiatives and companies and also  funds that are focusing on this so I think personally again that is exciting and very  
**[0:28:29-0:28:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:28:29):**  positive.  Yeah it seems like the space is waking up and offering more and more ways to, still  it's very early on, but to put money to work in this sector and that's a good thing because  without that we cannot really move capital into the space.  And when you, let's take it to a year from now, what will have changed in your work with  
**[0:28:55-0:29:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:28:55):**  both hats and what would you like to have seen changing with your work in the next 12  months?  I think from a wire group point of view what I would like to see in a year time is that  the approach that we are taking with wire group which is basically one around building  impact investing portfolios whereby we look both at kind of a finance first perspective  
**[0:29:28-0:29:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:29:28):**  whereby we say investing in impact doesn't necessarily have to mean that you're compromising  on financial returns, that the realization is amongst our client base is growing that  that is possible, but on the other hand there's also room for investing from a more theory  of change kind of approach so that people really dig into a particular theme that's  important and close to them and invest in that with a view to developing a particular  
**[0:30:05-0:30:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:30:05):**  theme or a particular sector and building that up and building up the ecosystem that's  necessary around that.  So with wire group we've just done a paper, we've written a paper on agriculture and food  so that's just one example of a theme that we've looked at and I think and others will  follow and I think that that approach to impact investing is very necessary and very important  
**[0:30:36-0:30:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:30:36):**  and that's also the approach that I take from my personal point of view so you know  it's about the individual investments but it's also about the ecosystem that is building  up because you need you know and that's obviously not for single investors always to realize  that or to make that happen but as long as you're taking that perspective of building  the ecosystem of company services, NGOs etc that are contributing to a particular theory  
**[0:31:13-0:31:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:31:13):**  of change.  So in short what I would like to see in a year's time is that in wire group we get our  clients to awaken or awaken but realize this dual approach of you know finance first portfolio  building and also venturing into a particular theory of change and then from the small agriculture  I'm just looking forward to seeing more and more development in that space and seeing  
**[0:31:47-0:31:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:31:47):**  that ecosystem of products and services building further and further.  And then I think if we take we look at more from I mean you use your personal hat as an  impact investor obviously what do you see as the two most important barriers we already  discussed this in at the beginning what are for you personally the two most important  barriers to make impact investments in regenerative agriculture with a more smallholder farmer  
**[0:32:17-0:32:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:32:17):**  angle?  Yeah I mean I go back to what I said earlier which is the I think the real barrier to making  this work is to ensure that the productivity improvement and the development of smallholder  farmers occurs in lockstep with an environmental perspective which has a clear understanding  and a clear appreciation of the ecosystem context within which that occurs and on a  
**[0:32:59-0:33:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:32:59):**  very practical level that means that companies like Hello Tractor which are selling these  tractor services to smallholder farmers that they take that approach and I think to some  extent they do so for example they are already have an attachment to the tractor with which  they can do seed drilling which in turn enables no till or low till agriculture which you  know from a soil perspective is obviously much better.  
**[0:33:32-0:33:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:33:32):**  So it is possible but it is important and necessary that all those companies that are  providing these products and services definitely have a very genuine and authentic commitment  to that ecosystem-centric approach.  So that's one barrier or challenge that I see and on the other hand I think I mean I've  just described kind of this energy that is being generated around smallholder farmers  
**[0:34:12-0:34:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:34:12):**  and that translating into new initiatives which I think is positive but I think there's  also a risk that because there's also a lot of interest among the UN and the NGOs etc.  in this sector one of the concerns that I have is that at one point large amounts of  institutional grant funding start going into this sector I mean or obviously already a  lot of money is going into it but if that is to scale up and all these organizations  
**[0:34:47-0:34:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:34:47):**  are working in isolation to come up with you know new projects and they don't deploy that  money in a way that's supportive of the kind of grassroots initiatives that are coming  up then I think there's a risk that those grassroots initiatives will suffer from that  because they won't have access to that money and that money is going into the projects  that have been selected by these organizations rather than supporting that sector development.  
**[0:35:25-0:35:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:35:25):**  So I think those are two kind of areas that are a challenge.  Yeah we should try to somehow also get that grant money in an impact investing format  or to invest it at least with those classes on because otherwise it could really disrupt  the sector as we've seen actually in other sectors as well.  Yeah I mean I think the key to it is to take the smallholder perspective which or maybe  
**[0:36:02-0:36:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:36:02):**  put another way to empower the smallholder to make his or her own choices and to spend  their money on the products and services that they see as a best match for what they need  rather than you know design a project for developing smallholder farmers on paper and  then kind of imposing that on the smallholder farmers so you know maybe in some sense the  best thing to do would be to just you know whatever grant money is available to just  
**[0:36:39-0:36:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:36:39):**  give that to the smallholders and then you know from there that will really kind of create  a boost in demand for products and services specifically geared towards smallholders and  then you actually get a very powerful boost rather than working counterproductively.  Yeah I think that's an excellent point and also a great point to finish this interview  and I would like to thank you for your time and I think we'll be definitely checking in  
**[0:37:09-0:37:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:37:09):**  with you in less than a year from now to see and to hear hopefully many more examples of  ways to invest into smallholder farmers with an ecological angle and to make sure that  for many generations to come farmers are not the ones that are malnutrition mostly and  are the poorest of the poorest.  Absolutely thank you for giving me the opportunity to share this.  
**[0:37:43-0:37:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:37:43):**  You just listened to an interview with Michiel Lenstra, partner at the Wire Group and impact  investor.  We talked about the role of smallholder farmers in the regenerative agriculture space and  I hope you will join us again soon with more of these interviews.  If you found the investing in regenerative agriculture and food podcast valuable there  
**[0:38:01-0:38:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:38:01):**  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  It's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means please  
**[0:38:20-0:38:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:38:20):**  join my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or in the description  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  
**[0:39:05-0:39:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:39:05):**  investing in regenerative agriculture and food.  How to put money to work in regenerating soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while  doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After a hundred interviews and more than a hundred hours of audio asking the question  
**[0:39:19-0:39:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:39:19):**  how to put money to work in regenerating soils and I've been following the space since 2011  and recording this podcast since 2016 we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision-making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  
**[0:39:36-0:39:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:39:36):**  How have we picked interviewees?  What questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  
**[0:39:44-0:39:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:39:44):**  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  You the soil builders and investors in this space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  
**[0:39:56-0:40:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:39:56):**  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management, consultants, etc. etc.  People that are building soil at scale and the investors who are putting their own money  to work through their family office or as private individuals or people who are putting  other people's money to work through foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies,  
**[0:40:20-0:40:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:40:20):**  etc.  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  
**[0:40:31-0:40:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:40:31):**  that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very different means.  So I'm inviting you if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  
**[0:40:45-0:40:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:40:45):**  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to ride along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  
**[0:41:09-0:41:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:41:09):**  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  
**[0:41:25-0:41:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:41:25):**  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  
**[0:41:40-0:41:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/michiel-lenstra/#t=0:41:40):**  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking, click on  the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  