---
title: 08 Thekla Teunis and Gijs Boers, what African regenerative farmers can teach us
---

### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2017-03-19)  
### Author(s): Koen van Seijen  

**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com  or in the links below. Now onto the podcast.  
**[0:00:13-0:00:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:00:13):**  You're going to listen to an interview with Tekla Teunis and Gijsboers of Grounded.  We're going to talk about the challenges you face when you work with large groups of farmers,  but also the enormous opportunities this brings. And how to work with business cases that come out  
**[0:00:27-0:00:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:00:27):**  of the work with farmers instead of very strict 10-year planning. The huge opportunities that you  have at the moment in local processing in Africa and what these opportunities mean for impact  investors. It really means that you'll be able to pay farmers for regenerative agriculture.  
**[0:00:45-0:00:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:00:45):**  Doing this, it's essential to find the right local crop mix. And to find this mix, you need to listen  to farmers. They know what could work well on their land, even if they're not growing that at  the moment because they are in a much more short-term mindset. If you get them to think  
**[0:01:02-0:01:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:01:02):**  long-term and you get them the incentives to do that, you will lock a huge opportunity locally  to introduce and maintain regenerative agriculture. Enjoy!  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture. Investing as if the  
**[0:01:18-0:01:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:01:18):**  planet mattered. Podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture  space to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities,  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return. Why am I focused on soil and  
**[0:01:35-0:01:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:01:35):**  regeneration? Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we  treat our land, grow our food, and what we eat. And it's time that we as investors, big and small,  and consumers, start paying much more attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  
**[0:01:50-0:01:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:01:50):**  Before we get started, I've been recording these interviews next to my day job and I will definitely  continue to do so and release about an episode a month. But at the same time I would love to take  this further, share more interviews, there are many more stories to share on investing in  
**[0:02:04-0:02:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:02:04):**  regenerative food and agriculture. More depth, improve the quality, maybe even doing some video  series. So I started a Patreon community which makes it easy to support creators like myself.  If these podcasts have been of value to you and if you have the means, I invite you to support me  
**[0:02:20-0:02:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:02:20):**  and make this happen. For more information please find the link to my Patreon account in the  description below. And now without further ado, the interview. Enjoy! Welcome to investing in  regenerative agriculture, agriculture as if the planet mattered. I'm Koen van Zijen, the host of  
**[0:02:38-0:02:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:02:38):**  today. In the podcast today I'm talking to Tecla Teunis and Gijs Boers, co-founders of Grounded.  An organization working with large groups of farmers in southern Africa to develop business  cases to bring agriculture back into balance. And of course we're going to ask what balance means.  
**[0:02:53-0:03:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:02:53):**  Welcome Tecla and Gijs. Yeah thank you Koen. Thanks Koen. So to dive in with it immediately,  why are you doing what you're doing? Yeah I guess that's probably a personal story for both of us.  For me, I have been working in corporate strategy for a couple of years and at some point I went on  
**[0:03:15-0:03:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:03:15):**  a cycling trip in Asia. So I cycled through China and Laos and Vietnam. And if you're on your bicycle,  most of the time you're cycling either through nature or through agricultural land. And it  struck me to see that a lot of these agricultural systems that I've been involved in, they're  
**[0:03:35-0:03:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:03:35):**  systems that I saw even though I didn't know much about agriculture, seem to be either really  extractive, so not very sustainable in the long run, or underperforming. So it seemed like they  could actually up their production quite a bit in the case of a lot of smallholder farmers. So then  
**[0:03:54-0:03:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:03:54):**  I actually couldn't sleep for a couple of nights because I thought there has to be a business  opportunity in this where you can make the land more healthy and also turn it into more profit for  the farmers. So that is when I decided to go into this field and try to find people who actually  
**[0:04:15-0:04:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:04:15):**  knew something about agriculture and ecosystems, which I then did. And it led to ultimately the  establishment of this company. But I think Gijs has also probably a very interesting story to tell.  Well, when I was a child, I always say, you know, once I get successful, I want to have a farm,  
**[0:04:38-0:04:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:04:38):**  because as a child, I always did some side jobs on farms and farms in the neighborhood where I was  born. Neither my parents or grandparents from both sides were farmers. So I have no idea where it  comes from. But I always somehow like their mentality and their internal, everlasting optimism.  
**[0:04:59-0:05:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:04:59):**  So I studied finance. And after my first job, I got the luxury to do something that I wanted and  to do some traveling. So I decided to visit farms all around the world because I thought, yeah,  why wait until I'm done working? Why not make it my profession? So I started visiting farms in  
**[0:05:18-0:05:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:05:18):**  Brazil, US, Eastern Europe. It's very easy because all around the world are Dutch farmers, and quite  successful farmers. So slowly, I began to learn more and more about agriculture. And one day,  I found myself working in Zambia for an organization that said, Gijs, could you go check  
**[0:05:38-0:05:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:05:38):**  out there? There's a lot of farmers there. We had some successful programs. And they went, they did  do some maize farming. And they do that better now. But we believe there's more to it. And we want to  do, we want to invest in those farmers. And so I'm walking to the Zambian forests. And that's where  
**[0:05:58-0:06:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:05:58):**  I meet Tekla. And we started discussions together. And from one day to another, I find myself working  with Tekla on the grounded. And I think our visions were quite similar at the time. And so by pursuing the things that I want, I finally  will have my agricultural job, some sort of say.  
**[0:06:25-0:06:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:06:25):**  You finally ended up on a farm. And what is grounded? I think it's the name is relatively new.  Can you tell a bit more about the background, the vision, the theory of change? And why this name?  Yeah, why this name is because we really focus on partnering with farmers. We believe that  
**[0:06:49-0:06:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:06:49):**  the problem of degraded land is caused primarily by, that's not a belief, it's actually a fact,  is primarily caused by unsustainable farming practices. And we don't think that that is something  which you can necessarily blame the farmers for. So we shouldn't see them as a problem. We should  
**[0:07:11-0:07:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:07:11):**  see the farmers actually as part of the solution. So what we do is we build very strong partnerships  with farmers and develop businesses together with them. So we can help them to farm more profitably  and more sustainably and in doing so regenerate degraded land. And because we work in Sub-Saharan  
**[0:07:36-0:07:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:07:36):**  Africa, it's actually quite difficult to invest in large scale in land. So because that would be a  model to do this, right? If you wanted to restore degraded land, you can just buy large pieces of  land and then control everything yourself. But we think that in this particular context,  
**[0:07:57-0:08:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:07:57):**  that's probably not the best intervention model. And so we have been looking for something which  on the one hand allows us to get to scale and on the other hand creates an impact. And that is why  we focus on the establishment of processing companies, which enable us to process high value  
**[0:08:18-0:08:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:08:18):**  crops that we produce together with the farmers on the landscape, thereby allowing the farmers to  capture more value in the value chain. And at the same time create something which is investable,  also for larger impact investors, which are interested in this space. And that also, of course,  
**[0:08:41-0:08:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:08:41):**  allows us to get to scale because these processing companies then process crops which are produced in  a sustainable and regenerative manner. And when you look at a concrete example of this,  which one would you pick from your fast growing portfolio as a perfect example or almost perfect  
**[0:09:01-0:09:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:09:01):**  example of this method and this theory of change? For instance, the first project which we did was  actually in collaboration with Common Land, a big landscape restoration NGO and Living Lands,  a South African NGO and a group of farmers in the Baviaanskloof in South Africa, which is a very  
**[0:09:22-0:09:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:09:22):**  remote area where the big problem was overgrazing because of decades of goat farming. So the farmers  used to have goats, but the goats have eaten most of the natural vegetation in that area. So the  productivity of the land is going down while their input costs are increasing. So together with the  
**[0:09:44-0:09:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:09:44):**  farmers and with our partner organization, we started on a journey to identify alternative  ways of farming. And eventually that has led to the establishment of an essential oils company.  So we're currently growing herbs like lavender and rosemary, and we're starting to add some  
**[0:10:07-0:10:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:10:07):**  indigenous herbs as well. And then we established a processing company in the area together with the  farmers that's processing the herbs into oils. And those oils are of course very durable. They're  super high value. They're compact, so it's easy to transport them out of a remote area and they're  
**[0:10:26-0:10:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:10:26):**  sold into the cosmetics industry. And the farmers who sign up to this company also commit to a  holistic management plan for their farm, which means that they will reduce the number of goats  on their lands to make it more sustainable. So it's no longer further degrading the land. And  
**[0:10:45-0:10:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:10:45):**  instead actually they make land available for restoration. So we've also formed a partnership  with a large beverage company who was active downstream to actually plant a lot of trees  on these degraded hillsides now that the farmers are taking off their goats. So I think that is  
**[0:11:04-0:11:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:11:04):**  a really tangible example of how this model could work. And we're now busy in other areas as well.  We're working in Zambia, Madagascar and another area in South Africa to see if we can replicate  this model, albeit in a different form, because every landscape is different of course.  
**[0:11:27-0:11:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:11:27):**  And that's what you mean when you say bringing agriculture back into balance?  Yeah, what we mean by that is that it's actually, I think it's two things. It's on the one hand  on the ground, bringing agricultural practices back into balance with nature. So instead of  
**[0:11:52-0:11:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:11:52):**  kind of literally slashing all the nature out of an area and making it into a complete controlled  environment, which is also sometimes less resilient to change. And in particular in the areas where we  work, which are very sensitive to, for instance, climate change, we don't think that that is  
**[0:12:11-0:12:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:12:11):**  necessarily always the best model. So bringing agriculture in balance with nature rather than  fighting against it. And at the same time, bringing the agricultural value chain back into balance.  So sharing more of the value which gets captured up in the value chain, for instance, in processing  
**[0:12:32-0:12:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:12:32):**  and marketing with the farmers. So the farmers also get a much higher percentage of the final  end product than they do typically. And we believe if you do that, then you also enable the farmers to  actually make the changes which are needed on their land. Because if they are absolutely cash  
**[0:12:49-0:12:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:12:49):**  stripped, which is often the case with the farmers we work with, they sometimes say to us like, yeah,  we understand that this is not the best way. And it's also not good for our children. But what do  we do? There's no other way, because we just have to survive from today until tomorrow. So if we can  
**[0:13:10-0:13:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:13:10):**  create a little bit more space in the system, we can actually enable people to be like proper  custodians of the land and make it better for their children than it is now. And if you look  at your your daily practice, basically, I mean, you just changed the name of the company. But of  
**[0:13:30-0:13:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:13:30):**  course, you've been doing this for a while. If you look back one year ago, so that will be February  or the end of January 2016. Until now, what has changed in the company and in your immediate  surrounding when you look at regenerative agriculture? Yeah, so a lot has changed in our  
**[0:13:54-0:14:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:13:54):**  company. Although we're still running around. So I guess that's the that's the constant factor.  But a year ago from now, we were just establishing the first lavender crops with the farmers in the  Baviaanskloof. We were just establishing the company together with them. Everything was new.  
**[0:14:15-0:14:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:14:15):**  And also, it was basically just me in the company. And where we've come now is we've grown the team  the team quite a bit. We have people working in all these different projects, as I mentioned.  And in our first company that we established, the one in the Baviaanskloof, we've actually  
**[0:14:39-0:14:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:14:39):**  produced the first oil, which was, of course, a really nice moment actually just recently in  January. So it smells really nice now. The lavender flowers. And yeah, I think also a big change there  is that the farmers are now really taking ownership of this company and working really hard together  
**[0:15:02-0:15:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:15:02):**  with us to make it into a success. So we've formed a real team, I think, together with the farmers.  And that is what we're working to establish now in other projects as well. So I think it's super  exciting. And I think I now hear six months and what's really difficult is if you want to do  
**[0:15:24-0:15:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:15:24):**  sustainable farming and regenerative farming, it changes from place to place and from location to  location. The context differs a lot throughout even within nations in Africa. The differences are huge.  And what we have developed last year, especially last half year, is to find a way to come into an  
**[0:15:51-0:16:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:15:51):**  area and to try to start from scratch and to go as efficiently as possible through different  steps, through a different approach, to end up with a totally new strategy and a way of working  that's specifically suited for that area. And that's one of the main challenges. But we believe  
**[0:16:14-0:16:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:16:14):**  that by going through a process and doing a specific approach and working together with  farmers, really looking into the agronomic or the natural boundaries and maybe even more  important, the social boundaries of a project, that going through that phase, we can end up  
**[0:16:38-0:16:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:16:38):**  in every place with a good strategy. Almost like a number of impact investors who do place-based  investing, meaning that they mostly invest in their region, which of course is different in every  region because it depends what the necessities are and what is necessary to do in that region.  
**[0:16:56-0:17:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:16:56):**  And you're saying almost it's place-based agriculture, really looking at what the landscape  can handle, what it needs, and both the landscape itself, meaning the soil, the waterways, the  ecosystems, etc. And of course, the people working, living and owning the land on top of that.  
**[0:17:17-0:17:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:17:17):**  Yeah, exactly. And so that is also why it's so important to work really closely together with  the farmers, because often they have a lot of knowledge about what can grow there and what  could be successful crops, even though they're sometimes not growing them at the moment for  
**[0:17:35-0:17:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:17:35):**  several reasons, because they don't have the capital to establish them or they don't have the  markets. And yeah, we believe that if we can partner with them to find the right crops, which  are suitable for the climate, you can create a much more resilient system. Yeah, I would even say  
**[0:17:55-0:18:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:17:55):**  anti-fragile, actually. Probably you create an agriculture system that is sometimes, especially  if you look at other systems, like neighbouring systems, is probably when there are climate shocks,  it's suffering the least or maybe even benefiting because you are building such a strong soil  
**[0:18:15-0:18:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:18:15):**  perspective. It's a very interesting perspective compared to an earlier interview we did with Tony  Lovell of SLM in Australia, where of course you have the opportunity to buy enormous pieces of  land from one owner and basically can do whatever you want on that, or you can build your whole  
**[0:18:33-0:18:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:18:33):**  system exactly as you want it. But of course, in many places or most places in the world,  there are many small farmers, smaller farmers, many people that own different pieces of land  and you need a social system to bring them all together under one shared future, because otherwise  
**[0:18:50-0:18:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:18:50):**  it's bound to fail from the beginning. Yeah, exactly. And I think you also need an economic  trigger and that is what we try to create by focusing on these high value crops that we  process on the landscape. So it becomes really attractive for the farmers or it should become  
**[0:19:11-0:19:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:19:11):**  really attractive for the farmers to participate in these companies because it allows them to create  more value from their land on an annual basis. So it decreases their risk and it increases their  profits. And when you look at this specific project in South Africa and the Bavian's Clove,  
**[0:19:31-0:19:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:19:31):**  can you share a bit of a few numbers? Like how many farms and farmers are we talking about? How  many hectares? What's the number of goats that's going down? How much lavender are you actually  able to produce and how much oil does come out of that? Just to have a bit of a feel about the  
**[0:19:48-0:19:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:19:48):**  scale we're talking about. Yeah, so we're working there. We started with only four farmers  and these are very large farms because it's extensive goat farming that they're doing there.  So the average farm size is about 4000 hectare in that area, most of which is not arable, most of  
**[0:20:13-0:20:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:20:13):**  which is mountain land which is grazed by these goats. And so the total area that we're bringing  under improved management currently is around 28,000 hectare and the total area which we're  actively restoring by planting trees is around one and a half thousand hectares. So those are  
**[0:20:37-0:20:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:20:37):**  millions of trees which are being brought back into the natural land where the goats have been  removed. And then in terms of how many herbs we're establishing, we're almost finished planting 100  hectare of essential oil crops, so that's both lavender and rosemary. And we think we have the  
**[0:21:03-0:21:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:21:03):**  potential to expand to about 250 hectare still, but already with this size we are one of the  biggest producers of these essential oils in South Africa. So the size of the project is considerable.  Extremely interesting. And if you look one year from now, what would have changed or what do you  
**[0:21:30-0:21:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:21:30):**  think has changed? Of course it's difficult to look in the future and for sure also a year from  now, but what are you working on that you think will have changed if we talk again February next  year? Yeah, so it's different for all of our projects. So in general we hope to have made a  
**[0:21:48-0:21:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:21:48):**  lot of progress on all the projects that we're working in. For the Baviaanskloof area specifically,  what we're currently busy with is to see how we can grow the company and in particular how we can  also bring the bigger communities into the company. So this is the area in South Africa  
**[0:22:10-0:22:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:22:10):**  where there's a lot of so-called historically disadvantaged South Africans. So we're currently  busy implementing a large-scale empowerment plan to get all of them involved, or not all of them,  the ones who are interested, involved in becoming producers into the company as well.  
**[0:22:30-0:22:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:22:30):**  And I guess for the other projects Gijs can also explain a little bit. The goal for this year is to  again set up some small value chains. In Zambia we start this year with 20 farmers that were  locally selected by a local trainer. So you always need some pioneering farmers because it's very  
**[0:22:54-0:23:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:22:54):**  important to be successful in the beginning to attract more farmers later on. So we want to  successfully plant some new crops and create a mixture of crops that we can grow, that we can  grow in a sustainable regenerative way and that we can sell. So there's a lot of steps to be done  
**[0:23:18-0:23:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:23:18):**  and of course process as well. We have agronomists on the team and we are quite sure we have, we're  very close to having a good mixture there. So next week we sit together with the farmers and  we discuss some potential challenges etc. and from there on we start the process. So we start  
**[0:23:39-0:23:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:23:39):**  planting this year and we're making a processing facility this year. Another project as well in  the Langkloof where we have a fine ball species that can promote or restore degraded fine balls.  It's a natural vegetation in a large part of the Western Cape and the Eastern Cape.  
**[0:24:01-0:24:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:24:01):**  And we can use that tree actually to restore land. It's a native tree and it's a very high  value tree. It's called honey bush produced, used to produce honey bush tea which is healthy,  nutritious and now completely harvested in the wild. And a lot of it is illegally harvested,  
**[0:24:26-0:24:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:24:26):**  and a lot of it is illegally harvested, poached in an unsustainable way. And we have a lot of  farmers there that are really interested to grow it and learn to grow it and also to set up these  value chains because now a lot of the value sticks with middle man and stick in between.  
**[0:24:48-0:24:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:24:48):**  If you can do the processing yourself and only buy sustainable and sell to the end consumer,  you'll be able to give the farmers a fair share. And even in this specific scenario,  you can give them such a high share that the very sustainable practices like bringing back  
**[0:25:06-0:25:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:25:06):**  fine balls look very attractive at this point where we are now in the project.  For those two projects, we really believe that this year we can set up those value chains.  Also because we've done it before and we have quite fur down the line with, and that's always  
**[0:25:26-0:25:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:25:26):**  something that you should not underestimate. For us it's very important to get that relation with  the farmers and that's something in the beginning that takes a lot of time. And that now goes very  well in that project. So that's why we believe for this year on those very specific projects,  
**[0:25:45-0:25:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:25:45):**  that's where we will be at the end of this year.  And when you look at, you just mentioned and touched upon working with farmers,  what do you see as what you've noticed in your experience as the biggest challenges  
**[0:25:58-0:26:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:25:58):**  and also the biggest opportunities of working with farmers, especially in degraded land?  Well, the thing is, Tekla already mentioned it a bit as well. It starts with listening very well.  Farmers have a lot of local knowledge and one of the strange thing for me as a European,  
**[0:26:18-0:26:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:26:18):**  for example, to understand is that in Zambia, there are very good markets for a lot of crops.  Almost everything is imported. I coming from a finance angle, always thought, okay, we need to  sell to Europe, high value markets, easy to sell, we know a lot of people there. But it turned out  
**[0:26:40-0:26:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:26:40):**  and the farmers pointed me to that, that the local markets are huge and the local prices  are often better than in Europe. And that is something that you only learn by listening to  farmers. And now it's just us doing a lot of talking, but most of our job is just to be very  
**[0:27:02-0:27:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:27:02):**  sensitive to what they say. And later on, you can see, for example, Bill Gates once mentioned,  if I would have been a farmer, I would have do chicken farming in Africa because the average  price of a chicken is $5. Who would believe that? And actually, it is like that because one of the  
**[0:27:21-0:27:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:27:21):**  people I've met there does chicken farming himself and he sells his chicken for $4 or $5.  So there's something strange going on that you have very good local prices and local markets.  But it is just one out of many examples. And often, the second is maybe also very interesting.  
**[0:27:41-0:27:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:27:41):**  A lot of the farmers indicated in Zambia that their stable crop used to be sorghum and that they  stopped with that because the government promoted maize. So they gave cheap maize seeds and they  bought maize. But after years of drought and the drought has been going on for three years in a  
**[0:27:58-0:28:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:27:58):**  row now, the older people were saying, you know, back in the days, the sorghum never let us down.  So last year, we handed out sorghum seeds to 200 farmers and we wanted to make some micro  finance scheme of it. So they needed to pay us back in bags of sorghum. However, the drought  
**[0:28:21-0:28:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:28:21):**  was so enormous that all the maize failed and the only crop survived was the sorghum crop.  So it was actually I didn't do anything than just following their advice. So I got to the  donors of the project. I said, can you give me $6,000 or $7,000 to get the seeds to the farmers?  
**[0:28:44-0:28:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:28:44):**  And that was the only crop that returned something to them. So in the end, the donors decided to not  get back the sorghum from the farmers because it was the only thing they had. And it was not  my knowledge, not agronomic knowledge. It was just the older people who said that it was sorghum  
**[0:29:01-0:29:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:29:01):**  that was the main crop until 20 years ago. And you see that just a small mixture, so doing  and maize and sorghum, which is far from the regenerative ideal scenario, but can also has a  big impact. And I think maybe if I can add to that in terms of like to go back to your question,  
**[0:29:22-0:29:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:29:22):**  Koen, on what are some of the challenges we're facing. So obviously, one of the biggest  challenges for us is that a lot of the farmers we work with, like I already mentioned earlier,  are under severe cash flow pressures or financial pressure in general. So it means that  
**[0:29:45-0:29:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:29:45):**  if they make a change in their current system, they're also taking a risk. So if it fails,  then they have an even bigger problem than they have now. So that puts quite a lot of pressure  on us as well as the farmers to make these things work. And I think in addition, a big challenge is,  
**[0:30:10-0:30:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:30:10):**  I think in any agricultural system, but what we're seeing here now, especially with, for instance,  in this time period with El Nino and climate change having devastating effects this part of  the world, there's like the worst drought in South Africa in I think since they started recording,  
**[0:30:30-0:30:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:30:30):**  is just the climate conditions that we need to work with, which put a lot of extra pressure on  the farmers as well as on our systems. Yeah, sure. No, I think that the shocks from climate become  even worse. And for sure, I mean, in Europe, we notice it, but it's very different if your land  
**[0:30:52-0:30:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:30:52):**  is already degraded and you're already suffering from a few degrees rise in temperature. Of course,  you're much more vulnerable to even the smallest shock in the system. And I think that's a big  challenge for the agricultural system. And if you look at what have you been working on in the last  
**[0:31:11-0:31:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:31:11):**  few months that really got you up at night because it was tricky or difficult or very exciting? I  mean, I think you already mentioned it a bit, maybe you can tell a bit more about the first  harvest and the first oil you made. How does that work and how did it make you feel after many years  
**[0:31:29-0:31:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:31:29):**  of starting this project and working with these farmers and not knowing that you were going to  be able to do that? Yeah, that's a good question. Indeed, if you would have told me four years ago  that I would be involved in a lavender company, I would have probably laughed. But indeed,  
**[0:31:47-0:31:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:31:47):**  yeah, it was exciting. Of course, we had a lot of challenges in the beginning, right,  because this was a new crop. And we're also doing it organic. And none of the farmers have been  before. So to transition from a conventional to an organic system is quite a challenge because  
**[0:32:05-0:32:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:32:05):**  there's a lot of things that you actually need to have in place to make an organic system resilient,  such as cover crops and things like that. And all of these were new to the farmers that we  were working with. Plus, it was a new crop. So some of the plants that we planted died,  
**[0:32:25-0:32:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:32:25):**  then we had an outbreak of a pest on one of the farms where none of the experts that we spoke  with in the industry or in South Africa had ever seen this particular pest attacking rosemary  plants, but it did. So that was a massive setback. But in the end, we actually managed to get quite  
**[0:32:48-0:32:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:32:48):**  an okay harvest and indeed to process it into oil. So the processing facility is now almost  finished, but we managed to improvise something in the meantime while it was not finished yet.  So a lot of it is just like on the spot improvisation. And that is also something  
**[0:33:10-0:33:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:33:10):**  which the farmers are really good at. So they actually took complete lead on this process.  And yeah, it's just really nice to have the first oil. And now people are also starting to think  about what they can make with the oil. And because of course, you can make soap or shampoo or like  
**[0:33:31-0:33:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:33:31):**  air spray or whatever. So we're starting to experiment a little bit with that. And yeah,  I guess it was a massive inspiration for the entire project to be able to produce this first  oil because it's actually giving us hope that this can actually work, even though we have still a lot  
**[0:33:53-0:34:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:33:53):**  to learn. Yeah. Yeah, we believe the answer lie in looking for the correct crop in the correct  environment, you know, and a lot of people would say, no, well stick to the mace, stick to the  stick to the to the goat stick, be no David the familiar with it and use something straightforward.  
**[0:34:12-0:34:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:34:12):**  And then we also try to process it. You know, well, why would you process it? And I think  everybody is also looking, you know, the bigger the bigger the scale, the more profit you make,  whereas actually, a lot of the lot of the products that come out of the land, you can process them  
**[0:34:29-0:34:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:34:29):**  on a very small scale quite efficiently. And especially in Africa, where production, sorry,  transportation costs are so high. Processing things locally really, really adds up. In addition,  you know, all the produce in Zambia, the prices are so high. So, but it's on all these different  
**[0:34:51-0:34:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:34:51):**  things, you know, we work with farmers in Africa, we involve them. We work with large groups and on  every of these topics, you have to convince everybody and nobody, you know, agrees. So  wherever you come, it's it's it's a lot of explaining and with new partners, you know,  
**[0:35:10-0:35:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:35:10):**  we try to involve everybody, we try to bring everybody together. And that means to communicate  that throughout all the different stakeholders and partners that's that often requires a lot of work  and some restless sleeps in during the night. Yeah, I can imagine. Yeah, but I think maybe if  
**[0:35:33-0:35:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:35:33):**  I can add something positive also on the result of following that strategy is, for instance, now I  already told you that we're in a very hectic drought in South Africa. The farmers in the  Bavianskove are saying that they've never experienced something like this before. But with  
**[0:35:50-0:35:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:35:50):**  the new system that we've introduced, they are actually using more than 10,000 different  methods. They are actually using more than 10 times less water than they did before. And some  of the farmers even say that they think that if they would have been in their old system still,  
**[0:36:07-0:36:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:36:07):**  they would not have been able to continue running their farm. But because the crops we established  are really drought tolerant, it actually works for them. So I think it actually shows that there's  a lot of work in choosing the right crops which are suitable for the environment. Yeah, no,  
**[0:36:27-0:36:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:36:27):**  definitely. I think it came at the right time for some or hopefully many of these farmers.  And when you look at because you mentioned at the beginning, these processing companies or the local  processing companies could be interesting or are interesting actually to impact investors. How are  
**[0:36:46-0:36:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:36:46):**  you looking at that? And what stage do you think these companies become interesting for impact  investors and how should they get involved in this process? Well, actually, you see that now  I'm generalizing, but there's a lot of processing capacity lacking throughout maybe entire Africa,  
**[0:37:10-0:37:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:37:10):**  but especially Sub Sahara Africa, everything is imported, as said before. So there's a huge  potential for that. I think, and we believe that what you should do and what our approach is,  is to try and start as quick as possible and try to start as a small scale. And from there on,  
**[0:37:35-0:37:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:37:35):**  learn your lessons, quickly adapt to situations and scale from up there. So even though the best  business cases on paper are to build up a bit processing facility, things are not as easy as  they may seem, especially not in these areas. It's hard to make sure you get a constant supply  
**[0:37:54-0:38:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:37:54):**  of inputs through your processing line and to get it to the market. However, if you want you,  you can prove you got something and you got something running and people see it, farmers  see it and experience it, then you have a totally new vibe of things. And then, you know, once it  
**[0:38:14-0:38:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:38:14):**  starts working, everybody, more and more people want to join. And it's, if you want to have an  impact in Africa, you can, and you do the processing, you can compensate farms or give  them good prices for crops they grow in a sustainable way. And that link, I think, is crucial  
**[0:38:33-0:38:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:38:33):**  because now a lot of the inefficiencies are in that value chain. And by taking control of that  value chain, as an impact investor, you can really have an impact on the farmers themselves. And I  think what we are doing is, you know, we see the cultivation side and the processing side as almost  
**[0:38:54-0:39:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:38:54):**  as one organization. On paper, they might be apart, but if you can connect those two links,  your impact is huge. You know, the farmers know they have a market and the thing is about getting  the risk out of the farming system. And by getting farmers a good price and lowering the risk, they,  
**[0:39:15-0:39:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:39:15):**  for the first time, are enabled to make long-term decisions. And we believe that the regenerative  agriculture is all about long-term. And the short-term vision that sometimes farmers are  forced to have, that is where a lot goes wrong. So if you want to have both an impact and a good  
**[0:39:37-0:39:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:39:37):**  financial return, because if you look to the value chain, a lot of the value is created within that  processing, I think processing offers a huge opportunity to both financial returns and impact  returns. I don't think there's a better way to end this interview than with that statement. I'm  
**[0:39:57-0:40:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:39:57):**  very thankful for sharing this knowledge. I think it's very interesting to see almost an emerging  structure, a structure of seeing which business cases come out and being very  lean and looking at minimum viable products and modular, which we always do, of course,  
**[0:40:17-0:40:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:40:17):**  in software, but seeing that into the old field of agriculture, it makes it very interesting. And I  think it's the only way of seeing if something sticks and expanding on that instead of a very  strict plan, 10-year plans, we're going to do this, this and this, because at the end,  
**[0:40:34-0:40:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:40:34):**  nature always comes and, for instance, does climate change and they all new year together.  So thank you both for your time here. And I'm pretty sure this is not the last time we'll be  checking in with your progress and your processes. A lot of good luck in the next months and  
**[0:40:51-0:40:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:40:51):**  hopefully there will be many more products you didn't expect coming out of these processes,  but that provide a good return to the farmers and restore a lot of land.  Yeah, thank you very much, Koen. It's nice to talk to you. Thanks a lot.  
**[0:41:07-0:41:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:41:07):**  You just listened to an interview with Gijsboers and Teklatoenus of Grounded. We talked about the  huge opportunity of local processing and what it can mean for the regenerative agriculture movement,  especially in Southern Africa. I hope you enjoyed it and come back soon for more of these  
**[0:41:21-0:41:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:41:21):**  conversations. If you found the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast valuable,  there are a few simple ways you can use to support it. Number one, rate and review the  podcast on your podcast app. That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it  
**[0:41:36-0:41:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:41:36):**  only takes a few seconds. Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your  friends and colleagues. Number three, if this podcast is useful for you, please share it with  your friends. Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means,  
**[0:41:50-0:41:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:41:50):**  please join my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or in the  description below. Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  
**[0:42:04-0:42:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:42:04):**  Hey, dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video  course investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it. Why are we doing this course?  
**[0:42:27-0:42:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:42:27):**  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to put money to work  in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011 and recording these podcasts since  2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned. What have we seen in the space over the  
**[0:42:43-0:42:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:42:43):**  last years? How have we built our decision-making framework? What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees? And what questions should you ask? What is happening in the space?  What should you read? What should you listen? What should you watch? How to approach this space?  
**[0:43:00-0:43:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:43:00):**  For whom is this course? You, the soil builders and investors in the space, the soil builders,  people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers, vehicle builders,  crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food companies, permaculture,  
**[0:43:15-0:43:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:43:15):**  key line designers, holistic management consultants, etc. People that are building  soil at scale and the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family  office or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  
**[0:43:29-0:43:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:43:29):**  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc. Is this course free? No. This is  pay what you think it's worth, meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to  you and I'm very aware that among the listeners of this podcast we have people with very different  
**[0:43:47-0:43:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:43:47):**  means. So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means,  to consider paying what you think it's worth. Thank you. So what is this course? It's currently  a series of 17 videos mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus pdf slides so you don't have to  
**[0:44:05-0:44:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:44:05):**  ride along. We're gonna look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive  agriculture is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build,  what to invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could  
**[0:44:21-0:44:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:44:21):**  find if you're a soil builder. Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share  what kind of reports, what kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you  want to dig deeper. We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more. So what  
**[0:44:37-0:44:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:44:37):**  is it not? It's not a list of investable deals. Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution. It's also not  investment advice. Before making any investment please find professional investment advice. So  
**[0:44:53-0:44:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/04/29/thekla-teunis-gijs-boers/#t=0:44:53):**  get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking. Click on the link below,  sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  