### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2019-00-02)
**[0:00:00-0:00:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:00:00):**  You're listening to the summary of the interview. For a link to the full-length episode, please check the description below.  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture – Investing as if the Planet Mattered,  a podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities and ecosystems,  while making an appropriate and fair return.  
**[0:00:27-0:00:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:00:27):**  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration? Because so many of the pressing issues we face today  have their roots in how we treat our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we, as investors, big and small, and consumers,  start paying much more attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  Before we get started, I've been recording these interviews next to my day job,  
**[0:00:49-0:00:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:00:49):**  and I will definitely continue to do so and release about an episode a month.  But at the same time, I would love to take this further, share more interviews,  there are many more stories to share on investing in regenerative food and agriculture.  More depth, improve the quality, maybe even doing some video series.  So I started a Patreon community, which makes it easy to support creators like myself.  
**[0:01:11-0:01:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:01:11):**  If these podcasts have been of value to you, and if you have the means,  I invite you to support me and make this happen.  For more information, please find a link to my Patreon account in the description below.  And now, without further ado, the interview. Enjoy!  I'm here today with Paul McMahon, co-founder and managing partner of SLM Partners,  
**[0:01:32-0:01:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:01:32):**  an asset manager that acquires and manages rural land on behalf of institutional investors  to scale up regenerative ecological farming and forestry systems.  He's also the writer of a white paper called The Investment Case for Ecological Farming.  I think we see land at the centre of a number of overlapping and increasing important environmental issues.  For example, climate change, land is going to be a huge role as a carbon sink  
**[0:02:04-0:02:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:02:04):**  as we try and get greenhouse gas emissions out of the atmosphere,  whether that's in soil, whether that's in trees or biomass on the land.  But terrestrial carbon we think has got a huge future of the next 50 to 100 years.  We think those systems are proven on a small scale, and there's some fantastic case studies out there.  Often driven just by innovative farmers, not necessarily coming out of academia or research institutes,  
**[0:02:30-0:02:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:02:30):**  but by really innovative farmers trying out new ideas and creating things from the ground up.  So they're proven at a small scale, but they need to be scaled up.  And that's what we think investment capital can play a role.  I think there's two things changing at the moment.  What we're seeing is that those, let's say what were previously externalities,  
**[0:02:50-0:02:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:02:50):**  which people got away with for free, are increasingly being priced and regulated.  And so actually farmers and land managers are being forced by policy and regulation  to actually take into account the impacts they're having on carbon, on water, on soils and biodiversity.  I think a second, and maybe even a more powerful driver, a more immediate driver,  is shifting consumer demands and consumer trends.  
**[0:03:19-0:03:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:03:19):**  Farming is the ultimate biological business.  It's the fundamental business of farming is taking sunlight, energy, combining with water  and the properties and minerals of the soils to grow things.  Organic coffee systems, which are able to out-produce in terms of yield actually,  conventional coffee systems during droughts.  
**[0:03:45-0:03:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:03:45):**  There's been a number of case studies in 2012 in the US where that was the case with corn production.  There's also diversity. I think you find that those more ecological farms tend to be growing a broader mix of crops  or raising a broader mix of animals.  So you're getting some resilience just from diversity, which really reflects and mimics nature.  We founded SM Partners in 2009 and our vision is building an asset management firm  
**[0:04:14-0:04:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:04:14):**  that wholly focuses on sustainable regenerative agriculture and forestry.  So we take a real assets approach.  So we're in most cases looking to acquire land or invest in land as a primary asset  and then look to really accelerate the shift in management from, let's say,  more conventional unsustainable practices to more sustainable regenerative practices.  
**[0:04:38-0:04:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:04:38):**  What we've done so far, we've raised an Australian Beef Cattle Fund in 2012.  We have about 100 million Australian dollars in equity and debt in that structure in Australia.  But we're raising an Irish Forestry Fund at the moment.  The idea there is we're looking to acquire existing mid-rotation commercial forests in Ireland.  We want to transform where possible to a more sustainable type of forest management called continuous cover forestry,  
**[0:05:04-0:05:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:05:04):**  where you never clear the forest, you maintain forest cover, you selectively harvest,  you get a more natural, diverse forest.  I mean, that's the other key thing.  You know, there's lots of people running around, former bankers with presentations and spreadsheets,  and that's kind of easy to do, but the hard part is actually making it happen on the ground.  
**[0:05:25-0:05:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:05:25):**  And for that, you need great technical people, great operational managers,  people who've got dirt under fingernails and really have done this work.  A huge amount of education has to be done just to get people comfortable with the dynamic of the sector.  But actually the third thing that's happening on the investment side is,  you know, if you look at where money flowed into agriculture over the last five to ten years,  
**[0:05:45-0:05:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:05:45):**  it mostly went into quite passive buying and lease strategies.  But that's started to run out of steam now because land prices are actually coming down,  they're correcting, cash rents are coming down.  It's a pretty tough time actually in conventional agriculture,  if you're making money, and at the same time, you look at what's happening in organic space,  
**[0:06:02-0:06:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:06:02):**  in these more, let's say, consumer-friendly markets.  That's where all the growth is, that's where premiums are available,  that's where people are still making good money.  What for you is the number one overlooked risk there?  Well, I think it depends on your timeframe.  
**[0:06:19-0:06:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:06:19):**  I think if you look over a very long timeframe, I think the degradation of the market,  over a very long timeframe, I think the degradation of natural assets,  in particular soil degradation, I think it's a huge issue for humankind over the next century.  It's one of these slow-run problems that you can ignore,  especially if you're in a very fertile area with very deep, top soils.  
**[0:06:45-0:06:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:06:45):**  But eventually it will come back to bite you.  I think though in the immediate term, the bigger risk of the more conventional systems  is the changing consumer.  The consumer, whether you agree or disagree, wants something different from what conventional ag is selling.  What are the two most important barriers you see for the sector to reach its potential?  
**[0:07:06-0:07:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:07:06):**  I think that's probably the biggest challenge still,  just to be able to show evidence and data that this can be done at a scale.  I think the second is just a more general one for the sector,  in that just agriculture of any type is still unfamiliar territory for most investors.  It tends to be capital intensive, the returns are lower,  
**[0:07:27-0:07:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:07:27):**  you're not going to get your VC, private equity, 20-25% net IRRs, it's just not possible.  But at the same time you've got downside protection because you have real assets,  you have land, you have biological assets.  What are the barriers you see for the sector to reach its potential?  When you look at the barrier of scaling the few pioneers or the pioneers with a few hundred  
**[0:07:50-0:07:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:07:50):**  or a few thousand hectares to a fund like S&M, like you're managing now,  how did you overcome that barrier to investors?  We took investors to farms in Australia using the same ideas, having done it with great success.  So they could see it in their own eyes, yeah, this has been done on let's say 10,000, 20,000 acres,  so there's no reason it can't be done on 100,000 or 500,000 acres.  
**[0:08:15-0:08:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:08:15):**  What is the future of investment in agriculture?  If you look at our philosophy is around rural land and harnessing sunlight, water and soils to grow things.  What is the future of investment in agriculture?  It's interesting, financial investors like to think in asset classes,  but nature doesn't think that way, you know, the boundaries of fluid and everything is interlinked.  
**[0:08:42-0:08:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:08:42):**  So we actually, we can see a time in the future where we may even try and combine some agriculture and forestry strategies together.  What advice would you give to smart investors who want to get into the regenerative agriculture space?  If you could give advice to smart investors that want to get into the regenerative agriculture space,  what would be your number one advice?  Only invest with teams who have real farmers on board, you know, it's too easy to come up and sell a concept,  
**[0:09:12-0:09:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:09:12):**  but farming is actually really hard, it's actually hard managing a fund for example.  So unless you've got people on a team who've actually done this and have made mistakes and have the scars to show it, then I'd be a little bit wary.  What advice would you give to smart investors who want to get into the regenerative agriculture space?  Just listen to the summary of the interview. For the full length interview, please find the link in the description below.  If you found the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast valuable, there are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  
**[0:09:43-0:09:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:09:43):**  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please join my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or in the description below.  
**[0:10:11-0:10:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2016/12/26/paul-mcmahon/#t=0:10:11):**  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  