### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2017-14-18)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  Welcome to another episode of investing in regenerative agriculture, investing as if  the planet mattered.  
**[0:00:21-0:00:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:00:21):**  Podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  
**[0:00:42-0:00:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:00:42):**  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  Before we get started, I've been recording these interviews next to my day job and I  will definitely continue to do so and release about an episode a month.  
**[0:01:02-0:01:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:01:02):**  But at the same time I would love to take this further, share more interviews, there  are many more stories to share on investing in regenerative food and agriculture.  More depth, improve the quality, maybe even doing some video series.  So I started a Patreon community which makes it easy to support creators like myself.  If these podcasts have been of value to you and if you have the means, I invite you to  
**[0:01:24-0:01:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:01:24):**  support me and make this happen.  For more information please find the link to my Patreon account in the description below.  And now, without further ado, the interview.  Enjoy!  Welcome to investing in regenerative agriculture, agriculture as if the planet mattered.  
**[0:01:40-0:01:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:01:40):**  In these interviews I am talking to people who are scaling up the sector, either by increasing  the influx of capital or by working underground to scale up the enterprises underground.  Why regenerative agriculture?  Because so many of the world current issues come together in this subject.  From drought to water scarcity, climate change, social issues, hunger, obesity all have a  
**[0:02:01-0:02:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:02:01):**  connection to how we grow food and what we eat.  You're going to listen to an interview with Thomas Vassen of Landmap.  I'm a small angel investor in their company.  They're working on land right documentation for rural communities.  Because to really unlock economic development you need property rights.  
**[0:02:19-0:02:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:02:19):**  And what do farmers have?  Land.  But no farmer will ever invest in something regenerative or even sustainable if they don't  have their land rights and thus a long-term perspective.  So this could unlock a lot of potential development for the five to six hundred million smallholder  
**[0:02:34-0:02:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:02:34):**  farmers we have in this world.  And we depend on them for a lot.  For our daily coffee, chocolate and tea.  Just to give a few examples.  So welcome to investing in regenerative agriculture.  
**[0:02:45-0:02:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:02:45):**  Agriculture as if the planet mattered.  I'm Koen van Zeyen, the host of today.  In the podcast today I'm talking to Thomas Vassen, co-founder and CTO of Landmap, a startup  out of Amsterdam, the Netherlands, delivering affordable land rights documentation to rural  communities.  
**[0:02:58-0:02:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:02:58):**  Welcome Thomas.  Hello Koen.  So to dive in with a personal question.  Why are you doing what you're doing after a comfortable, not really comfortable, but  a startup life in Amsterdam, why did you decide to work with rural communities and land rights?  
**[0:03:14-0:03:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:03:14):**  Yeah, I got caught with a certain virus, I guess.  And then it's hard to not do it.  Yeah, I think after working in the social enterprise sector for about seven years, I  put a lot of thought in what I really believe that kind of unlocks value creation, unlocks  economic development.  
**[0:03:39-0:03:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:03:39):**  And at some point I had an insight around property rights, that those are really essential  for building an economy.  And once I started seeing that, looking into how does the bottom billion of this planet  actually arrange their property rights.  And Andres Soto, a Peruvian economist, wrote a lot about that.  
**[0:03:59-0:04:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:03:59):**  And seeing that they have a big asset, which is land.  So that's why I got caught in the sense of looking into land rights and understanding  there's a whole range of research and people actually working on that.  So it was a process and slowly that developed into an idea of a company, a business that  provides that land rights documentation through a business model, which was kind of new.  
**[0:04:25-0:04:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:04:25):**  And also in the process I met, I had dinner with a friend and also a colleague at the  Impact Hub who had been working also alongside for about five years in a global team.  And I think he was also ready to make a move.  So I think just things started to catch fire at some point.  And that's how it got started.  
**[0:04:43-0:04:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:04:43):**  And when you look at unlocking land rights, you ended up in Ghana with cocoa farmers.  Can you describe the steps and the process that made you end up there instead of basically  any other place where the bottom billion is trying to secure their property rights?  Yeah, you know how that goes.  You can explain it in a very rational way, but it's not, that's only when you look back.  
**[0:05:13-0:05:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:05:13):**  So initially we just wanted to have trials and tests in various countries.  And we did do a pilot in Albania with an NGO on farmers whose land was actually taken from  them in the communist time.  And then it had to be redistributed.  So it was an interesting experience.  
**[0:05:32-0:05:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:05:32):**  Also in Indonesia we found an interesting party that sources cocoa beans from farmers  in Sumatra, was willing to work with us.  And we met about 200.  And in Ghana the story was that we initially started speaking with all the experts in the  field.  
**[0:05:52-0:05:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:05:52):**  And then several people also mentioned to us, you've got to speak with a guy at Omidyar,  Omidyar Network, who is basically the only big Impact VC that focuses particularly on  this topic.  So we were quite eager to speak.  And after a couple of calls and meetings, it was like, yeah, you should speak with these  
**[0:06:11-0:06:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:06:11):**  guys in Ghana because they've tried this before in another constellation of people.  And it actually stopped, but not due to market conditions.  So we had a call with one of these Canadians who had been doing this basically.  And slowly we came to Ghana, spoke more, and slowly explored the market as if like any  of the other markets that we were exploring, because we were also looking into, I think  
**[0:06:40-0:06:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:06:40):**  at that point, Uganda, Ethiopia, Kenya.  But for certain reasons Ghana made a lot of sense.  I mean, the language is good, it's English.  The culture is very open to foreign, I think foreign kind of involvement, and it's safe.  It's been tried and tested there.  
**[0:07:06-0:07:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:07:06):**  But also there's been like 15 years of land reform pushed from the World Bank top down  and they didn't deliver the results they wanted, but it did create some kind of political willingness,  basically, and it's kind of some framework.  I think we've seen that as well in Indonesia, that it's good that there's been like a decade  of top down land reform pushed, that at least kind of makes people aware of the situation,  
**[0:07:35-0:07:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:07:35):**  of the challenge.  And we take it much more bottom up.  But the policies are kind of somewhat more ready for our work to be done.  Yeah, and so the rest is more serendipitous.  I mean, we've met the people there, slowly met survey, a land lawyer and various experts.  
**[0:07:56-0:08:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:07:56):**  And then at some point it just seemed to be the best opportunity to take, to really take  it forward.  Because in none of these countries we could do this ourselves, right?  We're not the ones that can negotiate with chiefs one on one as a white guy.  We're not the ones that know how to operate and navigate the surveying sector and the  
**[0:08:18-0:08:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:08:18):**  political sector, etc, etc.  So the fact that we could bring on these Canadians slowly, step by step, was also a key reason.  And if you look at the process now, compared to maybe when you started, can you walk us  through the steps of what actually happens on the ground when you're surveying and unlocking  this value and how much of the process has changed compared to the trial you did and  
**[0:08:47-0:08:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:08:47):**  actually how you're running it today?  Yeah, it's a nice one.  So initially, I mean, first we had the idea that was more like people actually could themselves  map their land using a smartphone.  And then they would actually crowd validate that, meaning the crowd, meaning their neighbors  
**[0:09:07-0:09:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:09:07):**  and previous occupants, etc. would get like a notification like, hey, Mr Kwame has a,  has mapped his land and attests that this is his.  And could you verify that?  Could you verify his boundaries and his ownership type, etc.  And then if sufficient people like support it and there's no counterclaims, you could  
**[0:09:31-0:09:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:09:31):**  like more, the likelihood that it's actually yours could rise and at some point could be  sufficient for third parties and banks to then distribute loans or credit based on that.  And slowly it becomes like a very like independent repository of land claims that totally circumvent  the existing government characteristics.  That was like the dream and idea in the beginning.  
**[0:09:59-0:10:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:09:59):**  And we've asked, we tested it, but it's like the farmers weren't willing to pay anything  for that.  They were like, yeah, but the chief or the government doesn't authorize or sign it and  now it's useless.  So it's so an ingrained system that they're used to like when certain authority signs  
**[0:10:17-0:10:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:10:17):**  it then it's real and all the other stuff is, you know, doesn't have value to them.  So we'd have to kind of let go of that one.  And then in the tests it was more like mapping.  So you have a GPS device, they have like three meter accuracy.  We built a form, like you walk around the parcel and then ask a bunch more questions,  
**[0:10:42-0:10:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:10:42):**  make some photographs, fingerprints.  And we did that.  And that is initially, and we did initially, in the pilot that is sufficient for like knowing  the parcel size roughly, which is interesting for all the commodity buyers, for example,  and for certification purposes, for technical assistance, for various reasons that's useful  
**[0:11:03-0:11:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:11:03):**  because most farmers don't know the size or they over underestimated significantly.  Yeah, you could put it on a map, right?  For the data it's useful, but it's not sufficient for surveying.  I mean, what you will see if you look on a map for those kinds of parcels and some commodity  buyers have done this themselves for thousands of parcels, you know, it's not survey or great.  
**[0:11:26-0:11:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:11:26):**  Accuracies are not good enough.  You see slight slivers and overlaps, which is not allowed basically for surveying.  The data quality integrity is not good enough.  So what we end up with now is quite a sophisticated, integrated kind of hardware, software and  data management solution.  
**[0:11:47-0:11:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:11:47):**  Of course, you have to look for quite cheaper alternatives to the GPS devices.  You know, the survey agreed that devices are 10,000 euros and up, so we had to really work  with kind of novel devices and kind of hack them a bit and develop software.  We can have now devices about 700 euros and they're linked to an Android tablet that we  have and so the mapping is much more sophisticated.  
**[0:12:14-0:12:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:12:14):**  There's also pillaring of the different corners of the field.  Takes a bit longer and then the interview we do with the farmer takes also about 40  minutes in the village where we have our interviewers write a whole lengthy testimony of how the  parcel was acquired and about 200 questions about the legalities of it.  There's a witness walking around with the farmer in the parcel to also check whether  
**[0:12:41-0:12:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:12:41):**  the boundaries are correct.  There's a lot of bio data and household data that we collect in addition, which we could  also use for other purposes.  Yeah, there's like a thousand things more that we found out and have kind of implemented  over the months.  
**[0:12:58-0:13:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:12:58):**  Let's say the farmer is ill or very old and there's a representative and there's a whole  process with the power of attorney to go through, for example.  So once it becomes legal, that's a bit my point.  Once it becomes legal and technical, it's like there's a lot of nitty-gritty details  that we have to take care of that if ever the document ends up in court and there's  
**[0:13:19-0:13:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:13:19):**  landmine on it that we can show the whole audit trail, like all the stuff we've taken  to assure that the data is correct.  So that also continues after the data has been collected.  It's being sent to our servers and then in the office in Accra, in the capital of Ghana,  then there's the data coordinators who actually check through all that data and verify it.  
**[0:13:41-0:13:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:13:41):**  The office has to go back to the field for checks and also clean it and make sure it's  presentable from simple things like spell checks to very important things like cross-referencing  the claims, like you have leasehold or freehold claims to the land and that depends on your  ethnicity.  Those things all have to be verified.  
**[0:14:03-0:14:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:14:03):**  So through that, yeah, and after that there's a whole process of having it signed so there's  about seven or eight signatures being appended by various authorities and that's also like  a whole logistical chain basically before it can be sent back to the farmer.  So I think that's a long story.  The short one is more like, yeah, initially the idea is that like have farmers themselves  
**[0:14:26-0:14:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:14:26):**  map it through a phone and then pivoting more towards like kind of more simple mapping solution  that any representative in the field could use, like maybe a commodity buyer have a lot  of officers in the field, they could then map the land, we could give them a commission  and collect the data in that way to finding out that that is not going to cut it in terms  of data quality integrity.  
**[0:14:47-0:14:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:14:47):**  So we have built our own team, we have built our own software and hardware solution, we  have our own trainings and our team goes out and it's like a whole professional kind of  chain of activity that goes through hundreds of steps from farmer field to office back  to farmer that we are now kind of running.  And that's been a trial and error process.  
**[0:15:17-0:15:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:15:17):**  And so when we talk about unlocking, how does this in your vision of the future, maybe not  at the moment, like at this moment now, but in the near future and the longer term future,  how does this unlock value for the smallholder farmers?  Yeah, so in two ways.  I mean, one of them is that these are like this formal sector, people are not documented.  
**[0:15:41-0:15:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:15:41):**  They might not even remember their birthday.  Right.  So the only way to access them is either to visit them in person and create some kind  of profile that you know, who are you?  What is your life?  
**[0:15:55-0:15:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:15:55):**  What does your life consist of?  What is your productive capacity?  And what are your ambitions to expand your parcel, for example, replant your cocoa trees  in this case, add fertilizers.  There's a lot of technical systems and inputs are actually are available, but they don't  
**[0:16:14-0:16:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:16:14):**  reach these particular farmers often.  So that's the first step, like by documenting.  Because they're literally not on the map.  Yeah, they're not on the map.  And yeah, they're illiterate and they might not have a phone number yet.  
**[0:16:26-0:16:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:16:26):**  So just by collecting all the data and presenting, so next to the whole legal contract, you also  get a profile about their farm and about their households.  They get that in print and we keep that in digital storage.  And actually, if you talk with service providers, financial service providers, technical service  providers, micro insurance, and others, that's what they're mostly interested in, in data  
**[0:16:54-0:16:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:16:54):**  about these people at certain scale, but also with a certain quality that you can really  trust it.  And so what we've seen so far is that there is quite some data about farmers, but it's  you know, it's quite, it's old, it's not maintained, and it's often incorrect.  It's not verified, it's not double checked.  
**[0:17:13-0:17:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:17:13):**  So it's often incorrect and the farmers are sometimes getting a bit fed up about all these  questionnaires and they just give random answers.  So that's the first thing I think that is needed.  The second step is more that, yeah, once they have the document that can be considered collateral,  not in the fact that these parties would take over the land if a farmer maybe defaults,  
**[0:17:36-0:17:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:17:36):**  or they could, but it's more a proxy or an indication that somebody has an asset and  has been going through a lot of effort to actually register and secure it.  That means something, that means that they value it, that probably means that it's productive,  probably means that they can have a certain repayment capacity.  So that's the second big step.  
**[0:17:58-0:18:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:17:58):**  And then the third one is more really connectivity and something we haven't done yet, but what  we're going to pilot in the next few months is actually connecting them to mobile money  providers, actually signing them up for mobile money while we do the interview.  So that's from that point onwards, we have a payment relationship, which is ongoing.  We could have additional contact through SMS or IVR processes where you have some option  
**[0:18:24-0:18:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:18:24):**  to maintain an ongoing communication, which can also be very valuable.  And I think at that point through those steps, you can unlock additional services and through  that make the farmer and the farm more worthy of investment, ready for investment, and through  that improve the likelihoods.  And when you look at, I know it has been, I mean, you're working in a startup, so it's  
**[0:18:51-0:18:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:18:51):**  been every day is new and different, etc.  But when you look at the last year, I know a lot has happened.  Can you walk us through a bit what you've been busy with from like, if you look at a  year ago, which is March 2016, what has changed?  And also, if you look maybe ahead a year from now, what do you think will be different and  
**[0:19:15-0:19:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:19:15):**  will be different for LandMap?  Yeah, a lot, a lot, a lot.  Last year, I think, yeah, about 15 months ago, my wife and I decided that we should  live in Ghana for a year.  So that was a big step.  
**[0:19:30-0:19:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:19:30):**  And I think it's been a very interesting year in that regard to really live there.  And then about this week, a year ago, we did the first sales.  So we found somebody in the field in Ghana that has been working for what is called a  customer land secretariat, basically kind of a small office for a certain chief to organize  the land disputes and land documents in that area.  
**[0:20:00-0:20:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:20:00):**  And so he was willing to come on board.  And we asked him to compose a team of mappers and interviewers.  And then, yeah, so a year ago, we started actually selling and I built certain forms.  And we just started collecting the data, collecting down payments.  So farmers pay about 20% of the document to pay in down payments, let's say 20 euros.  
**[0:20:27-0:20:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:20:27):**  And actually, the funny thing was the first week, we did like amazing sales.  It was crazy.  Like 75 documents we sold, I think, in the first week.  So we're like, wow, and readjusting our forecast, like this is going to go insane.  And then three weeks after that, we sold just the same amount as the first week.  
**[0:20:46-0:20:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:20:46):**  So it's just like a lucky hit, funny enough.  But soon enough, I started moving there and just building the company, which if you've  experienced it, I think, in the African markets, anything that takes like five minutes here,  it takes a whole day there, from opening a bank account to paying a salary to buying  a car and all that kind of stuff.  
**[0:21:10-0:21:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:21:10):**  So it's very operational.  But the product development has been a lot of work.  Just getting the details right, because it's legal, it's getting the details right and  different for each chieftaincy and building relationships was also quite key.  So I think I've been very lucky to be able to work with these kind of experienced, couple  
**[0:21:29-0:21:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:21:29):**  of experienced Canadians.  Yeah, I think from being from that point onwards, things start to become real.  And so at some point, I think, yeah, by the end of the year, we had a team of about 30  people, three offices, you know, a couple of cars, eight motorcycles, and a lot of capital  expenditure has been made, a lot of training, a lot of devices, GPS, tablets, and several  
**[0:21:57-0:22:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:21:57):**  thousand parcels mapped.  So in a way, that's been like a bit of a roller coaster.  But it also came with all these challenges, like we had several, several accidents happen.  We had, you know, all kinds of issues in the team and employment issues.  We had, you know, all the stuff from like power failures all the time, elections coming  
**[0:22:25-0:22:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:22:25):**  up where we didn't, weren't able to work for a week.  Yeah, basically things breaking down all the time and spending half my day on just getting  it to work before I even had time to actually build more stuff on top of it.  Yeah, so it's always hard to give like a real sense of what it's like.  I mean, I was like in the field every two weeks, meeting with the field team, spending  
**[0:22:49-0:22:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:22:49):**  a couple of nights there, doing some upgrades to the systems, discussing the issues that  came up with the customers.  And then again, back to the office and building the data systems.  And yeah, it's I think one of the interesting things is really through this process by reselling  something is really understanding the customary land system, which is quite different than  
**[0:23:12-0:23:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:23:12):**  if you investigated or research it or even doing that.  I don't know if in the project, kind of by selling something, we had to negotiate with  the chiefs.  We had to sit down with a bunch of chiefs and negotiate on the farmer's behalf on the  signing fees, for example, or on the fact if we could even allow to work in that area.  
**[0:23:30-0:23:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:23:30):**  And then you really get to understand the way it works and the way they operate and  think and behave, et cetera.  And that was really interesting to see that from so close that this has been like a kind  of, you know, it's quite archaic model and it's, you know, it worked for maybe a couple  of hundred years and, you know, it's still in place.  
**[0:23:51-0:23:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:23:51):**  It's still the most influential, powerful system in the whole rural Africa, basically  through customary authority.  So and next to that, the fact how, you know, how farmers think and behave and how far removed  that is from our Western way of thinking, how to make decisions.  And there are customers, so it's like, it's to kind of empathize and really understand  
**[0:24:14-0:24:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:24:14):**  not to be nice and cute, but just to try and sell more and to really understand their realities  and the seasonality, the patterns that they have to deal with and how they deal with money,  how they deal with value, how they deal with family relationships and all that stuff.  So it's been like a crash course basically in that regard.  And I think that's been the most valuable components to some extent.  
**[0:24:39-0:24:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:24:39):**  Whether we're going to make it really successful is, will be dependent on, I think, that capacity  to continuously integrate its rate on the learning from the field and not to be rigid  and you know, to really be super flexible and kind of continuously being adapted in  the field and from our customers.  So yeah, and then by the end of the year, we started delivering our first documents  
**[0:25:03-0:25:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:25:03):**  and of course, like a huge moment to really feel that we've now secured the land tenure  for some of these people.  And it really works because of course, most experts have said that it totally won't work.  So in that regard, it's been a breakthrough, I think, to really make it work.  And now it's more to make it work at a certain scale and make it work also profitably, which  
**[0:25:28-0:25:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:25:28):**  is the next step.  And is that what you will be working on?  I mean, if we look, if we talk again a year from now, what do you hope you have achieved?  Is that the scalability, different countries, different type of documents?  Or is it really focused on the farm seal scale up like in Ghana as you're doing now?  
**[0:25:54-0:26:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:25:54):**  Yeah, so I think it's, for us, is to make the whole product work.  You have this way of thinking about product development while you start with the barebones,  just only the product itself, the core value that you're promising to the customer and  making that work.  And I think that this year is more about the total product approach, which is the product  
**[0:26:18-0:26:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:26:18):**  in its context, let's say the way you distribute it, the way you market it, the way you integrate  it with other services.  All the additional ways to kind of to make it flow, to make it work.  So we have to improve our payment collections and spread it out over a certain period so  that it aligns with the cash flows of the farmers.  
**[0:26:40-0:26:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:26:40):**  We have to also, we're also building signature digitization options for cheaps and give them  a tablet so they can review documents digitally and sign, which saves a lot of time.  We are building like these SMS solutions that farmers get messages when a document is ready  and these kinds of things.  And of course, also maps and data solutions for all the additional stakeholders that they  
**[0:27:04-0:27:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:27:04):**  can actually view and see what's going on in that field and might be willing to pay  for that.  So there's a whole like kind of approach, everything around the core product that we  are working on to make sure that it's going to be even more accessible, more affordable  and more scalable.  
**[0:27:22-0:27:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:27:22):**  I think that's going to definitely take a lot of our time.  And then yeah, the second product for residential parcels, we're going to launch it in a couple  of months as well.  So that's like homeowners, people with houses, they also want to secure that land that we're  going to come to launch.  
**[0:27:42-0:27:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:27:42):**  It's a different, you know, it's more peri-urban and urban, so it's a different environment.  In certain ways, it's easier in certain ways, there's also more competition.  And so let's see how that goes.  I think that's for now.  And then the third thing is that yeah, there's a lot of opportunity for using this data in  
**[0:28:01-0:28:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:28:01):**  a lot of other ways, I think, as we touched on, but particularly for credit provision,  financial services, that's the most straightforward option.  So we're speaking with a couple of MFIs and rural banks to collaborate.  And once we visit the villages and work with these farmers, what data do we need to collect  to build a simple credit profile and also have them access financial services.  
**[0:28:27-0:28:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:28:27):**  And when you look at this agriculture revolution that is happening in many parts of the world  where farmers are, if they have the resources, of course, looking much more long term, trying  to decrease their inputs, trying to get to certain certification, become more sustainable,  etc.  What do you see as a role of smallholder farmers that of course have a huge potential, but  
**[0:28:53-0:28:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:28:53):**  at the same time huge constraints because of circumstances and may want to grow other  things but don't have maybe the financial means to make these long term bets or long  term investments?  Do you see a role for this huge group of smallholder farmers?  And if so, how?  
**[0:29:08-0:29:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:29:08):**  Yeah, I mean, certain crops are so far just only grown by smallholders.  Certain crops don't make, you know, you can't really do it in the plantation level so far.  However, like the size of farms that they have currently, like one acre farms, also  doesn't really make sense.  So there has to be some, there has to be some way of changing it around.  
**[0:29:32-0:29:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:29:32):**  So I do think that, yeah, a lot of the food provision will be done by smallholders still  over the next decades.  And but it needs to be more integrated with the chain.  So I think if you see certain value changing coffee, cocoa tea, well, palm and cotton,  there's a lot of effort also by the traders and then also by the manufacturers to try  
**[0:30:01-0:30:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:30:01):**  and, you know, work on the first mile.  You know, what's the first mile, the first mile from the farmer.  Certification that was the first step and sustainability and traceability is coming  up.  So there's a lot of efforts being made because we all know that we're dependent on these  
**[0:30:18-0:30:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:30:18):**  growers.  And there's some interesting work being done, for example, in Ghana to say, well, can we  combine certain plots so that we have a bigger area so we can then collaborate with a couple  of farmers together and it will become much more affordable to apply certain inputs or  to contract labor services and to make the whole operation more efficient because you  
**[0:30:42-0:30:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:30:42):**  can make these farms efficient.  You can triple or quadruple the outputs if you farm with different practices or if you  apply certain inputs.  But in some way, that's not really getting off the ground.  So and one of the issues is that, yeah, like we started the conversations, there's no data,  
**[0:31:04-0:31:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:31:04):**  there's no knowledge and that knowledge doesn't trickle down to the farmer level.  So in a nutshell, I would say, yeah, we're going to be dependent if we want to eat chocolate  and drink coffee and use olive.  There's certain other crops that you could do much more like soy.  You don't need smallholders for it, but other crops.  
**[0:31:30-0:31:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:31:30):**  Interestingly enough, the high value crops, foods and vegetables, we're going to be dependent  on smallholders.  And yeah, there's a scenario through climate change and natural agents that their outputs  will actually only decrease year by year.  And I think we're just more in this scenario where we're trying to counter that.  
**[0:31:52-0:32:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:31:52):**  We're trying to keep it stable and not yet there really to try and increase it or improve  it.  So I think all the effort is being made at the moment is just to try and counter the  effects of different rainfall patterns that we're seeing in Ghana or droughts that are  coming up at a massive scale.  
**[0:32:12-0:32:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:32:12):**  And that the people just like they don't know how to deal with them.  They've been doing this for generations in a certain way.  And to adapt to a different way of farming is very challenging.  So a lot of effort has to be made.  I think we hope by at least securing the tenure of the land will allow that investments can  
**[0:32:32-0:32:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:32:32):**  be made into it.  Yeah, the simple example is if you cut down all the coca trees, you need to do that.  You replant your trees, which are often very old.  You need to replant them at some point.  If you cut them down, the chief will come and say, oh, you cut the trees down.  
**[0:32:47-0:32:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:32:47):**  So I guess you're no longer interested in a parcel.  I'm going to take it back.  That's a default way of doing things.  By documenting it and having it proven that it's yours, you can say, no, no, it's mine  and I'm just replanting it.  
**[0:33:00-0:33:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:33:00):**  And so you won't have that same challenge and risk.  And so it means that farmers are not afraid to replant them, which they currently are.  And so in that way, investment can be made and trees can be replanted and a whole parcel  can be regenerated and become productive again.  These are some of the very basic, simple constraints that we're seeing in which the land documentation  
**[0:33:26-0:33:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:33:26):**  can play a role.  And if you are, let's say you're a brave and hopefully smart impact investor looking to,  let's say for in this case, play a role in the sustainable cocoa sector and wanting to  invest, what would be your advice?  Yeah, I'm good.  
**[0:33:50-0:33:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:33:50):**  To could also be don't do it yet.  I mean, it could be too early.  But yeah, I think it's important to look at the systemic issues and pick one and try and  make a dent for that particular systemic issue.  Yeah, of course, from my perspective, this is the one that we're focusing on where we  
**[0:34:13-0:34:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:34:13):**  see the biggest benefit to unlock all kinds of additional services.  But I think it's possible.  And there are definitely examples where entire areas get rejuvenated by a consortium of partners  that collaborate.  And so I think that's those are the main components to look at.  
**[0:34:34-0:34:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:34:34):**  Is there a systemic issue you can focus on?  And can you do it in collaboration with other partners?  And can you do it in an economic way?  So I think at least what we've seen is that do it as a business from the start, trying  to make money from the start, trying to generate value from the start, don't just put in funds  
**[0:34:59-0:35:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:34:59):**  as a donation, but try and do it through a generative business model.  Let's say also, for example, it's a simple example, but maybe just to see that there's  also trees in these cocoa farms, there's shade trees, they're important actually for cocoa  growing.  They improve the cocoa production.  
**[0:35:18-0:35:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:35:18):**  But the shade trees by themselves after 20, 30 years become very valuable.  They're like hardwood trees.  So there's currently not a way usually that the farmer can also have tree tenure so they  can prove it's his or her trees.  So again, the government official or the chief or even the neighbor might come and cut them  
**[0:35:41-0:35:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:35:41):**  down and they sell off the wood.  And yeah, there's no way to stop them unless you can again prove that you've planted them.  And you know, and it's simple.  You can just tag the tree with a geo tag and take a picture, et cetera.  We could do that while we're at the farm.  
**[0:35:59-0:36:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:35:59):**  It could be a significant source of additional revenue for the farmer.  They could also incentivize them to take care of those shade trees better.  And everybody wins.  So and it's just by mapping and tagging them and providing legal documentation for them.  You know, there's several, even carbon trading ventures kind of focusing on that in Western  
**[0:36:27-0:36:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:36:27):**  Africa.  And so I think you could pick one of those things.  You could say that's a systemic issue which across the globe, we can pick a pilot area,  you can collaborate with a certain number of parties, we can figure out how that works.  And we could probably build a solution that can do that at scale and really benefit both  
**[0:36:46-0:36:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:36:46):**  the planet and those farmers and food production.  That would be my advice, but I think it's up to anybody themselves to kind of see what  is a topic that you really feel passionate about doing something for and then try and  give it some thoughts.  Thank you so much.  
**[0:37:06-0:37:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:37:06):**  I want to thank you for sharing your knowledge and taking the time to share it with us today.  I think we'll definitely be checking in how to scale up across the value chain and maybe  also other countries and other products is going to take place in the next years.  And thanks again for taking the time this morning to talk.  Yeah, welcome.  
**[0:37:28-0:37:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:37:28):**  It was great to talk and looking forward to catch up later Kun.  You just listened to an interview with Thomas Fasen of Landmap, talking about how to give  land rights to the five to 600 million smallholder farmers we have in this world.  I hope you enjoyed it and come back to us soon to listen to more of these interviews.  If you found the investing in regenerative agriculture and food podcast valuable, there  
**[0:37:51-0:37:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:37:51):**  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few  seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  
**[0:38:06-0:38:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:38:06):**  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  join my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or in the description  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  
**[0:38:50-0:38:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:38:50):**  Dear friends of the podcast.  I'm super excited to share with you the online video course investing in regenerative agriculture  and food, how to put money to work in regenerating soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty  food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  
**[0:39:04-0:39:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:39:04):**  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to put money  to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011 and recording  this podcast since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework?  
**[0:39:23-0:39:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:39:23):**  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  What questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  
**[0:39:31-0:39:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:39:31):**  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  You, the soil builders and investors in the space.  
**[0:39:41-0:39:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:39:41):**  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management, consultants, etc.  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  
**[0:40:01-0:40:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:40:01):**  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  
**[0:40:15-0:40:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:40:15):**  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you.  And I'm very aware that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very  different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  
**[0:40:32-0:40:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:40:32):**  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to write along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  
**[0:40:48-0:40:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:40:48):**  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  
**[0:41:08-0:41:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:41:08):**  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately, that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  
**[0:41:22-0:41:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/01/thomas-vaassen/#t=0:41:22):**  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  