### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2021-00-05)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  How to raise capital during a pandemic?  What can we learn from a very experienced non-profit fundraiser who joined a Regen Egg  
**[0:00:20-0:00:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:00:20):**  tech startup two years ago and during this pandemic had to completely pivot their fundraising  plans and was still able to raise more than half a million?  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture.  Investing as if the planet mattered.  Podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  
**[0:00:40-0:00:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:00:40):**  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  
**[0:00:58-0:01:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:00:58):**  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  In March last year, we launched our membership community to make it easy for fans to support  our work.  And so many of you have joined as a member.  
**[0:01:15-0:01:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:01:15):**  We've launched different types of benefits, exclusive content, Q&A webinars with former  guests, ask me anything sessions plus so much more to come in the future.  For more information on the different tiers, benefits and how to become a member, check  gumroad.com slash investing region egg or find the link below.  Thank you.  
**[0:01:34-0:01:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:01:34):**  So welcome to another episode today with Gina Pettersson, founding team member of Soar Heroes,  making nature everyone's business and getting farmers paid for the ecosystem services they  provide.  Just a caveat, I'm an advisor to Soar Heroes.  We've interviewed Jeroen Klompe, one of the other founders previously here, and I will  
**[0:01:50-0:01:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:01:50):**  definitely link that below if you want to know a lot more about the history and what  Soar Heroes is building.  But today with Gina, we're going to dive into something slightly different, how you're raising  during this crazy year, the 2020 is during a pandemic during COVID.  And when you're raising money for quite an innovative and new business.  
**[0:02:08-0:02:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:02:08):**  So Gina, thank you so much for coming on the show today.  And I'm very much looking forward to diving deep into raising during a pandemic.  Thank you.  And to start with a personal question I always love to ask because I know you don't come  from the soil world.  
**[0:02:22-0:02:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:02:22):**  How did you end up focusing all of your attention and energy on rebuilding soils?  There's a long answer and there's a short answer.  I want a long one.  So I've spent the last 20 years working in international development with a big belief  that the world can function differently.  
**[0:02:41-0:02:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:02:41):**  I've been fundraising for water projects in Tajikistan, for maternal health projects in  Yemen, for livelihood programs in Eastern Africa, and all the time looking in the eyes of the  funders and saying, you really are making a difference because I can hand on heart from  my own personal experience, actually visiting places all over the world have seen firsthand  the impact that external support can bring communities who perhaps are limited in certain  
**[0:03:12-0:03:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:03:12):**  resources or knowledge and need help to pivot.  That said, there's always that challenging question of, are you going to come back in  20 years time?  And will you have solved this problem?  And in the end, when I discovered actually the first thing I watched was Green Gold,  
**[0:03:29-0:03:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:03:29):**  when I discovered that in fact, everything begins with the soil beneath our feet, because  when you fix our soil, you fix our climate problems.  When you fix our soil, you fix people's resilience of their own crops that they're growing.  They can be independent.  And when you fix your soils, you're actually fixing your own health because it's changing  
**[0:03:48-0:03:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:03:48):**  what you eat.  That for me was really literally scales falling from my eyes.  Having worked for an environmental organizations, for development organizations, having worked  for Unilever, suddenly there I was realizing, why is it that for 20 years in all of this  work, I haven't actually been talking about soil health?  
**[0:04:07-0:04:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:04:07):**  So for me, there's no going back.  It's pretty clear that this is, you know, I would hope that it could be a 10 year job  and then it's done.  I'm not sure that's going to be the case.  But certainly for me, the mission is extremely clear.  
**[0:04:22-0:04:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:04:22):**  I think when we address how we use our land, we address all of those other ensuing challenges.  And do you still remember, was there like one moment you mentioned Green Gold, which  I will link below in the show notes, which is a great documentary of John Lue?  Did you see that and then you saw it?  Or did you see the documentary when you were already interested in soil?  
**[0:04:42-0:04:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:04:42):**  Like, was there one moment where suddenly you saw, I wouldn't say the sort of light,  or was it a gradual process where you got more interested in what's happening under  our feet?  No, I was actually approached because I live in the Netherlands.  I'm from Scotland, from the UK.  
**[0:04:56-0:05:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:04:56):**  Very appropriate that it's St Andrew's Day today because I'm actually from St Andrew's.  So thank you for that.  Should I say congratulations?  I don't know.  If so, congratulations.  
**[0:05:05-0:05:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:05:05):**  We don't do the Dutch thing.  Congratulations on someone else's birthday.  And so I found myself in the Netherlands.  I had been in global roles, I was in regional roles.  And by that I mean, traveling to South Africa, traveling all around Europe.  
**[0:05:19-0:05:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:05:19):**  And with a young family, in the end, you realize it's a choice that either your home and around  or it's and I had spent 20 odd years of traveling.  And in very full, all consuming roles.  So I chose to look for something more locally in the Netherlands, which was a bit challenging  because of my fundraising background, bringing this kind of very global horizons to the small  
**[0:05:45-0:05:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:05:45):**  town of Middleburg, which actually is internationally known, I've since discovered, but nevertheless,  working out what can I purposefully do that is a good employment of my skills and all  of my experience.  And somebody shared with me, you really need to get to know this very cool team in Amsterdam  that's working on land restoration.  
**[0:06:06-0:06:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:06:06):**  Take a look, they're looking for somebody they need to start from scratch, kind of on  the more fundraising side.  And so that's what I stepped in.  And interestingly,  That was the first time you heard land restoration?  
**[0:06:19-0:06:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:06:19):**  Or was that like, did it catch your eye?  Like, oh, that sounds interesting.  Or it was like, oh, what's that?  No, I mean, through the work with Oxfam and Save the Children, of course, there's big  streams of programs.  
**[0:06:29-0:06:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:06:29):**  But in terms of really understanding the nexus of soil health and community thriving, and  how you connect that through to the food that you eat or the clothes that you buy, I think  it's the soil health component for me that was really strikingly new, if you like.  Then you ended up at Soil Heroes.  And how would you I mean, in a startup, there are six zillion roles to fill, and the early  
**[0:06:55-0:06:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:06:55):**  team fills them all.  But how would you describe your role if somebody asked you, okay, what do you actually do at  Soil Heroes?  Like right now, we're talking November, December 2020.  Obviously it has been shifting.  
**[0:07:06-0:07:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:07:06):**  How would you describe your most of how you spend your time?  Most of how I spent my time is talking with a wide range of who I call change makers.  So internationally, people who are passionate about changing the way that we use our land  have a vision for a different way of operating, whether it's from the financial world, from  the food sector, whether it's farmers, of course, predominantly also investors.  
**[0:07:34-0:07:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:07:34):**  That said, I also speak with other organizations who are more like peers.  So I guess you could describe me as a bit of the team scout, sort of having those initial  conversations.  I'm enormously, I have like so much gratitude for the referrals that are made to my inbox  heaves under the weight sometimes, but people connecting us to other people.  
**[0:08:00-0:08:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:08:00):**  So I think really it's opening doors, aligning, discovering where our visions connect, and  then being able to bring that meaningfully to the team in a way that we can gain traction.  Or in some cases, it's good to know that you exist and we exist super.  We will, we're on the same journey on going and we follow each other.  And it doesn't always need action when you first meet with someone, but it's about building  
**[0:08:25-0:08:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:08:25):**  the...  My big thing is joining the dots, as you know.  So it's then working out which dots need to be joined and what's the best way to join  them.  And if you take us back to, let's say, January, February, or maybe even March, early March,  
**[0:08:37-0:08:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:08:37):**  when you were in full swing of racing around with Sorry Heroes, and slowly this pandemic  thing became much more serious than we all thought.  I certainly underestimated it greatly at the beginning of the year.  I remember our conversations.  But I also saw some things going out there saying this is going to be a very, very long  
**[0:08:58-0:09:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:08:58):**  winter, let's say for fundraising.  And if you haven't closed now and stuff is in the bank, then this is going to...  Because people are going to hit the brakes, going to postpone, et cetera, et cetera.  So if you take us back to, let's say, February, when it started to become slowly clear that  something was probably going to derail a few things, what was your thinking then about  
**[0:09:17-0:09:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:09:17):**  the round you were raising and if that would be even possible?  Or was it, okay, all hands on deck, let's see what we have now in and let's see how  we survive until, I don't know, next winter or something?  What do you remember February last year?  Or this year, sorry, we're still in the same year.  
**[0:09:31-0:09:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:09:31):**  No, it's a good question.  So coming back to your previous question, taking a step back, I spent a lot of my time  raising what you could call philanthropic funds.  So I worked very much in the kind of the charity sector, the charity space.  Because during that time, it was very evolving.  
**[0:09:48-0:09:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:09:48):**  I think in the end, if you look at it, they're big businesses and there are lots of challenges  kind of, is charity dead?  Actually, is this the right kind of money?  And then as I say, I joined a land restoration organization here in the Netherlands and whilst  we needed to fundraise for grants, discovered actually most people coming through the door  
**[0:10:08-0:10:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:10:08):**  were impact investors.  And so for me, for myself personally, this was a transition into a different kind of  funding.  I'm not from an investment fund background.  And so my own kind of concerns about, well, I don't know the technicalities of deals and  
**[0:10:25-0:10:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:10:25):**  what do I need to learn about the financial language and so on.  And discovered, and I coined a phrase at the time, as you will remember, discovered that  actually the principles are the same.  In the end, it's about what's the purpose, what's your mission, what's your intention?  That's what purpose means, essentially.  
**[0:10:43-0:10:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:10:43):**  What's your intention?  And when you talk about impact, are you looking for impact that is environmental, that is  social, for yourself, for your pocket?  And I think having those really hard discussions and I back then was operating very much in  the kind of the sweet spot between the hardcore investment and the charity, which of course  
**[0:11:03-0:11:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:11:03):**  we call impact investing and the term that I coined, as I say, was the investable grant.  So how can we ensure that whatever kind of funding is given, that it is building towards  something that is going to become investable or is going to be sustainable financially?  In other words, it creates its own business model in the end.  So there's a number of things in there.  
**[0:11:27-0:11:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:11:27):**  Business model means profit.  And let's face it, profit is and can be good.  The question is, is it your main driver?  And if purpose is your main driver, and this is where I love what Paul Palman has been  speaking about, particularly with the Business for Nature community, actually it's not profit  
**[0:11:47-0:11:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:11:47):**  for purpose, it's profit through purpose.  And the reason I share this is because when COVID struck and it became clear, and I think  we were extremely naive, I'm a little bit disappointed, if I'm honest, by the Western  kind of hemisphere, because it first arose in China and there was a sense of it's over  there.  
**[0:12:08-0:12:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:12:08):**  And by goodness, it really, those are words that everyone can eat because...  The latest research in Italy shows it went around already in September last year.  Doesn't surprise me at all.  They see a lot of, they froze a lot of blood samples from another research and now they  went back to see and they had antibodies in there, like a good 11.6 or 12% of the people  
**[0:12:27-0:12:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:12:27):**  in certain cities in the North had already antibodies of COVID-19, which is very interesting  for our eyes.  It is.  January was like, oh, it's there, don't worry.  It's not going to travel.  
**[0:12:37-0:12:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:12:37):**  And it kind of, that also comes to my point, which is in the end, it's about perceptions  and it's about realities.  And people talk about it started in China and actually, you know, good on the research  there that actually identified it and was able to flag it to the world when probably  it started somewhere else.  
**[0:12:56-0:13:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:12:56):**  And so my big rule of thumb with fundraising, and this brings me to the COVID challenge  that you've asked me, is never assume.  You don't make assumptions.  You need to peel things back, really understand.  And what it is, is what it is.  
**[0:13:11-0:13:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:13:11):**  And particularly in my role as a fundraiser, it's not for me to, to some extent challenge,  yes, but in the end, if there's core values and they are different to other core values  and they have very clear pathways that do not diverge, then it's a case of respecting,  respectfully acknowledging that that is a path that goes in a different direction to  yours.  
**[0:13:31-0:13:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:13:31):**  So there's some subtle work there.  In terms of when COVID struck, the way I see it is what I was imagining back in February,  I was pretty, pretty bold.  My view was, okay, this is the moment for impact investment to really step up because  in fact, it doesn't change a thing because we still are not using our lands properly.  
**[0:13:54-0:14:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:13:54):**  We still need to change how we work, how we see farmers, how we understand the food that  we put in our mouths, the clothes that we choose to wear.  Probably makes it more important.  Exactly.  And we've very much seen that since that has definitely come to be the case that there  
**[0:14:10-0:14:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:14:10):**  is now a sharpened understanding and appetite for going deeper into growing things better,  building back better, growing things better.  That's what I'd say.  And did the funders agree?  Because you can be bold, but if the other part you're talking to is sort of going back  
**[0:14:28-0:14:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:14:28):**  down, like everything risky, because we've seen that with some people, with other people  actually not.  Like it's really a two response.  Some people move forward and see this as the moment and push with their portfolio, with  their investments, et cetera.  
**[0:14:39-0:14:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:14:39):**  But some others are, okay, let's talk in 2021 because I'm not making any sudden rushes.  Also because you saw in March, like the stock market crashing, oil markets crashing.  Some people lost a lot of money, made it probably back in, hopefully back in the last months,  but it was a very scary moment on the financial markets.  There was a lot of sudden tension.  
**[0:14:58-0:14:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:14:58):**  So what was there?  You felt bold.  What did the other people feel?  In fundraising, I can't imagine why you'd be in fundraising if you're not passionate.  You're very passionate completely from what you're doing.  
**[0:15:09-0:15:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:15:09):**  So it's relatively easy to be bold.  As you say, at the same time, it's naive to ignore what's going on around you.  You have to listen.  And I'm also very strong.  I was sharing with somebody the other day, why is listening not the first language that  
**[0:15:24-0:15:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:15:24):**  we're taught at school?  It's so extremely important sometimes to actually stop and hear the noise, if not at least what's  actually being said, to hear what is and understand other people's perspectives.  So we were bold deliberately in order to keep going because it was very important that we  didn't just kind of hit the pause button that's all heroes and say, okay, there's pandemic,  
**[0:15:50-0:15:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:15:50):**  people are nervous.  Let's wait.  There's no time to wait.  So by being bold, we kept our confidence, we kept our resilience.  And at the same time, we did really lean in to understand, okay, what does this mean for  
**[0:16:04-0:16:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:16:04):**  the investment community that we're working with?  We do need to apply a big dose of caution, we need to work with that, how can that look?  And so we went from two commitments of a million euros each, almost on the verge of signing  that had to go on hold.  And the best thing that I think strongly believe the best thing that we did is to, instead  
**[0:16:29-0:16:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:16:29):**  of pushing that, is to immediately stand on the same side and work with those parties  to see how can we reconfigure this?  Because it's working together in the end, it's not a trans, yes, okay, funding goes  from A to B, but it's not a transaction as such, it's a relationship, it's a journey,  it's co-creating that you can have impact and really change something.  
**[0:16:51-0:16:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:16:51):**  If you're change makers, then you're doing it together.  So when you have a crisis that can feel very polarizing and feel quite difficult, because  suddenly, if somebody is putting pause on their investments, you don't want to push.  At the same time, if you are listening, and you are working together, then you find new  ways through.  
**[0:17:12-0:17:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:17:12):**  So we changed our approach and went for convertible loan for a much smaller amount and worked  out that amount based on what do we need to get to our next milestone.  And that milestone is very simple.  It's completely what we're all about as Soil Heroes.  It was how do we bring new income to farmers, so a million euros of extra funding to farmers  
**[0:17:40-0:17:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:17:40):**  who are transitioning to regenerative agriculture, and it's around 4000 hectares that would be  restored, and all of the beautiful things that they achieve for us by farming with nature  in restoring those hectares.  So we worked out that we needed around a million euros ourselves.  So with a million euros, we could keep the team running, build all the extra functionalities,  
**[0:18:02-0:18:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:18:02):**  team members and achieve that.  Get the hectares on board.  Yeah.  Yeah, bring the farmers on board, support them in their transition and achieve that  milestone.  
**[0:18:12-0:18:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:18:12):**  So by going into a much smaller, so effectively, we were looking, okay, and you have to take  the long term view.  We need to do a short term, lean round that keeps us nimble, keeps us able to, you know,  we can keep flowing, that secures the connections and relationships that we have.  Put some money in the pockets of farmers and show that you can do this.  
**[0:18:33-0:18:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:18:33):**  And then with the strong conviction that if you're able to put more than a million euros  into the hands of farmers, you're able to raise more or to build this machine bigger,  bolder.  Exactly.  Proof of concept.  
**[0:18:48-0:18:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:18:48):**  So by getting proof of concept, if we could essentially secure the team, prove that there  is an appetite within companies to pay farmers, not just talk about RegenAC, because there  have been some great statements made by some very significant companies, but actually then  having capital flowing directly to those farmers for restoring those hectares.  But with that proof of concept, we could then look at scale up funding.  
**[0:19:11-0:19:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:19:11):**  And actually, that's been the right thing to do, because as we although it does feel  like we're entering a long, hard winter, that said, it's kind of a bit to what you were  saying earlier, what I observed is that the crisis, the current crisis really sharpened  what people were all about.  So those people really driven by impact, and with who had the capacity to do so, of course,  
**[0:19:39-0:19:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:19:39):**  went deeper impact and said, nope, we need to stand stronger.  We need to now is the time to step up.  And I think that that sharpening is has been clarifying.  So where are we now in we're at the end of November.  So you mentioned these two groups, they both had a million committed, which both were put  
**[0:20:00-0:20:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:20:00):**  on hold.  What would you say is a good snapshot of where the fundraising is now for that million to  keep going and basically build the first show of product?  Where do you feel you are?  Because you said sharpening doesn't mean there are more people involved now, or more  
**[0:20:16-0:20:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:20:16):**  investors, more funders?  What has been the last month, basically on the fundraising side with that refocus of  raising 2 million from two funders, and then we can build a lot to we're raising 1 million  from potentially in a convertible loan from potentially a lot more people to build this  first product for 4000 hectares and 1 million to farmers?  
**[0:20:34-0:20:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:20:34):**  What has been the response to from both those two?  I'm very curious, obviously, they were already committed, but then had to pause and others  potentially that came on the table.  Really striking one has postponed for down the road, and has said, as soon as things  are flowing again, we will look at how we'll be able to step in.  
**[0:20:51-0:20:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:20:51):**  And we have a beautiful letter of support recommending us as partners and stating their  intention further down the line to work with us and join the Soul Heroes journey.  So actually, it's a dream scenario, we have our pipeline ahead, we already have key stakeholders,  who are lining up ready for the scale up round.  So for the convertible loan, which is all great, obviously, if you get to the scale  
**[0:21:20-0:21:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:21:20):**  up, like you also need the money now, you need some of it now, you don't need all but  enough to keep the fireplace going.  Exactly.  Otherwise, you never get to the scale.  Yeah, so you then you need to be smart, and you need to be constantly listening and flexing  
**[0:21:31-0:21:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:21:31):**  and zooming in, zooming out, you know, you have to move with the situation, if you're  just completely going to stick to your guns and be stubborn, like this is how we're going  to do it, then yeah, then it becomes very difficult and probably won't make it.  So we've actually chosen to close around early, we're two thirds of the way there.  And by doing so, we already have signing customers for Soul Heroes, so companies already onboarding  
**[0:21:58-0:22:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:21:58):**  and farmers onboarding, and we're introducing them and telling beautiful stories about how  they are together creating change.  And by doing so, so by closing around now, we are already changing the status of the  company, we can immediately move into scale up funding.  And that has, in the end, it will be interesting a year down the line to see if this holds  
**[0:22:21-0:22:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:22:21):**  true, but has done us a favour because there are a number of investors who are looking  at the scale up round for Soul Heroes because they generally prefer to invest larger amounts.  And so the small convertible loan is not the most suitable for them, but they're very keen  to step in further down the line.  So in fact, if you look at the flow over the period of time, in fact, it makes sense and  
**[0:22:46-0:22:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:22:46):**  it works.  It's just felt like a bit of a bumpy sideways ride to get there.  So I'm extremely thrilled with the support that we have from our current round of investors  who already are looking ahead thinking about once we close this, what that means for the  next round.  
**[0:23:06-0:23:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:23:06):**  Some of them have made reservations for the next round.  So this isn't a short term thing.  It's as I said earlier, it's a long journey, you're in it for the long game.  And I think by that sharpening that we talked about, you find who really are your most aligned,  your true tribe, your dedicated team around you.  
**[0:23:29-0:23:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:23:29):**  And I really consider that the investors I work with, they're really an extension of  our team.  And then in fact, you become more efficient.  You can go more direct and arguably faster because you have the right tribe around you.  As a philosophical way of saying, it has been a pretty tough year and we've had to flex  
**[0:23:51-0:23:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:23:51):**  and change, but it's not been a bad thing in the end.  And you've had you've raised capital, which I think for many, you said two thirds down  the line, we can all do the calculation.  You raised capital in a very challenging year for many.  I think everybody had a bumpy ride.  
**[0:24:05-0:24:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:24:05):**  If you were going up or down, it doesn't really matter.  It's been one of those years or actually not because nobody ever had a year like this,  at least not in the say, like you said, the Western world.  So what would you do different?  Like if you were going into like when that period where we look back at the year, et  
**[0:24:20-0:24:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:24:20):**  cetera, if there's one thing you could do different, would you do anything first of  all differently or would you say I would do it exactly the same?  This is how it was supposed to be.  And if there was one thing, what would you do differently?  One challenge that was brought to us, as you know, I'm not from an investment background  
**[0:24:34-0:24:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:24:34):**  and we chose to raise the three year budget, which was six point three million.  And we chose to do that upfront because of the time it takes when you're a startup.  That's also a very important point here.  When you're a startup, who are you investing in?  You're investing in an idea and you're investing in the team.  
**[0:24:55-0:24:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:24:55):**  So if you're investing in an idea and the entrepreneur, you're going to need a lot of  time with those people to really understand what their intentions are, to know that you  can trust their competence, the way that they work, that you're going to enjoy.  I mean, that's the other great thing about the investors around us.  They're kind of really the ultimate definition of critical friends.  
**[0:25:15-0:25:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:25:15):**  They're really sharp and clear and challenging and they're also very supportive and nose  aligned in the same direction.  So those critical friends around us have given us that, have helped with the confidence.  So there was some counterwind, let's say, that we were being too ambitious to raise  all the money upfront.  
**[0:25:39-0:25:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:25:39):**  But as I say, you really want to protect the time of the entrepreneur at the same time  as them being available for those investors who are essentially early stage, taking a  risk and there isn't just a product already that they can see and invest in.  Yeah, you're saying like you have to spend so much time anyway, investor entrepreneur,  like let's raise as much or let's raise quite a significant sum instead of just a few hundred  
**[0:26:05-0:26:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:26:05):**  thousand because the time is the same.  And let's use that time with the entrepreneurs and the team as wisely as possible.  Obviously making a bigger, I mean, if I remember correctly, it was connected to milestones.  It wasn't all the six million in one shot.  So it was obviously staged, but at least you invested the time upfront with the investor  
**[0:26:24-0:26:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:26:24):**  and if he or she or them said yes, then you knew, OK, we've invested this for a three  year budget and for etc, etc, which in pandemic time might be a bit more challenging.  Exactly.  So I think people might expect my answer to be, well, the thing that I would change is  that I wouldn't have gone for the full amount and that instead we'd have started with more  
**[0:26:43-0:26:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:26:43):**  classic style of a small amount, get a basic MVP, show the concept and then go back funding  again and then do fundraising again.  That would have been three rounds of fundraising.  But that's not your answer.  No, it's not.  
**[0:26:55-0:27:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:26:55):**  I've thought long and hard about this because obviously very keen constantly I'm always  learning and seeking to learn.  And I think being able to reflect critically on the steps so far are very important for  the steps you take further in the future at this kind of very delicate stage of being  emerging from startup and being a going concern.  
**[0:27:18-0:27:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:27:18):**  And no, I wouldn't I don't think I would change it.  And the reasons are that it helped us by saying that was our ambition and it has helped us  to find the right people who believe in that ambition.  And that's coming true because people are standing by us in spite of COVID and the movement  has only grown.  
**[0:27:39-0:27:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:27:39):**  Our external network has only grown.  It hasn't slowed down.  And I believe that if you want to achieve big change, at some point you need that big  hairy goal at the start and it might not work out like that.  Exactly.  
**[0:27:56-0:27:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:27:56):**  But yeah, but it's brought us the right people.  You put a bar, you put a bar pretty high.  And then during pandemic, as hopefully everybody, you were flexible what you could actually  what it was actually on the table and you could take.  Yeah.  
**[0:28:07-0:28:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:28:07):**  And as a result of that, after just two years, as I say, we also have a very healthy potential  pipeline already at play.  So a lot of the hard work has been done now that I think will really make things hopefully  flow easier in the future.  So I think it's still been the right thing to do.  
**[0:28:28-0:28:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:28:28):**  And any tips, tips is always difficult, but any advice you would give to others that are  in a similar situation facing this crisis or facing another crisis?  I mean, for that matter, I mean, depending where you are, you have things more regularly  that we were not so used to.  What would be your main advice or tip to other people that are fundraising in challenging  
**[0:28:48-0:28:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:28:48):**  circumstances?  Let's say number one, dialogue.  Everything starts with dialogue.  In the very first instance, don't be frightened to pick up the phone and have a very vulnerable,  open discussion.  
**[0:29:00-0:29:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:29:00):**  If things are hard, it's important that you talk more and that you're really clear about  where are the boundaries, what are the possibilities, how does this sit and understanding also short  term and long term, because things might be challenging right now, but that doesn't change  somebody's purpose.  And the worst thing you can do is, for example, let's say you've said, oh Gina, I could invest  
**[0:29:24-0:29:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:29:24):**  50,000 euros in your idea.  And I say, wonderful, and then you say, I'm sorry, Gina, with COVID, it's not possible.  It's not going to happen.  Am I then going to stop talking to you and say, oh, well, Coon didn't put his money in,  you know, it's not going to, of course not, because the connection that we have, the joint  
**[0:29:40-0:29:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:29:40):**  intention that we have, it's a very peculiar thing.  But somebody once said to me, you don't look or sound like a fundraiser.  And I was like, what?  Not quite sure what you mean.  Probably a good thing.  
**[0:29:50-0:29:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:29:50):**  Well, I took it as a good thing.  And I certainly meant it as a good thing.  And in the end, money is actually the last thing that you talk about.  It's critical.  And in the end, it's the point you have to sign a deal and you need to be able to pay  
**[0:30:04-0:30:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:30:04):**  for the team and things need to be able to happen.  But that's never the discussion.  It's never around the funds themselves.  It's actually about what are we going to do together.  So my advice in a crisis is, although you might be feeling really pressured about how  
**[0:30:22-0:30:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:30:22):**  are you going to pay the next bills and how are you going to see through to the next months  or retain the talent that you have, at that moment in time, the most important thing you  can do is rather than thinking about the funding per se, is to understand who are my pillars,  who is my network, and how do we want to approach this together.  I think a very important part for me is to be totally upfront as well.  
**[0:30:49-0:30:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:30:49):**  If you're having a tough time, being able to, so we've actually had this, speaking  with our founding funders, and we should briefly talk about that as well because it's a beautiful  example of going in for the six mil upfront.  Actually through that, we found our founding funder and really they are the absolute core  of everything we're doing.  
**[0:31:11-0:31:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:31:11):**  They provide stability and gravitas and understanding, confidence and empathy.  Really tremendous.  The moment that you think you're going to have a hard time, the best thing you can do  is go back to those people.  We shared with the founding funders, actually, we're not going to make it to the way that  
**[0:31:31-0:31:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:31:31):**  we thought we would.  Thank you for your honesty.  The feedback that we had from them was, there's two reasons, the concept and the team.  The third reason that they invested is they know that when times are hard, they're going  to know about it.  
**[0:31:49-0:31:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:31:49):**  When we're having problems, they're going to know about it.  That creates a level of ability to do things in the future.  Then you can really change things because you're being really upfront about the situation  rather than putting your head in the sand or being sunk by the enormity of the challenge.  Being authentic and being open and being honest.  
**[0:32:09-0:32:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:32:09):**  What was very lovely is they came back and explained, actually, if we could, we would  help you on your running rate.  Really, it's never even crossed our mind to come back to you because you've already done  your job.  You funded a third of the budget.  
**[0:32:23-0:32:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:32:23):**  We never intended this to be one set of investors coming in.  It's very important for the longevity of what we're doing and our impact to have the right  people on board.  It's never just one person or one family.  To be honest, it's very simple and very plain advice.  
**[0:32:41-0:32:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:32:41):**  I think you just need to breathe, believe in what you're doing.  Talk and listen.  Talk, listen, be open and not hold on too tight.  I don't know if you know what I mean by that.  Sometimes being able to let go just a little bit and be on the scary roller coaster.  
**[0:33:05-0:33:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:33:05):**  If you've built good foundations, you're going to come through it the right way somehow.  Trust.  In the end, it comes down to.  I think it's excellent advice.  I want to take that as a bridge to shift gears a bit and ask you.  
**[0:33:20-0:33:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:33:20):**  I know you keep saying, I don't have the investor background.  I come from the philanthropic fundraising world, but you also are used to quite large  amounts.  I'm very interested in what if you would be an investor yourself and you would actually  have the portfolio of a nice amount, let's say one billion to invest.  
**[0:33:38-0:33:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:33:38):**  What would you, I'm assuming regenerative back end food, but you could also invest somewhere  else.  What would you focus on?  What would be your prioritization in terms of if you had to put a bill into work?  Well, I should check first.  
**[0:33:49-0:33:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:33:49):**  Are you sure it's still only a billion?  Because I believe you've asked this question a few times, so maybe somewhere that amount  is increased.  I usually ask a billion, but if you want 10 as well, I'm curious about how you prioritize  because you've worked with large amounts, let's say.  
**[0:34:03-0:34:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:34:03):**  So if it makes you more comfortable, I can also add a few zeros.  But I'm interested, what would you invest it in in terms of categories?  What would you focus on?  What do you think are the most important pieces at the moment in regenerative back end food?  This is a different way of asking the same question, obviously.  
**[0:34:17-0:34:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:34:17):**  Totally agree.  It's about the prioritization rather than the amount.  I don't know how we would implement it, but I would love to throw a ton of money at retraining  agronomists so that no matter for whom they work, their foundation, their basis has been  in farming with nature.  
**[0:34:36-0:34:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:34:36):**  Because once it's in your system, it doesn't go away.  Once the scales fall from your eyes, there's no going back, as I said earlier, for myself,  for my own personal journey.  And you see it with farmers.  All farmers want to do good by their land.  
**[0:34:48-0:34:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:34:48):**  It's just they might not necessarily have the right tools or the right space, actually.  They might even have the knowledge, but the right space.  So in the first instance, I would love to, and those agronomists, to actually first spend  some time with small scale holders who are already farming in very regenerative ways  in, say, the global south, where we completely turn things on their head.  
**[0:35:11-0:35:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:35:11):**  Instead of what can we bring to them, we say, actually, what can we learn?  And we start to bring the world more into a central place of understanding rather than  this divide of kind of where the knowledge is and how we have to transfer it.  So bringing agronomists to the global side, I think that's to basically sit down, listen  and learn from smallholder farmers who are applying agroecology, regenerative farming,  
**[0:35:35-0:35:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:35:35):**  whatever you want to call it, and think, like, hopefully plant a seed that they will bring  back when they go to their enormous farms they're advising in Australia, Europe, the  US, etc.  And your hunch is that that seed won't go away anymore.  Like once you've seen what's possible, even if you work for the big chemical companies,  
**[0:35:53-0:35:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:35:53):**  you will figure out ways to not work for the big chemical companies anymore and work with  your farmers that actually that's supposed to be your client.  Yeah.  And of course, the key question is, what are the return expectations of the fund?  That's yours to decide.  
**[0:36:05-0:36:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:36:05):**  Could be zero, could be partly super high, super low.  I mean, you can build a portfolio.  Well, so I would love to, I don't have the expertise myself, but there are definitely  movers and shakers already.  For this amount, you can get a team.  
**[0:36:19-0:36:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:36:19):**  I mean, for this amount, you can get a team in place, don't worry.  There are people already thinking about it.  And I would say in the very first instance, the fund would not report impact based on  euros returned.  It would report impact based on nature restored.  
**[0:36:34-0:36:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:36:34):**  So and leave it as its own value rather than trying to translate that into monetary value.  Why is that?  I completely agree.  I don't like the constant everything has to be a dollar thinking, but I know a lot of  people do.  
**[0:36:48-0:36:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:36:48):**  What's you said at the beginning, so at some point that changes or you want to keep it  that way for as long as the fund lives?  No, I think I would leave it that way.  And the of course key thing there is then how would you measure that?  As of course goes without saying investing in an organization like Soul Heroes would  
**[0:37:05-0:37:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:37:05):**  be an obvious thing to do and be able to scale that.  I think as long as it can be measured, then you're actually incentivizing in the right  way.  You're not incentivizing for profit, you're incentivizing for purpose.  And then how do you then link that to increase the value in the value chain?  
**[0:37:24-0:37:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:37:24):**  So if there was a way that we could also underwrite and I don't know how we would do this, but  underwrite the profit margins, a percentage of the profit margins for companies that are  prepared to account for their investment in nature in a different way.  And that are also willing to transform their supply chains really like not just saying,  yes, we're going to do it and we'll do pilots, but actually stop immediately with all chemicals  
**[0:37:54-0:38:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:37:54):**  other than the ones that farmers need in order to get their soils off the chemicals that  they're addicted to.  So there's a certain transition period, but in the end, we need dramatic change.  And I just, I feel like we are still working within the bounds of what we know.  And there are some very interesting networks and thinkers at the moment looking at financial  
**[0:38:18-0:38:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:38:18):**  levers for change, looking at agro pivot points of how you can do things differently.  And I think if with a fund that you could literally just rewrite the rules, then I would  get the best team.  I would also find the most hardcore, critical, purely focused on profit investors to work  also with us so that we can really understand the headwind that we're going into and be  
**[0:38:46-0:38:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:38:46):**  able to figure out the answers to all of their fears, concerns, and questions.  And the most obvious thing would be to have as much of that money as possible going to  farmers to make the transition.  So for example, why not invest in a kickass marketing team that can help farmers on how  they talk about what they do?  
**[0:39:08-0:39:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:39:08):**  Because no farmers go at the time to go, you know, even just me getting technically set  up to speak to you, okay?  A farmer, are they going to have the time to go and have a professional photo shoot  and learn how to tell their story and work out what they're going, you know, and also  it's very personal and it's about yourself.  
**[0:39:25-0:39:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:39:25):**  So that's not a very easy thing to do.  Whereas I do believe that if we could have more visibility of farmers stories of what  the reality is of when someone walks into a shop and they pay the price of a banana,  that they actually understand what it took to grow it and the faces behind the food that  we are eating.  
**[0:39:45-0:39:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:39:45):**  It will be like a communication agency purely focused on telling the real story of farmers  or the extensive, holistic, not long form, not just the face on the package and three  lines because there's a lot more behind that, which we never know.  We don't know about our coffees.  We don't know about our potatoes.  
**[0:40:03-0:40:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:40:03):**  We don't know about our onions.  We have no clue about our grain and we have no clue about our milk or animal protein,  et cetera.  And obviously also not about our bananas.  Like there's the whole, unless you go out and actually spend time, I think I would argue  
**[0:40:15-0:40:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:40:15):**  most people don't really know what it takes to grow that regeneratively or non regeneratively.  Like in general, we don't know the challenges.  I think there's a huge, there are a lot of stories to be told there.  There are a lot of stories to be told and the question is how do stories make money?  Well actually some of the best companies in the world, they make their money in the end  
**[0:40:32-0:40:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:40:32):**  by telling stories.  And of course an example, you know, is always close to our heart because the first funding  into the Soul Heroes Foundation, Patagonia, there's no one who can tell a story like Patagonia  does and they say, don't buy a jacket.  And of course for them profit wise, everybody then goes and buys a jacket.  
**[0:40:50-0:40:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:40:50):**  Point being that when they tell their stories, people pay attention and they listen and actually  people move with, they vote with their feet.  They will come to a company because they know they're sourcing better cotton and they are  actually treating all their employees fairly.  And they're building the communities around where that cotton is grown and ensuring its  
**[0:41:09-0:41:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:41:09):**  full access to all of society.  So I think discrimination within, there's not much talk is starting, but the discrimination  that occurs even within the food supply chain, I think if there's a way of addressing that,  how do you then relate that back to profit?  Well in the end, if it means that farmers are going to build the resilience of their  
**[0:41:32-0:41:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:41:32):**  soils and therefore they don't need to irrigate as much and we've seen it with the Klomper  farm, the difference that it makes once you're really farming with nature, your inputs go  down.  Farmers are going to be more viable, which means their children are not going to leave  the countryside as quickly.  
**[0:41:51-0:41:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:41:51):**  They may be more likely to take on those farms.  Or they come back.  They come back.  Now that we've seen those examples, I mean, people keep asking like, is it more profitable?  I think if you dig down, it definitely can be or quality of life is much better or both,  
**[0:42:06-0:42:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:42:06):**  but they're definitely not less profitable.  I think that's the general, it really depends where you are in your transition, but there's  some very successful examples, small, large on any continent that have made or are in  the middle of a transition and are seeing huge payoffs in all impacts they can imagine  from biodiversity to yield to family time, quality time, et cetera.  
**[0:42:27-0:42:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:42:27):**  And if you can measure that in a really holistic way.  So impact meaning not just impact on soil health and impact financially, but impact  on the experience of people working on the farm, impact on the family, as you say, I  think impact really through all of the different lenses.  I think we heard it a number of times, like it's fun again.  
**[0:42:47-0:42:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:42:47):**  How are you going to measure it?  It never comes back in an impact report.  But I've heard many farmers say this is actually, it's fun again.  Like this is inventing things.  This is figuring out what works on my, on our land.  
**[0:42:57-0:43:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:42:57):**  This is going back in old history books and see what they did before combining that with  the new tech, figuring out new tech, buying the latest drones.  Like this is fun again, compared to many times conventional farming is a lot of stress and  not very fun.  Yeah, it's putting the joy back in farming and also being proud.  
**[0:43:15-0:43:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:43:15):**  And I think the community component is very underestimated.  You know, the psychological aspect.  Okay.  It's naturally a lonely experience and perhaps may not always be the most extrovert wanting  to connect with everybody, but to know that people are admiring and loving what you're  
**[0:43:34-0:43:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:43:34):**  doing and to know that you can see other people who are doing the same and not feel like you're  so strange in the way that you've got this very messy looking field.  Yeah, the weirdo.  You have to have it behind the farm only and on the front side, you know, stories of farmers  in Western Australia who'd been busy with with farm permaculture for a long time.  
**[0:43:54-0:43:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:43:54):**  And at the front, they had their bland monocrop fields and behind their houses, they had all  these beautiful, very diverse.  No, no, it's something we underestimate very easily because if you live in a relatively  small town with a strict social, not control, but it's very difficult to be different.  And if you have messy fields, many people look at that and look at you weirdly.  
**[0:44:15-0:44:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:44:15):**  And we've heard stories from people switching to organic in the US and their children were  no longer invited for soccer practice, or were no longer picked for the team.  And that was for organic wasn't even the messy regenerative transition some people go through  or SLM.  I keep telling that story.  
**[0:44:29-0:44:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:44:29):**  When they started in Australia, they were called stupid land management because the  neighbors were all looking at them like, oh, this is going to fail for sure.  And luckily, they came from the outside.  And of course, they and they proved a lot of things.  But the first years, their operators and their their farmers were looked upon really, really  
**[0:44:44-0:44:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:44:44):**  weirdly.  And so it's huge pressure thing, which is interesting.  And something we need to the story piece is crucial there.  Yeah, exactly.  And so and then just closing off on the fund, I think the business model then being and  
**[0:44:58-0:45:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:44:58):**  you know, I've learned a lot of this through, of course, working with the clumpers in the  end, if you're then improving by improving soil health, whichever way you do it, because  there's so many different means, as I say, you know, whether it's encouraging them up  farmer to be able to share their story.  And therefore they are encouraged and they're incentivized, whether it's through being rewarded  
**[0:45:18-0:45:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:45:18):**  for the I don't like the word ecosystem services, the greatness that it gives us from nature.  When you put nature back into the field, let's put it that way, whether it's paying them  for that, or whether it's retraining the agronomist, regardless, their asset, their farmland, their  home, their business is going to increase in value, because there is more resilience.  And it will, in the end, be growing more reliably and better crops than degraded land.  
**[0:45:53-0:45:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:45:53):**  And if there's a way that we can measure that, then I think you can start to talk about how  you give your reward back to the fund.  So it's not my area of expertise, but I would definitely come with the  That's why I asked the question, because otherwise it would be very boring.  I'd get a really expert person to work with my crazy ideas and where I'm very focused  
**[0:46:14-0:46:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:46:14):**  on mission and purpose.  That's how many funds start, don't worry.  And as a final question, because I want to be conscious of your time as well, I usually  ask a final question and then others follow.  So we take away the fund, but you have a magic power, you have a magic wand, and you can  
**[0:46:28-0:46:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:46:28):**  change one thing in the food and ag space.  What would that be?  I'm not allowed two things.  You're not allowed one thing and then changing it to two.  It's not allowed.  
**[0:46:37-0:46:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:46:37):**  So then I would be torn between either literally not a single person is allowed to walk down  the path of a farmer's home that isn't promoting nature in the way that they are growing what  we rely on.  Use, eat, burn.  That's one.  
**[0:46:57-0:47:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:46:57):**  And the other would be that every single time someone picks anything up off the shelves  of a supermarket, there's immediate transparency and they understand what they are purchasing.  So as a mother of young children, I hate it that I actually don't know, is this really  good for my child or not?  And am I feeding them in the end something that actually is bringing?  
**[0:47:28-0:47:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:47:28):**  Because what you put into the ground in the end is what you're putting into your own body.  It's that simple.  We've made it enormously complicated and we've made it very sophisticated and the whole world  global food system is extremely opaque.  And in the end, it's extremely simple.  
**[0:47:48-0:47:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:47:48):**  What you feed the grass, kind of what was put to me by someone is what does the plant  eat?  So what you give the plant to eat and what the soil eats in the end is what you're going  to eat.  So I think a level of transparency that means also consumers make more consider choices  
**[0:48:07-0:48:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:48:07):**  so that it's not a price game.  Because in the end, of course, if something is a bit cheaper on the shelf and you're managing  a budget, you're going to be weighing up, okay, well, in the end, it's about price,  not about taste, not about nutrition.  So I think a magic wand across kind of all of the shelves in a supermarket that somehow  
**[0:48:27-0:48:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:48:27):**  gives you that spotlight of, oh, this is bloody tasty, it's really good for you and it's not  ridiculously more expensive.  Oh, I'll take that instead.  I think it's a good way to close this interview.  Thank you, Gina, so much for sharing in this weird year, the end of a weird year.  
**[0:48:43-0:48:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:48:43):**  We're almost at the end, actually.  And of course, congrats with all the progress.  And I'm pretty sure we'll be checking in.  But for now, thank you so much for sharing your knowledge, your openness and for the  amazing advice you give to others that are struggling or are, let's say, in the grind  
**[0:48:58-0:49:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:48:58):**  still figuring out how to raise capital in 2020, which has been a crazy year.  Thank you very much, Kun.  And I should say on behalf of the whole community, we're all so super thrilled with the work  that you do and you are one of those great connectors and supporters.  So thank you very much.  
**[0:49:14-0:49:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:49:14):**  Thank you so much.  If you would like to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and  agriculture, find our video course on investing in regenerative agriculture dot com slash  course.  This course will teach you to understand the opportunities to get to know the main players,  
**[0:49:30-0:49:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:49:30):**  to learn about the main trends and how to evaluate a new investment opportunity, like  what kind of questions to ask.  Find out more on investing in regenerative agriculture dot com slash course.  If you found the investing in regenerative agriculture and food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  
**[0:49:50-0:49:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:49:50):**  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  It's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  join my membership community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  
**[0:50:12-0:50:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:50:12):**  You can find all the details on gumroad dot com slash investing region egg or in the description  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food.  
**[0:50:37-0:50:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:50:37):**  How to put money to work in regenerating soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while  doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After a hundred interviews and more than a hundred hours of audio asking the question  how to put money to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011  
**[0:50:53-0:50:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:50:53):**  and recording this podcast since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision-making framework, what to focus on with the podcast, how have  we picked interviewees, what questions should you ask, what is happening in the space, what  should you read, what should you listen, what should you watch, how to approach this space.  
**[0:51:17-0:51:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:51:17):**  For whom is this course?  You, the soil builders and investors in the space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management, consultants, etc.  
**[0:51:36-0:51:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:51:36):**  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  
**[0:51:52-0:51:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:51:52):**  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you.  And I'm very aware that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very  different means.  
**[0:52:05-0:52:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:52:05):**  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  
**[0:52:21-0:52:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:52:21):**  so you don't have to write along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  if you're a soil builder.  
**[0:52:40-0:52:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:52:40):**  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  
**[0:52:56-0:52:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:52:56):**  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  
**[0:53:13-0:53:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2021/01/05/gina-pattinson#t=0:53:13):**  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  