### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2021-00-09)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investing in regenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  Simply vegan isn't good enough.  Today a topic we usually don't cover in depth.  
**[0:00:18-0:00:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:00:18):**  The world of vegan cheeses and alternative proteins.  This is the story of a company that thought they were extremely sustainable by simply  making vegan plant-based cheese.  But they found out that if they wanted to be net positive and have the biggest impact  possible, they needed to look a lot further into their supply chain and completely change  
**[0:00:36-0:00:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:00:36):**  all their recipes.  I really wanted to share this story as we need the plant-based community to be part  of the regenerative transition.  Which means we need to ask difficult questions about industrial dairy and we need to ask  difficult questions about the ingredients and supply chains behind plant-based products.  
**[0:00:55-0:00:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:00:55):**  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture.  Investing as if the planet mattered.  Podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  
**[0:01:15-0:01:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:01:15):**  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  
**[0:01:33-0:01:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:01:33):**  In March last year we launched our membership community to make it easy for fans to support  our work and so many of you have joined as a member.  We've launched different types of benefits, exclusive content, Q&A webinars with former  guests, ask me anything sessions plus so much more to come in the future.  For more information on the different tiers, benefits and how to become a member check  
**[0:01:53-0:01:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:01:53):**  out gumroad.com slash investing region egg or find the link below.  Thank you.  Welcome to another episode today with Brad van stone, founder of Willycroft, a plant  based cheese for dairy cheese lovers who is going deep into regenerative agriculture and  soil.  
**[0:02:08-0:02:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:02:08):**  Welcome Brad.  Thank you.  Thank you for having me.  So to start with the personal question we always love to ask, why are you doing what  you're doing?  
**[0:02:16-0:02:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:02:16):**  Why soil?  Why plant based cheeses?  So this all started when I moved to Amsterdam.  I started to eat a mainly plant based diet with my partner and we found it very easy  to give up meat and milk, but cheese was definitely our favorite food until that point.  
**[0:02:31-0:02:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:02:31):**  I think like a lot of Dutch people, we really struggled to give up cheese.  And so we started to look for alternatives in the supermarket and even back then the  alternative to meat and milk were pretty good, but the alternatives for cheese left a lot  to be desired back then.  How many years ago is this just to have an idea?  
**[0:02:51-0:02:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:02:51):**  We're talking four or five years ago.  And so I started to experiment at home in my apartment and I had a basic understanding  of how to make cheese from my grandfather.  He was a dairy farmer, so I was combining similar processes and practices, but with a plant  based ingredient base.  
**[0:03:09-0:03:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:03:09):**  And from there the business kind of began very artisanally.  I was just going from market to market and then after about a year I realized that actually  if I could change one thing, it was to solve the initial problem we were facing, which  was good quality plant based cheese at retail.  But the whole intention of starting this was to create something that was genuinely having  
**[0:03:33-0:03:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:03:33):**  a positive impact on the planet.  And the only way in which we realized we could do that is if we could really go back to the  core of everything and really look at the beginning and the kind of transparency behind  our entire supply chain.  I guess that's how everything came back to the soil and the base and where things were  
**[0:03:52-0:03:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:03:52):**  produced, the emissions and the cause and effect of what happens when they are produced.  And so that's kind of how we came to be.  I know sort of the answer, but I would love for you to share it.  When did that realization came to you and the company?  Because for many, I think, plant based companies, that realization still has to arrive, that  
**[0:04:12-0:04:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:04:12):**  it's important to look beyond the ingredients.  It's not just important to take out the dairy and to take out something, but it's actually  important what do you put in and is it a highly processed, how is it farmed, etc, etc.  You came to that realization and decided to act on that, which I would love to hear how  that happened and how was that moment when you realized, OK, there's a world beyond the  
**[0:04:31-0:04:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:04:31):**  ingredients.  Sure, so I think quite a common misconception is that just because something's plant based,  it's therefore better for the planet than dairy.  And so once we got past that realization and realized that there was a lot more kind of  nuances at play, that was when we started to unravel a whole sort of rabbit warren of  
**[0:04:52-0:04:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:04:52):**  information, some of which was very difficult to take because we had to really start from  scratch and make decisions that we didn't think we were going to have to make.  Like what was the most difficult one, the most difficult realization and decision?  Basically just ripping out the rule book of every single recipe we ever made.  So just to give a brief kind of synopsis of plant based cheese, you really have two main  
**[0:05:18-0:05:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:05:18):**  base ingredients.  You have cashews or other nuts and then more processed components as a base.  So the cashew based cheeses are or other nuts are using kind of traditional processes to  create milk and then through fermentation, creating certain flavoring.  But the more processed variety are really just providing a sort of I don't want to say  
**[0:05:40-0:05:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:05:40):**  mimic, but that sort of experience.  It looks like cheese, it melts like cheese, it kind of tastes like cheese.  And so we realized that actually both models, neither of them really worked from an emissions  standpoint.  And therefore, we had to find a totally different route.  
**[0:05:58-0:06:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:05:58):**  And this was pretty much in line with when we just released some products on the market  and we're trying to celebrate those products.  And so, yeah, you claim to be an environmentally conscious business.  You think you're on a really good path.  And then you get hit with the news that actually across your entire supply chain through a  
**[0:06:18-0:06:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:06:18):**  lifecycle assessment, your emissions aren't really that much better than dairy.  That was definitely a tough realization, but the most important thing we've learned today,  for sure.  And what was the biggest driver of that smaller difference than you anticipated or hoped for?  Was it the way cashew nuts or nuts in general are grown, the water, etc.?  
**[0:06:36-0:06:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:06:36):**  What was the biggest driver of that difference?  Yeah, it was the cashews indeed.  So it's the processing of them that is the real energy intensive part.  So making the milk, basically.  So it's actually taking the shell off, which a lot of nuts have shells and they have shells  
**[0:06:54-0:06:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:06:54):**  on the individual nut itself.  So for every single one, you have to remove that shell.  And often that process is done actually thousands of miles away.  So I think two thirds of the world's cashews are grown in Africa, but actually a huge proportion  are then processed in somewhere like Vietnam and India and then sold.  
**[0:07:16-0:07:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:07:16):**  It could be in the States, it could be in Europe.  So the distances they're traveling, but also the energy that's being used to process them  is very extensive.  And often it's fossil fuel energy.  So we actually had a partner that was processing on site.  
**[0:07:32-0:07:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:07:32):**  They were growing with a load of local farmers.  I think they had a thousand smallholder farmers.  So it was a pretty responsible partner.  They were organic.  They're employing 70% women.  
**[0:07:42-0:07:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:07:42):**  And even then we were creating a highly emitting product.  So it was a real kind of red flag that even when you do have some insight into your suppliers  and you do think you've got some good partners, you can still cause a lot more harm than you  imagined.  And so that set of a journey to find alternatives for these nuts and to find ones that are less,  
**[0:08:03-0:08:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:08:03):**  let's say emission heavy or actually even emission positive.  Yeah, exactly.  So we switched on to beans and pulses.  So we're making that transition this year.  So by the end of this year, all of our cheese will be based on those ingredients.  
**[0:08:17-0:08:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:08:17):**  We spent about 18 months looking at all manner of different factors.  So the main starting point is to create a milk and from there we can create a plant  based cheese.  So there are certain nutritional components we're looking at.  There are certain cost components, there are certain ethical components in terms of wages  
**[0:08:36-0:08:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:08:36):**  for the farmers.  And we also now are starting to look at the soil as well.  So it's difficult to find entirely regenerative ingredients at this stage.  We'll maybe come on to that later.  But for organic, that is something which we are, we're not totally organic by any stretch  
**[0:08:54-0:09:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:08:54):**  of the imagination, but we are at least sort of 50 to 60 percent minimum upwards to a couple  of products which are going to be organic in a couple of months time.  So where possible, our philosophy is to select organic supplies.  But it's such a new space, the vegan cheese world, so we're using a lot of ingredients  that just haven't been certified at this stage.  
**[0:09:16-0:09:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:09:16):**  And how difficult is it then to, because a nut and a bean seem very different from the  non-vegan cheese expert, like how different is that process now becoming and flavor wise  and is it much more processing for you?  How difficult is it to switch from a nut to a milk and then a cheese to a bean and a milk  and a cheese?  
**[0:09:34-0:09:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:09:34):**  Yeah, it's a totally different recipe.  So a nut are actually probably the best base ingredient to make a milk.  They're high in protein and fat, quite nutrient in flavor, quite nutrient in color.  So they are just a brilliant ingredient.  Beans are high in protein but not high in fat.  
**[0:09:52-0:09:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:09:52):**  So you have to build up that fat level with other ingredients.  They are actually a slightly better color, white beans.  So that is a plus.  But yeah, we had to basically just rip up the book and start afresh with the recipes.  There were certain things we could cross over, but it really has been a process of starting  
**[0:10:10-0:10:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:10:10):**  again.  In terms of flavor, you're getting to, because of course your customers are used to the nut  based ones.  And so is that going to be a journey or what you're expecting there?  Well, we always look at it actually by comparing it to the dairy cheese we're replacing because  
**[0:10:26-0:10:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:10:26):**  in our eyes, whilst we think it's fantastic when someone can just switch their diet totally  without needing this, I do think for most people it has to be a comparable product in  taste.  I think the best meat and milk replacements that are on the market are really offering  something that is incredibly compelling when you place plant-based and dairy next to each  
**[0:10:49-0:10:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:10:49):**  other.  So for us, that is the target always.  It's not necessarily to compare ourselves to other plant-based cheeses, but always the  dairy cheese that we're trying to create an alternative for.  And that's, I'm just imagining or assuming that maybe the bean-based cheeses, they might  
**[0:11:07-0:11:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:11:07):**  lend themselves to make different cheeses than the nut ones.  Is that the case?  Like it naturally goes to a certain class of cheeses and the nut ones naturally like  bend towards another.  Is that the case?  
**[0:11:17-0:11:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:11:17):**  Like you're going to release different cheese varieties because of the beans, because of  different ingredients?  Yeah.  So we, at this stage, kind of our first focus was to create the cheeses that people are  having every day.  
**[0:11:30-0:11:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:11:30):**  So in the dairy cheese world, you've got mozzarella, feta, cheddar, howder, those sorts of cheeses.  So those are the ones that we focused on initially.  So I couldn't say how it will work for say a camembert or a more sort of aged cheese  or more of a kind of delicacy, but certainly for the more everyday cheeses, it's proven  to be a really fantastic base ingredient.  
**[0:11:55-0:12:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:11:55):**  And do you see this movement or your, let's say, larger scope looking beyond your ingredients,  looking beyond the LCA at a life cycle assessment?  Is that something that you've seen other plant-based cheeses or let's say alternative protein companies  starting to look at or looking at as well?  Is there somebody you could call like in this space, like, look, we're thinking about this,  
**[0:12:17-0:12:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:12:17):**  somebody that has made a few steps already or are you really lonely in the movement at  the moment?  We're lonely, but we're not an island.  There are two companies in Europe that I know of who are really looking at this as well.  The Swiss company called Neurut, they have just released an LCA, really fantastic company,  
**[0:12:36-0:12:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:12:36):**  great people.  And there's another company in Germany, I can't remember the name of, who've put their  emissions on their packaging, which I think is another really important step.  So it's starting, but this is where I think we also need to see a little bit more governmental  involvement.  
**[0:12:55-0:13:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:12:55):**  I really think a carbon tax would be a fantastic step.  We only need to look at the kind of move to a sugar tax and alcohol tax and cigarette  tax to see the improvements those have had in restricting or improving certain health  components.  And I think when we put a monetary figure on carbon, I do really think that is going  
**[0:13:19-0:13:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:13:19):**  to force the hand of supermarkets, of suppliers, of producers.  And yeah, I see that as something that can really help to lower the emissions that the  food industry has.  So you've been working on the ingredients, which is an enormous job for a small team  like yourself.  
**[0:13:37-0:13:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:13:37):**  So in terms of sourcing, how difficult, I mean, you've mentioned we're trying to find  a number of ingredients organic, but beyond that, or the soil discussion has been very,  very difficult, non-existent in many cases.  What are you working on in that area to improve that?  Like to make it easier for yourself, but also for others, obviously, to start sourcing some  
**[0:13:55-0:14:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:13:55):**  of these ingredients in a way that is a bit more holistic, looking at the full picture.  And what is your, because I know you have plans there, but I can imagine as a small  team, it's already tricky enough to change all your recipes and figure out that part.  But what are you thinking on the sourcing part and what are you working on?  Yeah, so this part is kind of split in two.  
**[0:14:13-0:14:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:14:13):**  So we've got some partners who are already really pushing regenerative practices, or  at the very least, they're already organic.  So they're already, you know, very much on a similar mindset.  And when you say partners, you mean farmers, I'm imagining in Europe or somewhere?  Yeah, suppliers who can kind of give us multiple ingredients and their philosophies are very  
**[0:14:36-0:14:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:14:36):**  much in line with ours, but their buying power is just so huge that the impact that they  can have is just enormous.  So we're very lucky to work with people like that.  But we're also conscious of doing some more kind of actions on our end.  So we've begun a transitional farming project with a couple of local farmers here in the  
**[0:14:55-0:15:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:14:55):**  Netherlands, we're teaming up with also a couple of partner organizations like Renatured  to help run the project.  And the goal is to basically grow some of our main ingredients, so the white beans on  what is currently dairy land, to give the dairy farmers another source of income, but  to also localize our supply chain, and to prove that plant based producers and dairy  
**[0:15:21-0:15:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:15:21):**  farmers can work together.  So we're going to start this on a small scale.  Initially we're hoping to plant this year, but at the very latest, it will be next year,  looking at probably 10 to 20 acres initially, so very small.  But the goal is just to get a couple of harvests in, prove that this ingredient can be grown  
**[0:15:40-0:15:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:15:40):**  here and it is already but we just want to really cement that it can.  And then we want to roll this out with much more scale.  And for, let's say, I'm a dairy farmer in the Netherlands, what does it mean concretely  for me that you're working with me on a transition, except for probably planting a few acres of  white beans, but what does it entail?  
**[0:16:01-0:16:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:16:01):**  Yeah, so I think as we do see climate change really kicking in over the next few years,  I think we do need to look at kind of multiple income streams for our farmers.  I think that will improve their resilience.  But I do also foresee a world that does have less dairy in it.  I think that the battle we're fighting is not with smallholder dairy farms, it's with  
**[0:16:23-0:16:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:16:23):**  big dairy, which has totally left a lot of farmers behind, my grandpa included.  That kind of saw an end to a fair price.  It saw an end to a multi-faceted farm, the care of animals.  And so we want to work with those who are still farming in smallholding setups to make  sure that they are protected because the subsidies you see for someone like in the EU, that's  
**[0:16:50-0:16:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:16:50):**  not going to these guys, that's going to the big dairy organizations.  So yeah, I guess we're kind of reaching out a hand to those dairy farmers and saying that,  yeah, we respect the role that you play and we want you to be as big a part of the future  food system as you have been thus far.  And then it would mean that like on part of my hectares or acres, I will plant white beans  
**[0:17:13-0:17:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:17:13):**  in this case and you will with an offtake agreement and that will add an interesting  income stream instead of putting, I don't know, solar panels on the land or instead  of doing some other crop, et cetera, to basically add to the small scale dairy that I'm operating.  Yeah, exactly.  Exactly.  
**[0:17:30-0:17:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:17:30):**  How do you see that playing out for like that you say we're fighting against or we're competing  against or what we want to change is the big dairy.  What do you see there happening?  Some of them are entering the space that you're in as well, probably not with the same values  and intentions, but what do you see that whole discussion on the large, definitely not alternative  
**[0:17:50-0:17:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:17:50):**  protein companies starting to enter the space of the alternative protein companies buying  up some big ones, setting up funds.  I mean, we see all the activities left and right.  What's your thought there as a very active player in it?  Yeah, I mean, I guess if the change happened, I actually don't necessarily mind how it happens.  
**[0:18:07-0:18:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:18:07):**  I would rather it happened a certain way, but much like with the renewable space with  energy, the guys that are producing most of the fossil fuel energy are inevitably the  people who can make the greatest change if they really put their time and effort into  setting up a more sustainable energy sector.  They have the infrastructure, they have the connections, they have the capital, they have  
**[0:18:31-0:18:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:18:31):**  the research and the manpower.  It's a similar story with dairy.  I don't think we're seeing the same kind of switch just yet.  We're seeing quite a lot of protective moves happening in Europe surrounding the naming  of products, the packaging of products and those sorts of things.  
**[0:18:49-0:18:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:18:49):**  Which means they're getting scared.  Exactly.  But change is definitely coming.  I do think a carbon tax is on the horizon, which will dramatically change the price of  food and force a lot of consumers to consider alternatives.  
**[0:19:03-0:19:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:19:03):**  I think the quality of the alternatives is getting a lot better.  People are raising a lot of questions about factory farming and so all of these indicators  are pushing towards a different system.  I just hope that they decide to move with it rather than trying to fight against the  tide.  
**[0:19:22-0:19:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:19:22):**  Because personally, even though we are a plant-based producer, we don't see a world without dairy.  That's not the world we're trying to create.  The world we do see is a world that can feed 10 billion people by 2050, in which scenario  we're going to have to produce 70% more food.  We're not going to do that with the current system.  
**[0:19:41-0:19:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:19:41):**  We need to just think about how we're allocating our resources, think about how we're growing  our food and that requires a different kind of food system than the one we have now.  To go a bit deeper into that analogy, I think we can learn a lot from the renewable energy  space.  You see some very large players moving and we can ask a lot of questions about it.  
**[0:20:02-0:20:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:20:02):**  But if you look just at Dong, which I think changed its name to Orset or something, the  Danish oil and gas operator became a fully wind, one of the biggest wind developers in  the world.  Of course, it took a long shot.  Of course, they sold their fossil assets.  
**[0:20:16-0:20:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:20:16):**  Somebody still owns them.  They're not completely retired, but made a huge shift or transition and seems to be leading  the pack at the moment.  Others are sort of scrambling to catch up.  What if you would be, let's say, the head of Friesland Campina, which is one of the  
**[0:20:30-0:20:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:20:30):**  biggest dairy cooperatives in the world based in the Netherlands.  What would be like you're in control of the oil tanker?  What would be your, you have maybe a couple of years because then shareholders are going  to get very nervous, etc.  What would be your first few steps to set up some change there?  
**[0:20:44-0:20:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:20:44):**  Because that's a massive dairy company, some small scale is still part of it, but I think  most of it is large, large subsidy driven dairy.  What would be your moves as the new appointed CEO?  So I would love to see true cost accounting and a target for net positivity.  So first up with the true cost accounting, as you mentioned, Friesland Campina is primarily  
**[0:21:07-0:21:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:21:07):**  propped up by subsidies or they're able to offer the price points they can because of  subsidies.  They're exporting all over the world with prices that local markets can't compete with  because of the taxpayer money.  So I would love to see them take a responsible stance and actually charge the price that  
**[0:21:27-0:21:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:21:27):**  should be charged for their products.  It would lead inevitably to a loss in revenue, but I think the first player that moves here  in the dairy space will get a lot of credit and that will resonate with consumers, I think.  And then from a net positivity standpoint, it is very possible to regeneratively farm  dairy and seek.  
**[0:21:50-0:21:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:21:50):**  Which is interesting to hear that from a plant based producer.  Yeah.  I mean, there's been a lot of reports, a lot of great stuff coming out of the US in particular  with regards to regenerative dairy farming.  And it's very clear that you can farm dairy in a regenerative way.  
**[0:22:06-0:22:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:22:06):**  So I think those would be the main things.  But there's a but you have to radically change everything you're doing basically.  Yeah, it would take huge change.  And yeah, the capital implications would be mega.  But I think even just setting a date that isn't a ridiculous thought on the horizon,  
**[0:22:24-0:22:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:22:24):**  but it's a 2030 2040 for targets, you know, maybe perhaps it was with 50 percent there  by 2030, 100 percent there by 2040.  That would still be an improvement on now where it's, you know, an interesting conversation,  but not really one that they're taking.  Like in the UK, we're banning the sales of all internal combustion engine or ICE vehicles  
**[0:22:45-0:22:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:22:45):**  by 2030.  Yeah.  And it would have happened anyway, probably because it's going so fast now in electric  transportation.  But it's even if it doesn't reach out, like it creates suddenly everybody's scrambling  
**[0:22:56-0:22:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:22:56):**  and starting to like this is real.  This is going to happen if it's 2031 or 2032 or 2029.  Doesn't really matter.  But it's the move is there.  And that would be very powerful to put a net positive statement out there.  
**[0:23:09-0:23:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:23:09):**  And then very interesting.  Yeah, I think it's also the responsibility of shareholders and the market.  I mean, everything is driven by today, but I've been reading a lot of recently about  intergenerational thinking.  You're reading the good ancestor or not.  
**[0:23:25-0:23:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:23:25):**  I just started like a week ago, maybe I'm only page 20.  But yeah, it's interesting.  Yeah, it's a really interesting topic.  And it's tapping into a lot of existing conversations.  So a lot of the ideas aren't necessarily new, but it's providing a kind of framework or  
**[0:23:38-0:23:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:23:38):**  a way of looking at it.  But I just love the notion of always thinking about, okay, so what is the future generation  going to think of us?  Because when you put it into that context, you remove your own individual ego, you remove  the present day.  
**[0:23:55-0:23:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:23:55):**  And I think then you make much better decisions.  And we have to act on things today.  But we should be acting on things today, knowing they're going to be better tomorrow, 20 years,  50 years, 100 years time.  Seven generations.  
**[0:24:08-0:24:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:24:08):**  Yeah, exactly.  There's that wonderful group in North America that think in a seven generational way, which  is very inspirational.  And I'm really then like, how do you get that into and Frisant Campina is a sort of different  story because they are cooperative.  
**[0:24:23-0:24:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:24:23):**  So they might have or they could have a longer term view.  But if you look at Danone, for instance, great example that are sort of control, like, I  mean, they have a longer term view on some shareholders, but now they get an activist  one that actually is pushing to Emmanuel Faber to change because they need to need results  per quarter.  
**[0:24:40-0:24:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:24:40):**  What can we do there too?  Because that seems to be that really the underlying every quarter or at least every six months,  I need to show X growth or X, which completely takes you away from investing for five or  10 years, which used to be the case.  And so what I mean, it's a very difficult question.  
**[0:24:56-0:24:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:24:56):**  This is a rabbit hole.  But if you're running a company, let's say you're now CEO of Danone and you have these  activities, you have these shareholders that are pushing, like, how would you counteract  that?  Do you have any?  
**[0:25:06-0:25:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:25:06):**  They're long term things and they should be because that's kind of important.  But they are thinking short term of their next shareholder, their next report coming  out.  We're actually looking at this ourselves at the moment about how we solidify impact decisions.  And so there's a few things that you can do from what we've seen from other organizations.  
**[0:25:26-0:25:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:25:26):**  So one is appointing an impact board, which is kind of slightly separate to the main function  of the business.  And it's a neutral body and they are given certain decisions on certain components.  So, for example, if it's a spend, if it's a packaging decision, if it's just a major  investment that could mean that the company is not making a responsible decision, that  
**[0:25:51-0:25:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:25:51):**  impact board then votes on it.  So they kind of have a golden share.  The golden share is another option.  We had Armin Storjanagel of Purpose Ventures a while ago.  I should definitely check in with them again.  
**[0:26:05-0:26:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:26:05):**  But they're like, who controls the steering wheel of your company, even if Unilever puts  half a billion on the table or whatever, a crazy amount that changes everybody's lives?  Like, how do you make sure you stay impact driven and long term focused?  It has to do with legal stuff.  It has to do with controlling certain decisions.  
**[0:26:23-0:26:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:26:23):**  Also when you're not there anymore, because maybe you moved on to something else and maybe  the key people of the team have changed.  How do you create organizations that last much longer than we are used to now?  Yeah, well, it's interesting to look back on the origins of a company which were initially  set up as a for good service for society.  
**[0:26:43-0:26:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:26:43):**  But now it's got a very different route.  So I think we need to return back to that idea of service and making society, the planet,  whatever it might be, a better and improved place by our actions.  And companies are, I mean, I'm not bashing against that.  I think it's the strongest organization form we have.  
**[0:27:03-0:27:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:27:03):**  It's just it's a tool as everything else, which means you need to really make sure you  structure it well and think of all the bad stuff that can happen and all the annoying  things that can come around to make sure if you're interested in long term stuff that  it can run for 20, 30 years, because then you're going to have the biggest impact and  not sell after three or four or five or whatever the crazy it is now.  
**[0:27:24-0:27:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:27:24):**  Yeah.  And to come back to kind of our supply chain and that kind of thinking, we have to be thinking  in decade long periods because we very much want to have a regenerative supply chain,  but we also have to be realistic that it's not going to happen overnight and we have  to really work and fight to make it happen.  
**[0:27:41-0:27:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:27:41):**  And therefore that long term thinking is absolutely crucial.  And if we're looking at, I love to ask this question, which is always a bit lengthy, but  the ITN framework, the importance, tractability and neglectedness, importance meaning what's  the scale of the problem.  I think the scale of the problem of industrial dairy, let's say, is very clear.  
**[0:27:58-0:28:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:27:58):**  Many people for sure still underestimate the just a sheer impact of factory farming in  general, both for meat, dairy and other animal products.  So if this would be fixed, a lot would be better.  But if it fixed the proper way, the tractability, like how solvable is it?  I think you're starting to unpack that.  
**[0:28:14-0:28:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:28:14):**  Like how solvable is it if not using certain nuts that are very damaging?  We found out like that's something, but neglectedness, like how would you rate your work if you look  at the importance, the tractability and how many other people basically are working on  it?  It sounds like it's, of course, pretty high, but what's your feeling on that, your work  
**[0:28:31-0:28:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:28:31):**  at Willicroft?  Yeah.  So in terms of an important standpoint, I do think it is very important work.  The emissions of food, well, food is the biggest emitting sector of all.  When you look at every part of the chain, also dairy cheese is the third emitting food  
**[0:28:48-0:28:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:28:48):**  type.  So I think the importance is really clear.  And on the plant based side, we're not seeing enough accountability traceability with current  players on the market.  So it's really important that we take a proactive stance in showing an example of how to kind  
**[0:29:05-0:29:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:29:05):**  of map out these LCA's and build a supply chain that is a bit more responsible.  And then on the solvability, I think maybe first, it's good to mention the uptake.  So the uptake now is incredible with plant based alternatives.  I mean, in the UK, 25% of all milk sold is plant based and there's only actually 1% vegans  in the UK or 1.5%.  
**[0:29:28-0:29:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:29:28):**  So that's a huge proportion of flexitarians.  So the quality of the product is there.  But again, to go back to the kind of improvements that all the sort of traceability and the  accountability to the environment, that is where there's much, much work to be done.  And this is kind of, I think, the second phase of the plant based space.  
**[0:29:51-0:29:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:29:51):**  I think the first phase was really just products coming onto the market and a lot of excitement.  And now I think consumers are going to...  Totally going through the roof.  And yeah, that's it.  And everybody's starting to pay attention.  
**[0:30:05-0:30:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:30:05):**  I mean, many people did five years ago, but now it's really different.  And now we need to have that discussion on ingredients, but also on processing and what  does it actually do to your body?  We know much more about dairy, but definitely not health benefits and the health benefits.  But now we need to have that discussion about white bean cheese, because otherwise we're  
**[0:30:23-0:30:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:30:23):**  just replacing one thing for the other.  Yeah.  No, the worst thing we can do is create another problem by solving one.  I mean, that's not helping anything.  So yeah, I think this next phase is really about delving into those things you've mentioned.  
**[0:30:36-0:30:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:30:36):**  Also really understanding the impact on our planet's health, but also on humanity's health  as well.  How is that happening?  Like what's your view on that?  Because obviously you cannot do 30 year randomized control trials with fixing or replacing one  
**[0:30:50-0:30:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:30:50):**  cheese for the other.  Like what are you seeing that in white beans?  Like how much do you have to process it?  What other ingredients are there that could trigger certain things?  What's your view there?  
**[0:30:59-0:31:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:30:59):**  Yeah.  I mean, the nice thing is that for most producers, we know a lot about the individual ingredients.  So when they're combined as a combination, that's where we're perhaps still needing to  learn at this stage.  But I think the first step on the ingredients is there.  
**[0:31:17-0:31:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:31:17):**  There are some, you do look on the back of a pack sometimes on plant-based products and  do question, you know, what are half of these things and why are there 25 ingredients in  a single product?  I think that is somewhere that needs to change.  But we're seeing things like the NutriScore come out in Europe, which is a standard kind  
**[0:31:34-0:31:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:31:34):**  of health scoring mechanism.  And as I said, I do think a carbon tax on food is not too far away from an emissions  standpoint, at least on a trial basis in an individual country.  But these are all areas that need a lot more work and input.  And we're really at the beginning.  
**[0:31:52-0:31:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:31:52):**  And from your customer perspective, like your openness on emissions and ingredients now,  because you're on that journey, you're talking about it, you're releasing an impact report,  what has been the response from your customers that you're switching from nuts to other things?  Whether you weren't so sustainable as you hoped you were, but what has been your, because  you for sure have many fans, what has been their involvement, response, et cetera, on  
**[0:32:14-0:32:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:32:14):**  this journey?  We've never had anyone negatively look at it because I think we've always been quite  open the minute we've had information at hand.  And I think where people get frustrated is when there's a problem, but you don't address  the solution or when you try and hide the problem.  
**[0:32:33-0:32:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:32:33):**  So I mean, some of the companies that I admire the most are ones that always kind of look  in the mirror and take action at what they see.  Companies like Patagonia, for example, they started using organic cotton in the 90s, but  the uptake across the whole fashion industry has actually been really low.  And they see that as quite a personal kind of setback, that they haven't been able to  
**[0:32:58-0:33:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:32:58):**  drive the change that they would have liked.  And I think it's really fantastic when a company is constantly trying to improve, constantly  trying to evolve.  And the minute you put numbers behind anything, you can look to improve beyond those things.  When you're just basing your actions on assumptions, that's a dangerous place to be.  
**[0:33:19-0:33:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:33:19):**  As you learned.  Yeah, exactly.  Yeah, but I can imagine, let's say the customers in the vegan space can be quite, I don't know,  focused on that.  And it's interesting as a company takes them on a journey as well.  
**[0:33:32-0:33:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:33:32):**  There is a world beyond and maybe some of the other vegan things or plant based things  you're buying are 25 ingredients and actually are not that clean.  You're not saying that, but basically, of course, implicitly you are by making the moves  yourself and having a cleaner ingredient list and having potentially the carbon on it and  et cetera, et cetera.  
**[0:33:50-0:33:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:33:50):**  So it's yeah, maybe it's a message that some people don't want to hear because it makes  life a lot more complicated.  Yeah.  No, I mean, I think anyone who is willing and able to look at things pragmatically and  with nuance and depth sees that this is absolutely the right path.  
**[0:34:06-0:34:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:34:06):**  Anyone who's looking for a headline might see it differently.  And imagine an audience of smart impact investors listening to this conversation, like with  all the attention there is for plant based at the moment, what would you advise them  obviously without giving investment advice, but what would you advise them in terms of  directions to ask directions to look at?  
**[0:34:26-0:34:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:34:26):**  Like what if you will be investing in the space?  What would you be looking at?  What is exciting to you now as you're so deep into the process?  I think a good tasting product is not enough.  I think you really have to have something that is looking at a multitude of factors,  
**[0:34:42-0:34:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:34:42):**  really delving into supply chain, really looking at where things are from, you know, who are  the people behind producing these ingredients and also the health components of the product  as well.  And I think a very much kind of long term view is important because there are a lot  of things that seem to be sort of, I don't want to use the word fad, but I just have  
**[0:35:06-0:35:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:35:06):**  a better word to describe that basically, it seems like there's a lot of kind of quick  fixes and things that don't necessarily have that much depth to it.  And I think what this huge growth is really exciting to see.  And I think it's fantastic that a lot of options are now available.  I just hope that we learn from other lessons.  
**[0:35:28-0:35:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:35:28):**  And as we mentioned earlier, we don't create other issues by bringing something new onto  the market that hasn't been totally thought through.  So that's maybe a word of warning.  Digging deeper.  Yeah.  
**[0:35:42-0:35:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:35:42):**  And there's a lot coming out now, a lot of noise, like always when stuff starts heating  up, everybody jumps on it.  If you would be running an investment fund with a crazy amount, let's say a billion,  what would you be looking at?  What would you be investing in starting tomorrow when you're head of this newly created investment  
**[0:35:59-0:36:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:35:59):**  fund?  You can spend it whatever you want, not in grand capital, it has to be investment, but  could be extremely long term.  What would be your priority list?  What would be your focus?  
**[0:36:08-0:36:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:36:08):**  So can I mention a couple of things?  Absolutely.  You can do a whole list if you want.  You can do 50 million each, five million each or whatever you want to take in terms of space.  Some people answer with, I would put it all in X and some others have a whole list of  
**[0:36:23-0:36:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:36:23):**  things they want to look into.  But I'm asking it because I'd like to look into your head and what would you prioritize?  I'm not asking because we need to know exactly.  It's going to be 55 million point six.  What is the first things you would go after and with more or less, how would you split  
**[0:36:38-0:36:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:36:38):**  it up?  I really, really believe that lobbying is fundamental to us changing so many things  about our food system.  The guys who are lobbying at the moment do not really care about the planet and they're  protecting single interests and the status quo.  
**[0:36:57-0:37:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:36:57):**  So I would put a lot of that money into lobbying, which would probably lead to being fired at  VC because it's not going to lead to instant return.  But it would lead to a lot of widespread change.  I really do think that that is a big part of what's happening now.  And they would go after a carbon tax, they would go after...  
**[0:37:16-0:37:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:37:16):**  True cost accounting, carbon tax.  Getting a lot of the really important fundamentals right so that the market price switches because  as with renewables is the perfect example.  Now that so many options are price comparable, people are buying electric cars, people are  using renewable energy.  
**[0:37:35-0:37:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:37:35):**  So I think with food, we need to go and look at a similar sort of model.  I would also look to support projects that are really promoting the regenerative label.  I think we've got this amazing momentum now behind regenerative farming, but we now need  tangible things that we can buy in supermarkets.  So you would go after food companies, the food company side of things.  
**[0:38:00-0:38:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:38:00):**  And I think what's maybe missing at this stage is finished products.  We've got a lot of ingredients that can be regenerative, but making that into a product  is the next phase, I think.  So I would try and support projects that are looking to do that because I think that is  an important step.  
**[0:38:16-0:38:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:38:16):**  That is something we personally are struggling with at this stage.  We can get 50% there perhaps, but we're not going to be able to get the whole way there  at this stage.  So then would you invest in companies like Wheeligroft or would you invest in your suppliers  that then buy from farmers to get more ready ingredients for you to make your cheeses or  
**[0:38:38-0:38:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:38:38):**  for others to make other things?  Because you mentioned before, it's difficult to get, I mean, maybe some of the supply of  the white beans or et cetera, et cetera is there, but then the transformation piece seems  to be missing.  Is that what you're saying?  
**[0:38:51-0:38:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:38:51):**  Yeah, exactly.  Exactly.  I think we need more ingredients and farms that are using these models.  So yeah, I think it has to start there.  We need to plant these seeds now because it will probably not come into fruition for five  
**[0:39:06-0:39:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:39:06):**  to 10 years.  So yeah, I think we have to get a lot of the fundamentals right at either end of the spectrum.  You've got the lobbying at the top and then the farmers, which are obviously the rooters  of everything and the soil.  And that will ensure that everything in between starts to adjust in the right way.  
**[0:39:25-0:39:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:39:25):**  If you could change one thing, so we took away your fund, I'm very sorry, but you have  a magic wand and a magic power to change one thing, only one.  So you cannot say carbon tax and true or cost accounting.  What would you go after if you could change one thing in the ag and food industry, which  could be anything, could be global consciousness, could be, I mean, we've had many, many, you've  
**[0:39:41-0:39:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:39:41):**  heard some episodes, many, many different answers to this question, but what would be  your one change?  Yeah, I had to ponder on that for quite some time.  That's why I ask it.  Yeah, I do think it is this though.  
**[0:39:52-0:40:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:39:52):**  I think I would love to see us return to our grandparents diet, which sounds strange, but  that would solve so many problems.  We wouldn't have this huge dependence on meat.  We would be paying the true cost of things.  There are so many things that were got right at that stage.  
**[0:40:12-0:40:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:40:12):**  I mean, if you look at the cost of the household spend in America, for example, now on food,  it's gone from 20% per family down to 10%, yet they're eating more meat than ever, more  dairy.  And you know, these things just don't add up.  So I would go back to a bygone era.  
**[0:40:32-0:40:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:40:32):**  And go forward sort of, because I think there's a lot of, because I don't think we want to  go back to the back breaking.  No.  I mean, they got many things right, but many things not so much as well.  But there's an interesting, I think on the diet part and the changing diet that can really  
**[0:40:46-0:40:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:40:46):**  lead to a lot of change.  Like if we not incorporate nuts everywhere because that has its issues, but if we like  just the peas and legumes, just the there's massive switches that leads to simply by switching  a few things in your diet and we need to push for a lot of other things.  But I think that's a, and it was much healthier.  
**[0:41:04-0:41:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:41:04):**  I mean, if you look at the current health crisis, which comes from many different reasons,  but very much comes from industrial chemical driven input driven farming ways.  And then what we eat out of it, it's a massive, an absolute massive one.  Yeah.  The nutritionals behind the food now and then is another crazy comparative point.  
**[0:41:23-0:41:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:41:23):**  Yeah.  There was a lot.  Do you get questions on that?  Like vegan cheese compared to dairy cheese?  What does it mean for me, for my body basically?  
**[0:41:31-0:41:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:41:31):**  And what do you answer to that?  Yeah, we do.  We do actually.  We're actually doing a kind of synopsis directly comparing each cheese to the dairy equivalent  at the moment.  
**[0:41:40-0:41:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:41:40):**  They shape up pretty well.  I think one thing though, that is always worth bearing in mind is we are trying to create  cheese.  So it's not like it's a, we're creating a super food.  Therefore that, you know, can taste like cheese, but also give you your five a day and all  
**[0:41:56-0:41:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:41:56):**  of your millions of vitamins and stuff.  So we heed caution when people shouldn't only eat this.  You definitely shouldn't only eat Wurtecraft and you can definitely quote me on that.  And you shouldn't only eat cheese in general.  Yeah, no, it's part of a diet.  
**[0:42:10-0:42:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:42:10):**  Obviously of a hopefully diverse.  Absolutely.  Yeah.  Yeah.  And what would you be busy this year?  
**[0:42:16-0:42:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:42:16):**  We're still sort of at the beginning of 2020, not really.  We're in March already.  Don't know how fast that went, but what's your, apart from the whole ingredient, the  launching the new cheeses or improved cheeses or changed cheeses, what other big projects  are you working on?  
**[0:42:29-0:42:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:42:29):**  If you could actually work on something else, because this is a massive one.  No, so that's taking up a lot of time, the switch from nut concert to beans and legumes.  But we're also just about to release our first impact report.  And so that's been a real focus for the team this year.  Which should be out at the moment.  
**[0:42:45-0:42:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:42:45):**  I will link it below, obviously, for anybody listening, which should be out by the time  this interview is out.  So thank you.  Yeah.  And we're also doing some big campaigns this year to try and get some buy-in from other  
**[0:42:55-0:42:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:42:55):**  kind of plant-based producers and well, any kind of food producer actually.  So the first campaign is surrounding making Mother Nature your CEO.  So we appointed Mother Nature as our CEO last year.  How has that been?  She's doing an excellent job.  
**[0:43:10-0:43:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:43:10):**  Okay, great.  She's been tough in places, but yeah, she's kept some straight and narrow, that's for  sure.  But no, we've put in quite a few requirements that a company needs to follow up on if they  do make this appointment, because we don't want it just to be an appointment and then  
**[0:43:26-0:43:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:43:26):**  it's kind of left there.  We do want to introduce certain requirements.  So the sort of things we're looking at is committing to writing an impact report within  two years, publishing emissions on packaging within the timeframe, looking at accreditations  like B Corp and other kind of accreditations.  
**[0:43:45-0:43:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:43:45):**  So yeah, a set of goals to work towards essentially.  That's a campaign we're doing in April.  And then we're also putting our emissions on our packaging this year, which will be  a really nice step, I think, because that's us really then saying to the consumers and  to all of our sellers, you know, this is something that we really think should be given greater  
**[0:44:05-0:44:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:44:05):**  attention.  So I would say those are the real, real core projects.  And we're also really trying to make improvements in our supply chain and have our first two  organic products coming out this year, which is really exciting.  But there's still a lot of work to be done on the supply chain side.  
**[0:44:24-0:44:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:44:24):**  Yeah, I can imagine.  And I love asking this question, slightly edited from Jon Kempf.  What do you believe to be true about regenerative agriculture and food that others don't believe  to be true?  I do genuinely believe that it can be a label, a consumer label.  
**[0:44:38-0:44:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:44:38):**  I think organics virtues have led to some incredible improvements to the produce of  food over the last 30 years.  But I'm very glad that we're taking the next step because organic does have its limitations  in certain countries.  Are you going after ROC like regenerative organic?  
**[0:44:58-0:45:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:44:58):**  I will link the interview with Elizabeth below, which we released recently.  Are you planning to go after, let's say, organic plus in this case, but also adding so animal  health and obviously social sites to it?  That is our goal.  So we are hoping this year to know what time frames we have for that, because what I am  
**[0:45:16-0:45:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:45:16):**  very conscious of is making a statement about when we can achieve this.  And we're still in the information gathering phase.  So we can comfortably say we're going to be able to get organic with two products this  year and many more in the future.  But in terms of regenerative organic, which is definitely a goal, I don't want to commit  
**[0:45:37-0:45:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:45:37):**  at this stage.  But we will do everything in our power to make it happen.  Perfect.  Thank you so much.  I don't think I have any further questions.  
**[0:45:44-0:45:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:45:44):**  I would love to check in because I think it's going to be an incredibly busy year for you.  You just finished a crowdfunding raise actually a few weeks ago or a month ago.  And it sounds like you're going to put that to good use and riding the wave of plant based,  I wouldn't say hype, but definitely growth, but asking a lot more questions behind that.  So I want to thank you for taking the time to join us and raise some of those questions  
**[0:46:06-0:46:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:46:06):**  you've been asking and that many others should as well.  It's been a pleasure.  Thank you very much for having me and for all the great work you're doing as well.  If you would like to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and  agriculture, find our video course on investing in regenerative agriculture dot com slash  
**[0:46:23-0:46:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:46:23):**  course.  This course will teach you to understand the opportunities to get to know the main players,  to learn about the main trends and how to evaluate a new investment opportunity.  Like what kind of questions to ask.  Find out more on investing in regenerative agriculture dot com slash course.  
**[0:46:41-0:46:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:46:41):**  If you found the investing in regenerative agriculture and food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few  seconds.  
**[0:46:55-0:47:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:46:55):**  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  join my membership community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on cambrot.com slash investing regenegg or in the description  below.  
**[0:47:16-0:47:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:47:16):**  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  
**[0:47:42-0:47:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:47:42):**  After a hundred interviews and more than a hundred hours of audio asking the question  how to put money to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011  and recording this podcast since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework?  
**[0:48:01-0:48:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:48:01):**  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  What questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  
**[0:48:09-0:48:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:48:09):**  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  You the soil builders and investors in the space.  
**[0:48:19-0:48:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:48:19):**  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management consultants, etc.  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  
**[0:48:39-0:48:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:48:39):**  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  
**[0:48:53-0:48:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:48:53):**  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  that among the listeners of this podcast we have people with very different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  
**[0:49:11-0:49:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:49:11):**  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to ride along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  
**[0:49:31-0:49:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:49:31):**  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  
**[0:49:51-0:49:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:49:51):**  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  
**[0:50:02-0:50:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/brad-vanstone#t=0:50:02):**  Before making any investment please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  