### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2020-00-21)
**[0:00:00-0:00:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:00:00):**  You're listening to the summary of the interview. For a link to the full-length episode, please check the description below.  Disrupting the Cow. This interview is about how factory farms, agriculture and land prices will be disrupted by precision fermentation.  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture – Investing as if the Planet Mattered.  Podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  
**[0:00:36-0:00:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:00:36):**  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration? Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we, as investors, big and small, and consumers, start paying much more attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  In March last year we launched our Patreon community to make it easy for fans to support our work. And so many of you have joined as a member.  We've launched different types of benefits, exclusive content, Q&A webinars with former guests, Ask Me Anything sessions plus so much more to come in the future.  For more information on the different tiers, benefits and how to become a member, check patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or find the link below. Thank you!  
**[0:01:17-0:01:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:01:17):**  Today I'm joined by Katherine Tubb of RethinkX, the lead author of Rethinking Food and Agriculture 2020-2030, the second domestication of plants and animals, the disruption of the cow and the collapse of the industrial livestock farming. Welcome Katherine!  Yeah, so our report looks at how technology is going to converge and basically become cheap enough and good enough to transform how we produce protein.  So this report is really about a protein disruption driven by economics and essentially we're going to be able to produce the same proteins found today in livestock by a method we call precision fermentation.  And by 2025 this technology will be able to compete cost wise with bulk proteins and that this is the point where adoption is going to be able to tip and accelerate exponentially and all that time costs are going to continue to improve.  And ultimately we see proteins as being five times cheaper by 2030 than existing animal proteins.  
**[0:02:11-0:02:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:02:11):**  And I guess the other point is not a single disruption but multiple parallel disruptions across every single part of the cow from the milk, the meat, the leather, the collagen and these are all going to impact each other.  And it doesn't depend on a kind of one for one substitution of the end product. This is an ingredient business to business led disruption.  Yeah, so the best example of this is really milk. So if you think about if you take milk from a cow only 3.3% of it is the protein.  And I think another couple of percent is the fat. And if you think about how milk is actually used globally, a lot of the milk is actually kind of put down into the solids, the milk solids and that's what's exported.  So for example, New Zealand exports 70% of their milk as these solid exports.  
**[0:02:53-0:03:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:02:53):**  If you can make that at the same cost anywhere in the world, that's going to completely obliterate New Zealand's export milk industry and therefore obliterate their dairy industry.  And that's going to obviously have huge knock on effects then once you take out the dairy industry, you take out kind of cheap meat and that's going to increase prices in the meat and then that's going to kind of drive investment and into the dairy industry.  But if you take that investment and into the further kind of PF for precision fermentation for meat, then that's going to kind of basically disrupt the whole cow.  Particularly the cow industry is very on very critical very thin margins, as I'm sure people are aware, is a lot of subsidies going on.  knife edge industry and that makes it very kind of susceptible to disruption.  
**[0:03:45-0:03:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:03:45):**  And that's something we've looked at as we mentioned in our previous report and this  is kind of our bread and butter, this is what we look at, we look at disruptions, technology  driven disruptions.  So precision plant visitation is when you take microbes and basically kind of program  them to produce anything you want and mainly proteins, right?  
**[0:04:03-0:04:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:04:03):**  So things like yeast, fungi, you'll be able to just program just as we do experimentation,  as you do to make beer or sugar or kimchi or ketchup or wine or yogurts, you know, you're  going to harness these microbes to be able to make any protein you want.  And what does it use as feed because these microbes need to eat?  So what do we need to feed them basically to create these proteins?  
**[0:04:25-0:04:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:04:25):**  It's mainly sugar and then nitrogen.  Sugar from anything, we eventually think that they'll be able to get carbohydrates from  kind of biomatter.  And does the quality of the sugar of the material, because I think for now it will be mostly  sugar, does that influence the outcome of the protein?  
**[0:04:43-0:04:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:04:43):**  So yeah, I mean, I know a lot of microbes at the moment like to kind of bathe in the  best possible sugar, the purest glucose, but that can change.  It's just an efficiency question and a programmable question.  And the big question on health, like what comes out of this process?  I think we all know the incredible health issues of the industrial factory farming system  
**[0:05:07-0:05:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:05:07):**  and what comes out of that.  I don't think we can even call it meat, but what comes out of this, probably there will  be a big fight if we can actually call it legally meat.  I mean, that's for a separate discussion.  But in terms of health, what do you see where we're now and where we're looking in five  
**[0:05:21-0:05:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:05:21):**  years compared to the meat products you can now buy in the supermarket or the protein  products because it could be milk as you said before.  I mean, I think there's a disease and nutrition question on health.  So disease, obviously you're not going to have those kind of issues that you get with  factory farming and then the slaughterhouses where you get a lot of contamination of the  
**[0:05:39-0:05:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:05:39):**  food.  So, you know, they've done some tests, I think on the meat produced via kind of, which is  slightly different to precision fermentation, but if you can produce meat, it usually doesn't  get the same bacteria and microbes that you have an issue with.  But then on the nutrition side, obviously there is a bigger kind of question and people  
**[0:05:56-0:05:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:05:56):**  are still looking into that a lot.  But on nutrition, I think the ability to kind of build up the products, you know, very personalizable  nutrition questions that you need, like based on the particular proteins that you may or  may not need, it's going to be extremely valuable.  You know, we definitely say that it's going to be better because you're just not going  
**[0:06:15-0:06:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:06:15):**  to have that contamination that you get in the current system.  How do we prevent this enormous concentration that we have now, especially in the KFO industry  in the US, where I think there are just a few producing all pork and just a few producing  all chickens and actually mostly the same companies.  And also in the beef industry, there's an enormous concentration.  
**[0:06:35-0:06:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:06:35):**  Is there anything to say on that as a potential danger and what this movement could do for  that?  Yeah, so this is really part of the point of our report, right?  We want to kind of alert people that there are going to be choices to be made with this  technology disruption.  
**[0:06:48-0:06:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:06:48):**  And we really kind of advocate to ensure an open and transparent competitive market, you  know, because we think that's critical to ensure competition.  You're basically unpacking the cow or the products coming out of the cow and taking  obviously the most interesting ones first.  And that's not the meat part.  
**[0:07:07-0:07:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:07:07):**  And another exciting, well, another interesting example, which I probably find is another  more than anyone, is the fact that the idea that for formula milk for babies, instead  of using kind of cow proteins, you could use human protein proteins, right?  Which might sound a little bit icky, I guess, in some ways.  But if you had the choice, you know, and everyone has a choice of how they feed their baby.  
**[0:07:25-0:07:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:07:25):**  But if you decided to feed them formula milk, would you prefer them to have formula milk  with human proteins or cow proteins?  You specifically looked at factory farms in the US.  What does this mean for, let's say, the farmers and workers in these industries?  Yeah, I mean, obviously it's hugely disruptive.  
**[0:07:44-0:07:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:07:44):**  And again, you know, we're not, I don't want to soften this.  If what we say is true, then essentially, you know, there'll be millions of jobs lost  because essentially, if factory farmers, we know it won't exist.  We say, look, this disruption is coming, it's inevitable, and you need to get on top of  this and think about how you can support the farmers and workers.  
**[0:08:06-0:08:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:08:06):**  And what does this mean for the farmers that are actually mostly growing, if you look on  average in the US, crops for animals?  So what does it mean for rural America?  Yeah, I mean, there is huge impact.  We I think we forecast something like almost 500 million acres of land will not be needed  
**[0:08:25-0:08:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:08:25):**  in the way that it is now to produce crops.  So it's going to create these huge opportunities for farmers.  I mean, obviously, there's massive impacts such as land values could be decimated, right?  They're going to be disproportionately affected by this impact, probably a likely rapid collapse  in value.  
**[0:08:41-0:08:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:08:41):**  But, you know, which is something investors should take note of.  Because a lot of their models are based actually on land always has like the real assets, they  always have value.  Exactly.  And, you know, we've seen a precedent for that land drop as well, value drop by more  
**[0:08:57-0:09:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:08:57):**  than 50%, I think, in the 20s and 30s.  And then also another 40% in the 80s.  So this has happened.  So you can see a kind of disproportionate effect of land value.  Just listen to the summary of the interview.  
**[0:09:10-0:09:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:09:10):**  For the full length interview, please find the link in the description below.  If you found the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few  
**[0:09:27-0:09:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:09:27):**  seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  join my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or in the description  
**[0:09:47-0:09:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:09:47):**  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  