### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2017-14-15)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  Welcome to another episode of investing in regenerative agriculture, investing as if  the planet mattered.  
**[0:00:21-0:00:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:00:21):**  Podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  
**[0:00:42-0:00:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:00:42):**  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  Before we get started, I've been recording these interviews next to my day job and I  will definitely continue to do so and release about an episode a month.  
**[0:01:02-0:01:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:01:02):**  But at the same time I would love to take this further, share more interviews, there  are many more stories to share on investing in regenerative food and agriculture.  More depth, improve the quality, maybe even doing some video series.  So I started a Patreon community which makes it easy to support creators like myself.  If these podcasts have been of value to you and if you have the means, I invite you to  
**[0:01:24-0:01:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:01:24):**  support me and make this happen.  For more information please find the link to my Patreon account in the description below.  And now, without further ado, the interview.  Enjoy!  Welcome to investing in regenerative agriculture, agriculture as if the planet mattered.  
**[0:01:40-0:01:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:01:40):**  In these interviews I am talking to people who are scaling up the sector either by increasing  the influx of capital or by working on the ground to scale up the enterprises on the  ground.  Why regenerative agriculture?  Because so many of the world current issues come together in this subject.  
**[0:01:55-0:02:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:01:55):**  From drought to water scarcity, climate change, social issues, hunger, obesity all have a  connection to how we grow food and what we eat.  You are going to listen to an interview with Dr. Sarah Scheer, founder and CEO of Ecoagriculture  Partners.  We talk about stranded assets.  
**[0:02:10-0:02:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:02:10):**  11 trillion of stranded assets are stuck in agriculture.  We will talk about the importance of good landscape partnerships and how, as a smart  impact investor, you can recognize partnerships that actually add value where all the stakeholders  are involved and the need for new institutions to really get this movement to scale.  Enjoy!  
**[0:02:29-0:02:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:02:29):**  So welcome to investing in regenerative agriculture, agriculture as if the planet mattered.  I am Koen van Zeyen, the host of today.  In the podcast of today we have Dr. Sarah Scheer, agricultural and natural resource economist,  CEO and co-founder of Ecoagriculture Partners, plus author of many books and papers, for  instance Scaling Up the Investment Finance for Integrated Landscape Management, where  
**[0:02:49-0:02:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:02:49):**  for the first time, at least I have read it there for the first time, people speak about  the stranded assets in agriculture.  So we are definitely going to ask more about that.  Welcome Sarah!  Thank you very much, Koen.  
**[0:02:59-0:03:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:02:59):**  It is a pleasure to be with you.  And to start, as I like to start with a personal question, how did you end up in the regenerative  ecological agriculture space?  Well, I am one of those unusual people who has actually been interested in that question  since I was about 19 years old.  
**[0:03:16-0:03:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:03:16):**  And I was doing some of my early field work in the rainforests of Costa Rica and looking  at the kinds of agriculture that made sense and did not make sense in that kind of environment.  That inspired me to go on to study agricultural economics and study agroforestry and natural  resource management.  So I have been looking at this question my whole life for a very long time, focusing  
**[0:03:39-0:03:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:03:39):**  on those areas where agronomists said it was hard or maybe we should not be doing agriculture  in rainforests and dry lands and steep hillsides, particularly throughout the tropics.  And I was so constantly looking at this relationship between agricultural production and livelihoods  for farmers and the management of the soils and the water and the vegetation and the biodiversity  and the places where they were working.  
**[0:04:06-0:04:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:04:06):**  So I did that work for a really long time.  And I was a researcher also doing development work for about 25 years.  In the year 2000, I got involved in several research projects that were looking globally  at land use, trying to look at the relationship between agricultural production areas and  important ecosystem services.  
**[0:04:30-0:04:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:04:30):**  And I found to my astonishment that the remote sensing data actually showed that the most  important areas for biodiversity, for carbon sinks, terrestrial carbon sinks, for watershed  management were actually in the prime agricultural areas of the world.  And this was really quite a shock for me because I realized that the issues that I had been  facing all those years in what they used to call marginal lands were actually just as  
**[0:05:01-0:05:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:05:01):**  true of our bread baskets and rice bowls.  And that the way that we manage our agriculture in those places was absolutely central to  long-term provisioning of water, to long-term conservation of biodiversity, wildlife, et  cetera.  So it really gave me a new look at things and realized that we need to be looking at  
**[0:05:21-0:05:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:05:21):**  agriculture not as something that is separate from environmental management, but as one  of the most important tools that we have.  And so then I thought, well, then the big challenge we face moving forward in this next  generation is to find agricultural systems that are actually not just a little bit less  bad for the environment, but are actually positively contributing to healthy watersheds,  
**[0:05:48-0:05:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:05:48):**  to wildlife habitat, to terrestrial climate change mitigation, et cetera.  So that's what really sparked my interest in thinking about this issue, not only at  the farm level, but at a much larger landscape scales.  Yeah, I really like the not less bad, but more good metaphor definition.  I think it really captures a whole new paradigm almost of agriculture instead of really looking  
**[0:06:14-0:06:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:06:14):**  at making sure we do it in a way that it's maybe slightly less bad or cutting less trees,  et cetera.  We're looking at how do we bring back a lot of the biodiversity and use it as a huge tool.  Have you seen a lot of change in the perception because you were for sure one of the first  that started looking at that?  
**[0:06:33-0:06:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:06:33):**  In 2000 to maybe a few years ago and then a few years ago until now, were there really  big changes in the perception of people and the responses in the companies you're working  with, the organizations, et cetera?  I think that one of the things that you've been seeing over the last decade is much wider  recognition of the importance of environmental issues to agriculture.  
**[0:06:56-0:07:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:06:56):**  But I would say that the focus has been more of a preoccupation about the controlling the  negative effects of agriculture on the environment.  I think there's still not a very widespread recognition of just how important environmental  management is to the productivity and long-term sustainability and resilience of production  agriculture itself.  
**[0:07:19-0:07:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:07:19):**  I think that's to me the change in the mental model that we still need to see.  It also means that people are then not being quite as creative at thinking about what those  investments need to look like.  They're not thinking about their agriculture investments within this broader context of  what kinds of land uses and land management are actually surrounding them.  
**[0:07:43-0:07:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:07:43):**  To me, this is actually one of the big changes that has happened in just the last couple  of years.  One of the things that we've been doing at Ecoagriculture Partners for the last 15 years  is to try to document and study and understand how are these integrated landscape management  strategies work.  
**[0:08:02-0:08:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:08:02):**  We've documented with partners around the world more than 420 of these large-scale  landscape partnerships where farmers and conservation organizations and local governments and social  NGOs and nutrition folks, et cetera, have partnered together in landscapes where it  was very clear that none of them working separately was going to address very serious issues of  natural resource conflict or natural resource degradation and some of these other concerns  
**[0:08:32-0:08:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:08:32):**  that have been really arising all around the world.  People have been doing this kind of work for quite some time.  I think it was a bit of an unrecognized secret just how much these local situations were  giving rise to new kinds of partnerships, new kinds of institutions to try to transform  landscapes to become much more sustainable for all of the people that are living in them  
**[0:09:00-0:09:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:09:00):**  to produce all of the products that are needed and all of the ecosystem services and livelihoods  that people in those landscapes need to have.  What you had was very little recognition at the policy level and certainly very little  recognition within the financial institutions.  One quite remarkable thing is if you look at these 420 landscapes that we documented  
**[0:09:21-0:09:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:09:21):**  between 2013 and 2015 that had all been established for at least three years, they had platforms  for negotiation among the stakeholder groups, they were developing action plans, et cetera.  There was only a quarter of them had any agribusiness or food industry partners in them and other  private sector actors.  We were really quite surprised by this, particularly since the focus of all of these was on production  
**[0:09:48-0:09:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:09:48):**  agriculture landscapes.  To not have private sector actors, apart from farmer organizations, those were very common  in all of the landscapes.  There was this surprising lack of business involvement.  In Africa, it actually was only 8% of all the landscape initiatives that had business  
**[0:10:07-0:10:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:10:07):**  partners.  You're saying, wait a minute, agriculture is basically a private sector business.  How can it be that they've not been part of this?  Why is that?  Part of it simply was that in the minds of most companies, they want to focus on the  
**[0:10:23-0:10:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:10:23):**  farms they work in.  They want to focus on their supply chains.  All of the interventions that we think about, whether it's from a production point of view  or even a sustainability point of view, were largely at the farm level and within supply  chains.  
**[0:10:36-0:10:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:10:36):**  If you look at certification as a strategy, if you look at supply chain standards, et  cetera, that is really the way the agricultural sector is largely structured.  Also government entities involved in agriculture are structured really at those two levels,  rather than at the larger landscape level.  They weren't used to thinking about the problem as something that they needed to solve at  
**[0:10:57-0:10:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:10:57):**  the larger landscape scale.  Obviously, they're not going to do anything.  There's not a good business case for it.  One of the things that to me has been the biggest change, you ask, over the last couple  of years has been the burgeoning recognition by many of the actors in the agriculture production  
**[0:11:13-0:11:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:11:13):**  and food industry space that many of their most important sourcing regions are actually  at risk and that it's going to be hurting the business.  The most common risks are concerns about water access, water quality, and water security.  You have brewing companies, for example, that all of a sudden are getting very interested  in being involved with multi-stakeholder watershed management programs because they really need  
**[0:11:40-0:11:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:11:40):**  to ensure that for the next 50 years, there's good water sources.  You have all of these companies that have made commitments to deforestation-free supply  chains that have realized that it's not sufficient to do farm level certification if those farms  that are supplying them are in the middle of forests where many other actors are continuing  to do deforestation.  
**[0:12:03-0:12:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:12:03):**  They then have no credibility for their certification.  Those groups are now starting to recognize that they need to partner with other actors  in the landscape to try to have collaborative solutions to addressing deforestation.  You also have companies that are seeing issues related to climate change and the need for  climate change adaptation that also want to partner with other institutions to co-invest  
**[0:12:30-0:12:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:12:30):**  in some of the activities and programs and business models that will allow them to adapt  more effectively to climate change.  I think you're starting to see much more recognition about the potential business advantages of  being part of these landscape partnerships, but at the same time, you have a really pretty  start of the learning curve for everyone and how to make those partnerships actually be  
**[0:12:57-0:12:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:12:57):**  effective.  And if you look at what has changed in the past few years, that suddenly at least a number  of these groups in agriculture, either companies, processing companies, etc., started to look  beyond their own farm or beyond their own supply.  What has triggered that, let's look outside, beyond the gate of what I'm used to?  
**[0:13:16-0:13:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:13:16):**  I would say for most of them it is looking at business risks.  They're seeing risks that they can't manage within the confines of their own company or  their own supply chain.  So I think that's the biggest one.  And I guess say climate water, I think some of the community issues about establishing  
**[0:13:32-0:13:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:13:32):**  a long-term right to operate in places where there's many other actors that are competing  for some of the same resources that are important for the companies.  So I think that's part of what you're starting to see is a recognition of risk.  There are some real far-sighted companies that are actually turning that on its head  and are actually making commitments from the level of their board of directors that say  
**[0:13:56-0:14:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:13:56):**  we are committed to long-term sustainability in our operations and in our businesses.  We see partnerships with other actors who share the resource base with us as actually  being one of the core principles of our business.  So I would say there's not too many of those yet, but you're actually starting to see it  move from simply a risk analysis to a shifting of business models as something where they  
**[0:14:20-0:14:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:14:20):**  recognize that the long-term sustainability of the landscapes they're operating with and  the economic, social and ecological health of the other actors in those landscapes actually  are part of the plan for achieving success within their businesses.  That's almost moving from a less negative, in this case risk, to a few that are actually  seeing the positive potential almost from a risk management to actually this is full  
**[0:14:48-0:14:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:14:48):**  of opportunities if I'm doing it right, which isn't easy, but at least it's possible, which  of course the 400 cases you've looked at, or at least a quarter that was involved with  agriculture business have been showing.  I think the other landscapes are desperately trying to engage businesses in the work and  in many cases they haven't been successful to.  
**[0:15:11-0:15:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:15:11):**  One of the things that we've been working with is tools and methods and analyses that  will help some of those existing landscape initiatives reach out to businesses and help  them consider the business case for participating.  We've also been trying to look at working with businesses to see how they can do their  own internal assessments of when it makes sense and how it makes sense, what kind of  
**[0:15:34-0:15:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:15:34):**  roles are appropriate for them depending upon the kind of business that they have.  Now, one of the things I think that is constraining this is that most of our major institutions  don't support this kind of integrated landscape management.  Our policies and government rules and the ways that government agencies operate regulations  and make public sector investments are still very, very much siloed, very, very siloed,  
**[0:16:06-0:16:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:16:06):**  very sectoral and at the same time so are the financial institutions.  So if you have a business that has got together with some NGOs and the local government and  have agreed to co-invest in let's say riparian restoration so as to improve water quality  for all of the actors that are depending upon that water, they often can't get any financing  for that because the finance is also itself quite siloed by sector and also quite differentiated  
**[0:16:40-0:16:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:16:40):**  in terms of whether the investor or the person getting the loan or the grant or the equity  investment is in the public, private or civic sphere.  So if you're really looking at how do we scale up good practices at the farm, forest, outside  the agricultural areas but that have impact on agricultural areas so that you may have  in order to scale up to restore watershed functions, we work in a number of landscapes  
**[0:17:08-0:17:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:17:08):**  where they've managed to actually get rivers that were no longer running all year round.  They got enough land users around all of the rivers, all the farmers that were using irrigation  et cetera to shift their practices so those rivers are now running all year round which  of course is quite transformational not only for agricultural production but also for biodiversity  and for many other services that are in that landscape.  
**[0:17:30-0:17:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:17:30):**  But you need to be able to have all of the actors do complementary and coordinated activities  in order to achieve change that are really be transformative at scale and we have very  few financial models for doing that.  So people have to kind of jerry-rig the finance and put it together and there's a real need  for and we call that sort of a financial aggregator or financial coordinators, brokers that say  
**[0:17:58-0:18:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:17:58):**  okay if we're going to actually restore this degraded area over there, the protected area  is going to have to do these things there and the coffee farmers are going to have to  do these things and then the maize farmers are going to have to do that and then the  local government infrastructure is going to have to shift from using this to that practice.  You need to have somebody who says okay what's the financing plan for this action plan?  
**[0:18:24-0:18:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:18:24):**  So you have many of these landscape initiatives actually most of them they spend a few years  coming together to get a shared understanding of how the landscape is actually operating  and where the risks are and where the opportunities are and where the trade-offs are and where  the synergies are and they develop an action plan.  But what we're finding is that very few of them actually then develop a financing strategy  
**[0:18:48-0:18:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:18:48):**  that would allow the investments that need to take place among the different land users,  among the different farmers, the different agribusinesses or food industries and other  actors that are affecting the land use to achieve the impacts at scale that they need.  Yeah and then often what you see or what at least I see from a bit outside the space is  that the people on the ground running interesting projects, the farms that are scaling up their  
**[0:19:15-0:19:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:19:15):**  agenda of agriculture practices etc. cannot find the financing and are complaining that  there are no good investors and then the investors you talk to say they cannot find the projects  and the companies to invest in because there are no good investments and probably the truth  is somewhere in the middle and has to do with language etc.  But you've been describing, I've read two ways of one is helping those people on the  
**[0:19:36-0:19:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:19:36):**  ground to get to that financial plan.  How would it work as a sort of incubator or help to, after you've made the ecosystem plan  and the landscape plan, to also make the financial plan to do that?  How are you working in that part of the sector at the moment?  Well I think that you identified the fact that the issue is actually on both sides and  
**[0:19:58-0:20:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:19:58):**  I actually think they're both true.  We do find that many of the groups that are the best at designing regenerative agriculture  investments even at scale don't have a very good sense of…  Are very bad at designing financial systems.  They don't understand what kinds of financial institutions would potentially be interested  
**[0:20:19-0:20:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:20:19):**  in that kind of investment given the time frame, the scale, the nature of the flow of  returns and those things.  So they go after the wrong financial groups.  They think, oh I'll go to a bank for this but that's actually not the kind of investment  that a bank would ever give you.  
**[0:20:35-0:20:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:20:35):**  You need to go to an impact investor for that or maybe you need to get some blended finance.  You're finding some extremely interesting innovative partnerships around finance that  are happening whereby civil society groups, private sector groups and sometimes governments  will come in to co-finance particular activities.  So there's a lot of innovation going on in this space.  
**[0:20:56-0:20:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:20:56):**  It's just that…  So on the one hand while they're trying to sort out their own understanding of finance,  on the other side the financial institutions are often quite so rigid in the kinds of their  definition about the kinds of things that they finance that they're not exploring in  a creative enough way new models of finance.  
**[0:21:17-0:21:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:21:17):**  And I think this is also one of the things that's changed so much in the last couple  of years.  We are seeing the most innovative experiments going on, I would say some of them are, about  how they can connect different actors within a landscape and all of it taking place within  the frame of an agreed long-term action plan so that it's complementary with what others  
**[0:21:38-0:21:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:21:38):**  are doing within the landscape.  So I'm quite encouraged by the amount of innovation that's going on.  But I think until the financial sector quite seriously looks at how they can address the  need for these kinds of more sustainable multi-objective, multi-actor investment situations, we will  be limited in terms of how far we can go.  
**[0:22:04-0:22:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:22:04):**  And I think you're starting to see that happen.  You're starting to see now even some of the larger financial institutions be implementing  certain lines of finance to explore how they can make a change in the way that they're  doing.  But at the same time I think there is a really important role for the development of incubators,  
**[0:22:26-0:22:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:22:26):**  the development of aggregators who can work with these landscape groups that have both  the financial expertise but also have an understanding of what is the nature of the kinds of financial  investments that are needed.  One of the important things that we've learned from our work with doing landscape finance  is that it's important to distinguish between the asset investments, which are the investments  
**[0:22:51-0:22:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:22:51):**  that are actually going to change what's going on with the production system or with the  natural resource management that's going to change the infrastructure, whether it's built  infrastructure or natural infrastructure, et cetera.  You have your short-term and your long-term asset investments.  You have your high return, your lower return ones.  
**[0:23:10-0:23:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:23:10):**  Each of those need to have a different segment of the financing sector to be available to  them.  But at the same time you've got other investments that we call the enabling investments, which  are the ones that enable you to achieve scale.  They're the ones that provide training in new regenerative agricultural practices to  
**[0:23:31-0:23:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:23:31):**  hundreds of thousands of farmers rather than just 5,000 farmers.  They are these incubation roles to support, to bring some of these novel kinds of investments  to become investable.  They are the roles for documenting the performance both of the businesses and the performance  of the landscape, because one of the things that financial institutions look for is track  
**[0:23:55-0:23:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:23:55):**  record.  So we've got a real problem with these landscape, these novel landscape investments.  They just have not developed a track record.  And even where they have, that track record has not been well documented and shared with  the institutions.  
**[0:24:07-0:24:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:24:07):**  So I think there's a whole lot of other roles, the landscape-  Field building almost.  Yes, exactly.  You're really creating in some sense new institutions.  I think that's what we need to think about for something really transformational.  
**[0:24:21-0:24:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:24:21):**  If we're going to see the agricultural sector move from being the greatest threat to our  water resources to become one of the greatest tools for conserving water, if we want to  see agriculture move from being the greatest threat to biodiversity to become one of the  most important habitats to help support networks and habitat networks for species, if you want  to see it move from becoming one of the most important contributors to greenhouse gases  
**[0:24:46-0:24:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:24:46):**  to being one of the most important sources of sequestration of greenhouse gases, we have  to think about change at scale and it is going to imply changes in our financial institutions.  And I think the businesses are starting to move in that direction.  I think the financial system is not moving as quickly.  And I think that's one of the top priorities for making this approach really deliver its  
**[0:25:08-0:25:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:25:08):**  promise.  And if you look at a slightly more practical level at your work at the moment, what have  you been busy with?  Of course, if you can share that for the last few months and what kept you up at night basically  and what will keep you up at night for the next few months?  
**[0:25:26-0:25:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:25:26):**  That's a great question.  Actually, what's been keeping me up at night have been good things.  Too much work, but good things.  I just finished about two weeks ago a really incredibly inspiring experience in Addis Ababa,  where we helped to organize a meeting of 140 individuals who are leading African landscape  
**[0:25:51-0:25:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:25:51):**  initiatives from 17 countries.  And these were movers and shakers.  These were people who were actually implementing these landscape partnerships, were totally  in it.  And it was an opportunity for them to share experiences and to identify what was going  
**[0:26:06-0:26:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:26:06):**  well and what wasn't going well.  So I spent a lot of the last couple months helping to organize a really fruitful and  creative kind of meeting.  And two of the most important subjects that were discussed there were the role of businesses  and how to strengthen and have really productive roles of businesses in these landscape initiatives.  
**[0:26:28-0:26:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:26:28):**  And another one of the topics was around finance and what kind of innovations in finance were  there.  So what came out of that meeting was a set of priorities in Africa for scaling up integrated  landscape management with an agriculture focus throughout the continent.  And we had a number of important institutions from the public sector, some from the private  
**[0:26:54-0:27:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:26:54):**  sector and civil society sector who made commitments to move forward on activities such as the  development of an incubator for East Africa that would support landscape initiatives,  developing a community of practice of individuals interested in developing new forms of landscape  finance, of developing an outreach campaign with some of the financial institutions to  educate them about the kinds of financial opportunities that there were, but informed  
**[0:27:28-0:27:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:27:28):**  by people who actually know how to tell what is a good financial opportunity and what isn't.  So there was a whole series of outcomes from that meeting and we're already seeing follow  up from those.  We ourselves are supporting a network of landscape initiatives in Kenya and in Ethiopia and in  Tanzania that have started to do very active sharing exchange and also collaboratively  
**[0:27:56-0:28:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:27:56):**  going to policymakers when they need to see a policy change that will make it easier for  them to operate in these places.  And you're also seeing this new mobilization of private sector actors, particularly from  agribusiness and the food industry, also from the forestry sector and bioenergy sectors  as well that are looking at these new opportunities for landscape investments.  
**[0:28:25-0:28:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:28:25):**  And for investments that will deliver landscape benefits.  And I think one of the messages that I would say to investors is if you are planning to  support agriculture or forestry or some of these other natural resource management activities,  go to a place where there is already an organized landscape partnership that has done their  homework about what's working and what's not working, where the threats are, what are the  
**[0:28:51-0:28:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:28:51):**  kinds of changes that are needed, where in the landscape and that would provide some  guidance and sort of vision of where they're going because that is likely to very significantly  reduce risks for you in doing your, because you know where your company, you know where  your investment fits within a larger plan of landscape action.  And also there are partners there who understand what you want to get and can come in to do  
**[0:29:16-0:29:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:29:16):**  things like co-invest with you on infrastructure that you might jointly need or could come  in and provide say the training that your farmers you're working with need without necessarily  as much cost to you.  So I think there's some real opportunities that are just becoming realized there.  So I'm quite excited about what's going to happen over this next year.  
**[0:29:35-0:29:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:29:35):**  And when you are, as hopefully everybody is a smart impact investor, looking at different  landscapes or different landscape partnerships, how do you recognize a good one?  How should a master plan, should one of those plans look?  Which questions should you ask if you are doubting between two or three to become active?  Of course you should do more as many as possible.  
**[0:29:55-0:29:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:29:55):**  Let's say you can only do one.  What would be a few smart questions to ask from your perspective?  No I think it's a really good question and it's so interesting that just in the last  like two years that question is coming up for people as they get serious about doing  this.  
**[0:30:10-0:30:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:30:10):**  We're actually involved in the development of a couple of tools to assess to what extent,  how well landscape partnerships are actually operating internally.  That's actually already been developed and is being widely tested.  We're in the process right now of testing and training in the use of a new tool to assess  the governance of landscapes, which is certainly one of the things that they're very interested.  
**[0:30:36-0:30:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:30:36):**  And also a third tool that we're doing collaboratively with a couple of other partners trying to  answer specifically that question for investors.  They think some of the key, they have quite a checklist of the kinds of things that they  should be looking at.  But one of them is whether there is a stab, sort of a commitment within the landscape  
**[0:30:56-0:31:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:30:56):**  among key partners around a future vision that some of the homework has already been  done about where people consider to be the sensitive spots.  What are the kinds of production systems that will fit with the plans for moving forward?  Where are some of the new opportunities?  I would certainly want to look at where there is, work in places where there's already significant  
**[0:31:26-0:31:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:31:26):**  thinking about market innovations, about finding ways to make money at the farm level or within  ecotourism or payments for ecosystem services, et cetera.  But where people are already thinking about a vision where production and agriculture  and business are going to be good also for environmental concerns and social concerns.  So you want to look at work in places where those conversations have been taking place  
**[0:31:51-0:31:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:31:51):**  for some time.  You want to look for a place where the business, where the government, the local governments  are at least supportive, if not playing a leadership role in some of these initiatives  and that you know that the kind of policy framework in which you would be operating  is going to be supportive for this kind of a business.  
**[0:32:09-0:32:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:32:09):**  So those are some of the kinds of things that we look at.  Obviously there's questions that are the typical ones around land tenure, around access to  skilled people, et cetera.  But I think being in a place where there's commitment already to collaborative investment  and collaborative action is a real plus for an investor.  
**[0:32:24-0:32:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:32:24):**  It's great.  And also I'm very much looking forward to share, if of course when the tool is ready  in public, the tool for screening for interesting landscapes for investors.  Let's say hopefully some of the listeners to this podcast are working at a larger financial  institution.  
**[0:32:43-0:32:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:32:43):**  You've mentioned in your publication in 2015 about the 11 trillion stranded assets.  So what does that refer to?  We all know the divest-invest movement of fossil fuels, I hope.  And I've seen a bit of push to look at agriculture in the same way.  But could you explain briefly, if I'm in a big financial institution, probably I have  
**[0:33:07-0:33:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:33:07):**  exposure to agriculture, why should I be worried?  I think there's I guess two things that I want to say about that.  The first is why you should be worried and secondly about some of the innovations that  are actually coming around to address that.  There is no question that we have, first of all, the level of degradation globally in  
**[0:33:24-0:33:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:33:24):**  agricultural lands is remarkably high.  It's estimated to be 30 to 40 percent of agricultural lands have some form of degradation.  Now some of those forms of degradation can be offset to some extent.  For example, some of the loss of fertility can be offset to some extent with fertilizers.  Some of the loss of infiltration of water can be offset by better water systems.  
**[0:33:50-0:33:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:33:50):**  But many of those are actually creating chronic losses in productivity and it's moving in  a very big downward spiral.  I worked, for example, in one area of Tanzania where they have identified rice production  as one of the most exciting and profitable opportunities for investors of all types.  A recent study there found 100 percent of all the farms surveyed already had substantial  
**[0:34:16-0:34:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:34:16):**  salinization in their rice fields, which does not bode well for the future.  So I think there's been almost a putting your head in the sand by many agricultural investors  and many people in the agricultural community who think you can solve all the problems with  better seed, better fertilizer, better pest control and better markets.  And all of those things are extremely important, but they will not address major climate changes.  
**[0:34:44-0:34:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:34:44):**  If all of a sudden wind velocities are much higher going through your orchard, you will  get major losses.  And so if you're not going to do something about landscape configurations of establishing  windbreaks, you're going to have very substantial losses in agriculture.  And I think in general there is simply a myopia.  
**[0:35:05-0:35:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:35:05):**  Most of the screening criteria for good agricultural investments today actually don't look at the  sustainability of water supplies.  They don't look at the long term productivity of the soils.  They don't look at the impacts that climate change is going to have on production characteristics.  And they're not looking at where the farm is in relationship to larger ecological and  
**[0:35:28-0:35:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:35:28):**  economic processes in the landscape.  So I think that there are many assets out there that should be valued much lower than  what they are right now because these factors have not been looked at.  So I totally think this is going to be an issue.  And it's going to be exacerbated by the fact that you're starting to have in some crops  
**[0:35:45-0:35:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:35:45):**  and in some parts of the world increasing demand from the industries that use the products  that they don't want deforestation to be associated with their products.  They don't want water loss to be associated with their products.  So they're going to start looking at this from that perspective.  And many things that look like they'd be really good assets will no longer be.  
**[0:36:07-0:36:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:36:07):**  So I absolutely think this is something for financial institutions to be careful about.  Now on the positive side, there's just started to be some efforts at developing investment  screens on some of these issues.  If you go to the International Finance Corporation, for example, they've got some standards that  require you to look at some aspects of a landscape such as water and sustainability of water  
**[0:36:32-0:36:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:36:32):**  supplies for those areas.  There's also the Millennium Challenge Corporation, for example, developed something called a  landscape life-scape analysis.  And we're using it as a screen for investments in Indonesia that individual companies needed  to show how their operation was connected with other things in the landscape that could  
**[0:36:52-0:36:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:36:52):**  potentially increase their risks or reduce their risks.  And I think that was a fairly novel tool.  But overall, I would say that this is not being carefully looked at.  I was just speaking last June at a meeting with a bunch of agribusiness and food industry  people from around the world looking specifically at this question of how to do effective landscape  
**[0:37:14-0:37:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:37:14):**  partnerships.  And there was an example given from South Africa where one of the great achievements  that was being tutored by the government and by the Chamber of Commerce was the development  of an investment area where they had attracted something like 15 agribusiness and food industries  to all come to that valley and operate and set up new manufacturing plants, et cetera.  
**[0:37:38-0:37:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:37:38):**  This was a big success.  Well, it turns out that when you put all 15 of those companies there, their demand for  water far outreached the availability of water in that area.  And you started almost within a few years have some of those companies have to go out  of business.  
**[0:37:55-0:38:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:37:55):**  They're not looking at the ecosystem sustainability of these systems at scale.  They're looking in the short term at their own plot of land, but they're not looking  at how that plot of land is linked with the larger landscape.  Yeah.  And I think that really summons it up.  
**[0:38:11-0:38:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:38:11):**  Look beyond your gate, beyond your fence, beyond your plot of land, whatever the size.  If it's half an acre in Kenya or a few hundred thousand in Australia, you're still part of  a larger ecosystem.  And you can't escape that.  You are.  
**[0:38:27-0:38:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:38:27):**  And on the positive side, there are great opportunities that open when you look across  that fence line.  There are people to co-invest with you.  There's people who can reduce their risks that you face.  There's people who can develop coalitions with you to look for more favorable kinds  
**[0:38:44-0:38:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:38:44):**  of and supportive policy measures.  So I think it's both the negative and to keep in mind the positives of doing that.  Yeah, and I think any long term investor has to have in any investment a holistic view,  especially in agriculture, but of course also in energy, education, et cetera.  How does that fit in a larger system?  
**[0:39:04-0:39:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:39:04):**  Doesn't make it easier to screen, but doesn't make it a lot less prone to risk and probably  have a lot more opportunities, especially in the long term.  Yeah, I've had a number of people who've spoken to me about that we are kind of in agriculture  where we were maybe with sustainable agriculture 30 years ago.  You mean a sustainable energy?  
**[0:39:23-0:39:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:39:23):**  Yeah.  You know, the finance people didn't know much about it.  You know, a lot of businesses didn't know much about it.  We didn't have very many good models for it.  And that this is really just a learning process.  
**[0:39:32-0:39:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:39:32):**  These are new markets.  These are new and new approaches.  And yeah, the other words that that sort of that process happened 30 years ago with sustainable  energy.  And now, of course, we have massive amounts of finance and many businesses, et cetera.  
**[0:39:44-0:39:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:39:44):**  And people know what that looks like.  They know what the types are.  They know what the risks are associated with it.  It's a sector and it has a track record and their numbers.  Yeah, it's a mature sector.  
**[0:39:55-0:40:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:39:55):**  And so I think we need to look at the sustainable agriculture and sustainable agricultural landscape  world as just we are still in the sort of early years of that.  And I think if we can be quite proactive, we can learn a lot from other sectors.  And we can learn from the urban sectors.  They've also done integrated investment programs that we probably could learn quite a lot about  
**[0:40:15-0:40:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:40:15):**  how they finance that and apply that to agriculture.  But I think it does require that effort of innovative groups among the people who know  the land, among the people who farm, who know the markets, who know the finance, who know  the business and they know the governments to pull together to actually move this from  a kind of an infant industry to a much more mature industry, which I think we could absolutely  
**[0:40:39-0:40:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:40:39):**  get to in the next 30 years.  Yeah, and hopefully with those lessons actually speed it up and save us from some of the mistakes  they have made and get to a more mature, which I think are really we've reached maybe five  years ago in renewable energy in different markets and we're still reaching them in other  parts of renewable energy.  
**[0:40:58-0:41:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:40:58):**  But hopefully reach that point a lot faster and we need to and hopefully we'll get there.  Yeah.  And I think the because particularly we do have these increasing risks for agriculture  from climate, from water, from other places, I think there will be actually pretty if we  can get together, there'll be a strong incentive to really sort of rethink our systems and  
**[0:41:18-0:41:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:41:18):**  then create institutional support to move towards those more sustainable regenerative  agriculture systems.  Yeah.  And with that, I want to thank you so much for taking the time and sharing your knowledge,  wisdom and experience in the sector.  
**[0:41:32-0:41:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:41:32):**  And I'm sure to be checking in with you and the many projects you're working on and to  share those updates with a wider audience.  Thank you, Kun.  And I congratulate you for doing this work on regenerative agriculture.  It's important work.  
**[0:41:46-0:41:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:41:46):**  Thank you.  Thank you so much.  You just listened to an interview with Dr. Sarah Sheer, founder and CEO of Eco Agriculture  Partners.  We've talked about stranded assets, the need for new institutions, the need for new screening  
**[0:41:58-0:42:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:41:58):**  tools for impact investors and for investors.  What big financial institutions should do to get real on regenerative agriculture.  I hope you enjoyed it and will join us again soon for more of these interviews.  If you found the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  
**[0:42:17-0:42:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:42:17):**  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few  seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  
**[0:42:34-0:42:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:42:34):**  join my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or in the description  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  
**[0:43:19-0:43:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:43:19):**  Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food.  How to put money to work in regenerating soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while  doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to put money  
**[0:43:33-0:43:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:43:33):**  to work in regenerating soils and have been following this space since 2011 and recording  this podcast since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in this space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  
**[0:43:50-0:43:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:43:50):**  How have we picked interviewees?  What questions should you ask?  What is happening in this space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  
**[0:43:58-0:43:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:43:58):**  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  You, the soil builders and investors in this space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  
**[0:44:11-0:44:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:44:11):**  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management, consultants, etc.  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  
**[0:44:31-0:44:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:44:31):**  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you.  
**[0:44:44-0:44:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:44:44):**  And I'm very aware that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very  different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you, and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  
**[0:44:58-0:45:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:44:58):**  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to write along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  
**[0:45:18-0:45:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:45:18):**  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find, or what kind of investors you could  find if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design, and a lot more.  
**[0:45:38-0:45:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:45:38):**  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately, that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  
**[0:45:49-0:45:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/05/10/sara-scherr/#t=0:45:49):**  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea, or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up, and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  