### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2021-00-13)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  How do you build a regenerative disruptive agri-food brand?  What store of marketing and storytelling to scale regenerative agriculture?  
**[0:00:21-0:00:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:00:21):**  Join us in the third episode in this series to unpack new foundation farms raising 20  million pounds to buy a thousand acres in the UK and build a regenerative agri-food  enterprise.  Definitely listen to the previous interviews with Mark and Marcus, the executive chair  and CEO.  
**[0:00:35-0:00:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:00:35):**  You can find the links in the show notes below.  And stay until the end when Mark joins us to discuss how the investors on their current  roadshow are responding to the impact measurement and management questions and discussions.  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture.  Investing as if the planet mattered.  
**[0:00:55-0:01:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:00:55):**  Today I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space to learn more on  how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities and ecosystems  while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  
**[0:01:15-0:01:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:01:15):**  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much  more attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  In March last year we launched our membership community to make it easy for fans to support  our work and so many of you have joined as a member.  
**[0:01:34-0:01:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:01:34):**  We've launched different types of benefits, exclusive content, Q&A webinars with former  guests, ask me anything sessions plus so much more to come in the future.  For more information on the different tiers, benefits and how to become a member check  gumroad.com slash investing region ag or find the link below.  Thank you.  
**[0:01:53-0:01:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:01:53):**  Welcome to another episode today with Kirstie Settler, the Chief Marketing Officer of New  Foundation Farms.  This is part of our series where we unpeel the onion of New Foundation Farms who are  raising 20 million pounds to buy a thousand acres in the UK, building a regenerative agri  food enterprise.  
**[0:02:09-0:02:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:02:09):**  And today we're going to go deep into the agri food enterprise.  Welcome Kirstie.  Hello, thanks for having me.  And to start with the personal question we always love to ask, how did you end up in  this case in New Foundation Farms working on soils and so much more in the UK?  
**[0:02:24-0:02:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:02:24):**  Yes.  So for me, actually, when I think about the whole team, I'm probably the newest to regenerative  agriculture.  And I think I've probably had a sort of slightly squiggly career.  But I think actually, fundamentally, it's like a tale of two parents.  
**[0:02:39-0:02:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:02:39):**  So I had one parent who really railed against education, ultimately is quite capitalist  still to this day admires Thatcher.  And then I have another parent who lived really with feet on the ground, head in the clouds,  believed in endless curiosity, and the power of imagination.  And that for me is what led me to start my career in advertising, because I've always  
**[0:03:03-0:03:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:03:03):**  found I've existed in that sort of space of tension really, between the commercial world  and a sense of creativity.  And actually, though, what has now increasingly been more around purpose and impact.  And so for me, that's why I find regenerative agriculture, although it's really only something  I discovered less than a year ago.  
**[0:03:24-0:03:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:03:24):**  But that's what I find so compelling about it.  I think the economic case for regenerative agriculture is ironclad when you look at the  way in which it can operate and manifest.  But then I find on the other side of things as well, the timing now to be able to reengage  people with farming, the importance of soil, just what it is as a matter and how it exists  
**[0:03:47-0:03:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:03:47):**  and how little we know about it, I think is amazing.  And it's literally got a sense of stability to it, I think, and potentially certainty.  Grounded.  Yeah, literally.  So I think this idea, the timing now to be able to get people to be more interested and  
**[0:04:04-0:04:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:04:04):**  inspired by soil, and then the role it can play in agriculture, and of course, ultimately  food, I find that actually very hopeful.  So it's again, it's about sitting between sort of the tension of what I tend to see  as those two sides.  That's really what drew me to regenerative agriculture, which is how I came to find me  
**[0:04:25-0:04:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:04:25):**  meet Mark and Marcus, the two first co-founders of New Foundation Farms.  And you've worked in food before, you didn't work only in, let's say, advertisement and  the world of broadly storytelling.  Can you explain a bit there because you weren't completely new to the food world or definitely  not actually completely new to the food world?  
**[0:04:43-0:04:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:04:43):**  No, that's very true.  Very true.  So yes, I have many years in ad agencies, but then I happened to have a meeting in 2015.  So almost six years ago now with the co-founder and CEO of Leon restaurants, which is a UK  based business, but actually does have some restaurants in Europe.  
**[0:05:02-0:05:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:05:02):**  And it is a naturally fast food brand.  So it's very much a business of food retail, but I joined as brand and marketing director  at a point where the business was looking to go through rapid expansion.  And that for me, or a whole host of learnings and experiences very much connected to food,  where it comes from, what it can mean for people, how you can prepare it, the role of  
**[0:05:27-0:05:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:05:27):**  menus and recipes.  And then of course the bit that sort of fits most closely with my title, but the marketing,  how do you present it to people, how do you get it to become the food that they would  choose to buy?  So I spent four years as brand and marketing director in that business.  
**[0:05:42-0:05:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:05:42):**  And then actually after a hiatus, I returned last year to focus on sustainability and values,  because I think that sustainability is something I've always personally been very driven by.  And I did a MSC in sustainability and responsibility, gosh, 10 years ago now.  But that for me as well, and knowing the Leon business the way I did, there was huge opportunity  I think to be able to go back and focus on that side of things as well, which is of course  
**[0:06:10-0:06:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:06:10):**  kind of was a stepping stone to getting to understand the role of soil and regenerative  agriculture.  And then how did you end up here where you are now?  I know the story, that's why I'm asking.  And it's a testament of reaching out and doing, and it's not that you, it's an interesting  
**[0:06:27-0:06:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:06:27):**  story.  Let's go into it.  How did you meet Mark and Marcus?  So I was in Leon and I was exploring how do we work with suppliers?  So rather than that sense of, oh, we need better suppliers, let's change our supplies.  
**[0:06:40-0:06:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:06:40):**  I wanted to understand what are feasible ways of working with suppliers for them to have  a more positive impact.  So I was of course beginning to understand more around the role and the potential of  soil and farming in a way that looked at soil health.  And I think as lots of people did last year, actually, I was spending more time on LinkedIn  
**[0:06:58-0:07:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:06:58):**  and I came across somehow, I think through a set of connections in my network, I came  across an article written by our chair in Responsible Investor magazine.  So an article written by Mark on the role of regenerative agriculture and on its potential  to offer a new asset class for investment in the UK.  And I just found it so inspiring that there was something that had this much economic  
**[0:07:24-0:07:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:07:24):**  potential in it and obviously it was new to me so I didn't fully understand it.  So I contacted him, I sent him a message on LinkedIn.  I was like, right, read your article, thought it was fascinating, don't think I understand  all of it, have you got time to talk?  So we set up a call and it ended up, it was myself, Mark and Marcus and really within  
**[0:07:43-0:07:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:07:43):**  about 15 minutes, I just, I think felt a connection and we really hadn't obviously got very deep  into any particular topic.  But Mark, I think just said, would you be interested in working with us?  Would you be interested in spending more time with us on the startup?  We're creating a new foundation farm.  
**[0:08:01-0:08:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:08:01):**  And I just said, you know, I think I would.  And I am a great believer in both synchronicity but the importance of timing and how paths  can cross and that there can be meaning in that, even if it's not something that was  entirely by design or was consciously created.  And so yes, that led to a series of conversations over the months.  
**[0:08:22-0:08:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:08:22):**  And then for me more formally joining the team at the end of January this year.  And no, I think it's a testament to reaching out, being open to things that don't start  spamming obviously.  I mean, don't, but for many people that are listening that want to get into or become  active in this space and be active and try to, doesn't mean that you get always a response.  
**[0:08:41-0:08:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:08:41):**  People are extremely busy.  I'm sorry if I didn't answer to some people.  But it is interesting how these things happen, partly online, partly synchronicity, partly  timing, but you have to be out there asking the questions, reaching out, be vulnerable  and who knows what happens.  
**[0:08:57-0:08:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:08:57):**  Yeah.  I'm a massive believer in that.  That's how most of the opportunities for me professionally have happened.  That really was the way in which actually I first joined Leon, for example, and sort  of decisions before.  
**[0:09:08-0:09:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:09:08):**  But I definitely agree with the point you make, but I also think as well, it's having  the right reasons for pursuing the lines of inquiry that you are as well.  Because I think there is something where, like you say, having a good reason and a good  intention behind those inquiries.  I think that can become very clear quite quickly to people.  
**[0:09:26-0:09:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:09:26):**  Yeah.  You really reach out because you wanted to understand more, not because you were looking  for a job.  There's a difference that people sense that and you had some general questions about how  this would work, et cetera, as an interest.  
**[0:09:38-0:09:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:09:38):**  And so now that's interesting.  And then, so you started in January, obviously already engaged before.  And then the big question here, we unpeeled part of the onion.  I keep going back to the onion.  I don't know why.  
**[0:09:49-0:09:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:09:49):**  With Mark and Marcus.  And now I think it's time to go deeper into what is a disruptive agri-food brand and what  makes it unique.  Why now is the time?  And I'm very interested to dive deeper into what that is and what that is from a storytelling  
**[0:10:04-0:10:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:10:04):**  perspective and from a marketing and all of that.  But let's start with what is to you a disruptive agri-food brand and why are we talking about  it now?  Yeah.  So I think you can only really be disruptive if you've got quite a clear sense, obviously  
**[0:10:18-0:10:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:10:18):**  of context and sort of where you'll start from and therefore kind of how you would be  disruptive.  And I think for me, a lot of the challenges in the UK is this increasing distance we have  between ourselves and our food.  And that's literally what the food is.  
**[0:10:32-0:10:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:10:32):**  But of course, where it comes from, how it was produced, where it was grown, what the  value of it is.  I mean, we now, I think, spend quite a depressingly small amount of our household income on food.  It's 9%.  I mean, the only country that spends less is the US.  
**[0:10:49-0:10:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:10:49):**  And we know the quality there.  Yeah.  Yeah.  It is also the fact that we have a really high percentage now of food in our baskets  that's ultra processed.  
**[0:10:58-0:11:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:10:58):**  So I think for me, that's one part of it.  The other part of it as well is also just over the years, the observation that I think  food is very much becoming a bit like fashion.  It's becoming labeled, it's becoming stylized, it's becoming something that's very much positioned  as highly desirable, but desirable in its end form and for these sort of catchy benefits  
**[0:11:20-0:11:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:11:20):**  it might give you.  You know, is it a superfood?  Is it low in this?  Is it high in that?  And I just think that it's become quite moralized food.  
**[0:11:28-0:11:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:11:28):**  And it's also become kind of quite like a fad.  And I think that those are again, other things that are distancing people from their food.  So I guess it's a little bit.  Partly because of ex-colleagues of you and obviously the marketing industry coming very  involved in discovering ultra processed foods in many cases, but yeah, telling a story that  
**[0:11:48-0:11:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:11:48):**  hit a nerve with all of us, just like the fashion industry did 20 years ago or more.  It became and becomes quite a, yeah, quite a different thing than a couple of years ago.  Yes, I definitely agree.  I definitely see myself as sort of perhaps a slightly reformed person from the ad industry  because.  
**[0:12:05-0:12:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:12:05):**  Recovering.  Yeah.  Well, I think, yeah, looking for change anyway, I suppose, because it is true.  I think the sort of the tentacles and effects of marketing and frankly consumerism have  just basically gone too far.  
**[0:12:17-0:12:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:12:17):**  And so I think when we think about being a disruptive brand in agri-food, it's very much  following the principles of regenerative agriculture.  It's kind of almost, it is a sort of leaping forward by reflecting back to the past.  And I think there is something to be said for, there can be quite a lot of disruption  in actually just being incredibly honest, incredibly transparent and actually making  
**[0:12:42-0:12:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:12:42):**  food something that works as a system in a way that's really, really local and really  connected to people and far more in tune with what they want and what they need.  Because then you've started a cycle of inviting their input and then being able to further  inform what they can expect from food, what quality food looks like and what quality food  tastes like.  
**[0:13:04-0:13:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:13:04):**  To be a bit more specific on it, I think there is something disruptive actually in pricing  of food.  So the fact that the input costs for regenerative agriculture are 30% less, that for us is absolutely  something that we would want to be able to transfer over to people so that they can appreciate  local quality food can be very fairly priced, quite competitively priced.  
**[0:13:27-0:13:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:13:27):**  And I think the other thing is being able to do more of a comparison for people on true  cost.  So the idea, I do reference the fashion industry quite a bit having done work with it before,  but you look at certain fashion brands and I just use this as an example I'm familiar  with not necessarily saying it's the best, but there was quite a lot of disruption when  
**[0:13:45-0:13:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:13:45):**  Everlane as a fashion brand broke down what actually goes into the price of a t-shirt  or a sweatshirt.  And I really think trying to create more understanding with customers as to what goes into the cost  of food, because I think you've immediately been disruptive in depositioning processed  food and showing that a huge amount of what you pay for is that packaging, is that branding,  
**[0:14:13-0:14:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:14:13):**  is that logo, is that set of logistics that were involved in frankly taking a product  from being very natural through to actually processing it to a point where it really no  longer is.  So is it something you're going to see in your products as well?  Like that breakdown that clear where things go to, because I see a few fashion brands  
**[0:14:33-0:14:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:14:33):**  and a few other brands using that.  I haven't seen the food yet.  I mean, some mentioned, of course, this is how much goes to the farmer and compared like  in coffee, there are some movements around that.  Moji is doing that very nicely.  
**[0:14:44-0:14:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:14:44):**  How much stays actually in the country or not?  How much travels outside?  And is that something you're going to see on the packaging?  Is that something we're going to see on the wall in the farm shop?  How we're going to see that as customers in new foundation farms?  
**[0:14:56-0:15:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:14:56):**  Yeah, I mean, we are in development, so I probably couldn't say exactly where you'll  see it.  But the point is that you would be able to see that and have that as part of input stuff.  Yes, as part of your decision making process, because I think in the end, there's an enormous  amount of talk really across all of industry about people as consumers.  
**[0:15:18-0:15:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:15:18):**  And we don't subscribe to that, partly because I think the more you talk about consumers,  the more you're taking people away from being creators.  And I think the point here is that how do we empower people to feel more like citizen  shoppers, where they understand the contribution that their money makes, because whether we  like it or not, money is power.  
**[0:15:38-0:15:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:15:38):**  The point is it's somebody else's power, or whether it's yours.  And the more information we can very simply and excessively give people, the more power  they will have over their own decision making, but ultimately their food systems.  And I think that when we think about the way in which we would like to develop new foundation  farms from a first farm of 1000 acres, up to a series of hubs that we create across  
**[0:16:02-0:16:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:16:02):**  the UK with farms that are central, but then probably clusters of farms that we've either  partnered with, or that we've helped support transition to regenerative agriculture.  That's where also we've got these circles of influence that involve those local communities  and those citizen shoppers.  And that is part of why we think the model of development that we're going for will be  
**[0:16:25-0:16:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:16:25):**  disruptive and ideally will create positive change.  So how is this different from your typical farm shop where you see the connection, like  you visit a farm shop?  In my imagination, I have yet to look at the numbers.  It's typically fairly small, you buy a certain amount of products, and you have the connection  
**[0:16:44-0:16:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:16:44):**  to the land.  Maybe you can even eat there, because in some cases, obviously, they added the restaurant  part, which is very interesting for margins if you don't do it well.  But it is also, I mean, accessibility is an issue.  Customers are often interestingly high and not so accessible because you have to go,  
**[0:17:00-0:17:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:17:00):**  which immediately makes it inaccessible for a lot of people.  And you're mentioning this disruptive part.  So how do we envision, okay, how can I as a potential client in the future, in a year  from now, at the end of this year, get access to food through New Foundation Farms?  What's the experience like for the different types of customers?  
**[0:17:20-0:17:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:17:20):**  One of the main parts of the New Foundation Farms model is to be able to stack the different  economic activities.  So for the 1,000 acre first farm, we are planning to have 1,000 square meters of both processing  and retail.  So I think like you say, that is, I think the processing perhaps slightly less typical  
**[0:17:40-0:17:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:17:40):**  for a farm, but the retail, not necessarily.  So I think that what we will be striving for is to have that shop experience, but also  to have a cafe and a restaurant, because it's not just the transaction that is important.  I think like we've talked about with-  That can happen online.  
**[0:17:57-0:17:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:17:57):**  Yeah.  With transparent pricing, it is also creating a sense of food culture.  And I think that is vitally important because then you've created more points of connection  for people than just, I've come in, I bought a product and I've left.  And so there's two points I'd make about that.  
**[0:18:14-0:18:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:18:14):**  One from an accessibility point of view, like I said, I think we would be aiming for very  fair pricing.  But two also, I think the way in which we stock that shop obviously needs to be really  considered because we are looking to become a replacement for the weekly grocery shop  that people could do elsewhere.  
**[0:18:31-0:18:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:18:31):**  So I need to find almost everything there.  Well, we would look to have kind of curated choice.  So it's the things that people need, not necessarily lots of choice in each category.  No, no, not 16 types of peanut butter.  But yeah, at least I would like, yeah, you need to feel that you can do your weekly shopping,  
**[0:18:48-0:18:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:18:48):**  even if it's a bit more limited than the mega supermarket aisles that we're getting used  to.  And I think that's really where we would see there's two sides to the way people make decisions  on there.  One is a more emotive side and the other is a really practical side.  
**[0:19:02-0:19:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:19:02):**  And I think from my point of view and my experience, we really have to be very successful on the  practical aspect.  So that is, are we easy to visit?  Are our prices fair?  And also, is it as convenient as possible to buy from?  
**[0:19:15-0:19:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:19:15):**  And this is where the role for tech for us is really important.  So this is why we have a really strong COO and CTO in Wayne, who I know you'll be hearing  from in a later podcast.  But you know, we don't want to be a charming place that you have to visit in person to  be able to buy a few special things.  
**[0:19:34-0:19:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:19:34):**  You know, we would like to be somewhere where it's really easy for you to buy online and  have the items delivered, but also then yes, to visit in person.  So I think there's that side of it.  And how do you see that split?  Is it going to be 80-20?  
**[0:19:47-0:19:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:19:47):**  I don't know which side it's going to be 80-20.  But in terms of this online explosion that obviously we have seen during COVID, like  the meal box companies are going through the roof and supermarkets are scrambling to keep  up with online.  How do you see that split in terms of visiting versus maybe I visited once and then I continue  
**[0:20:06-0:20:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:20:06):**  to buy my weekly or monthly stuff through you and not visit necessarily every week?  Yeah, so in the UK, actually, the uptake pre-COVID, the uptake of digital food delivery and so  was actually surprisingly slow.  And I think that is because it's taken time for people to adopt that behavior.  There is also just something where particularly when it comes to food, people do still like  
**[0:20:30-0:20:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:20:30):**  to see the produce and make that choice.  And we found, I think in the UK in particular, the weekly shop still happens, but increasingly  people are just shopping for smaller number of items more often.  I think that we could have a greater proportion of digital transactions, but actually in order  to create the hubs that I mentioned and for those to be successfully replicated, but also  
**[0:20:54-0:20:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:20:54):**  for us to be achieving the social impact that we are striving for, we would really like  to maintain a balance.  And I think that's where the second part of the early question you asked around what would  make the farm shop slightly different or more interesting.  It is this point around food culture, because I think what we don't want to become is the  
**[0:21:13-0:21:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:21:13):**  sort of just replacement and that people purely do buy in the way they currently do, because  that is part of the challenge is that there is not enough of an emotional connection.  And I think an engagement of attention into food shopping.  That's why I think we've managed to speed up the process of shopping and reduce the  amount of time and kind of enthusiasm that can go into buying products.  
**[0:21:37-0:21:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:21:37):**  And I don't think it has to be that that is because about a cost thing.  I think it's just largely about trying to create renewed appreciation for food, its  quality and the role that it plays in your life.  Prioritization.  Yeah.  
**[0:21:52-0:21:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:21:52):**  So I think on the question of digital versus in real life, we'd hope to maintain a balance  if it goes that there are more digital transactions over time, which hopefully there probably  would be because there's something in that about convenience and about it being more  likely that people could buy more regularly.  But we would always want to also be bringing people to the site because it's the transparency  
**[0:22:14-0:22:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:22:14):**  by which we would share our farming process and encourage people to actually spend the  time on the land that we're doing that more holistic, we're playing a more holistic role,  I think, in foundation farms.  I think it's going to be fascinating to see how that will shift and how often people will  keep like, let's say, regular online customers.  
**[0:22:33-0:22:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:22:33):**  How often will they visit because not necessarily to do the shopping and it will do as well,  but because of the experience and because of the food to eat there and because of the  farm tour or because of XYZ and keep checking in, keep visiting just to make sure they have  that connection compared to a pure online brand or a pure farm shop brand.  I think that combination is going to be very interesting, challenging because they're very  
**[0:22:55-0:22:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:22:55):**  different beasts, but obviously also in terms of skill needed or necessary because you're  just running between brackets because it's not easy.  A farm shop could be very challenging in terms of quantity.  You need to push through that to make sense, especially if you're operating a thousand  acres.  
**[0:23:09-0:23:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:23:09):**  Yeah, that's true.  I mean, but just, I suppose, as there is the diversity of produce that we're planning to  farm, you know, true to regenerative agriculture principles in a way, the diversity of ways  in which you could buy and what we look to sell, we think in the end it could become  beneficial to have that rather than complex because one of the big parts of what we are  
**[0:23:32-0:23:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:23:32):**  and what we will work to achieve is to be able to, when we start and not having a lot  of our own produce, we will be sourcing from local farmers.  And that for us is a beneficial thing for increasing our network, being able to share  the learnings and obviously then more easily having a diversity of products to sell.  Because I think a lot of the way in which we will look to create change in the system  
**[0:23:55-0:23:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:23:55):**  is to be able to establish a sales platform that proves the market demand for regenerative  agriculture, which is then an incentive for other farmers to transition.  And how do you deal with, let's say those farmers are, maybe are in some part of the  transition, but as nobody's done yet or nobody is a regenerative farmer, how do you deal  with the fact that they might be still applying practices that you, let's say, are not in  
**[0:24:20-0:24:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:24:20):**  favor with or in a couple of years are definitely not doing on your farm?  How do you going to choose between not supplying or not selling this produce as you know that  the farmer is in a transition of phasing out XYZ or not using that anymore, but still might  be using this this year?  How do you deal with that in terms of maybe the customers are coming and expect a fully  
**[0:24:38-0:24:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:24:38):**  regenerative, whatever that means, supermarket ready and it is work in progress?  Again, I think it's the transparency by which we present the product, because I think that  we will of course be looking to source produce from mission aligned farmers that will be  at some stage on the journey as we will also be.  And I think it's about how honestly and easily we can share the information with customers  
**[0:25:04-0:25:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:25:04):**  around what that product is and what may have been used in the process of producing it.  But obviously, hopefully being able to point out what wasn't used as well.  So there's a lot of reason why claims drive marketing and drive preference.  And a lot of it is because they're simplistic.  They are the kind of things that people begin to recognize and then base their choices on.  
**[0:25:25-0:25:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:25:25):**  And I think we know we are aware of that.  But I think it is about how you try and add just that bit more information but easily  for people so that they understand that actually, it's not necessarily about that, whether it  has a single accreditation or not.  There's other things to be considered.  
**[0:25:42-0:25:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:25:42):**  And to be very honest as well, I think there is something in the fact that from a producer  point of view, regenerative is very powerful.  From a mainstream market point of view, regenerative is very little understood.  So a lot of it actually, I think, comes down to language.  So the idea of being able to have a positive impact on nature or help biodiversity or actually  
**[0:26:05-0:26:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:26:05):**  also one of the biggest drivers in the UK is the appreciation for local food.  Local doesn't necessarily mean better, but it is part of the story that actually from  the way we would look to be sourcing produce for the shop at New Foundation Farms, that  will be important.  So again, a lot of it, I think for us will come down to honesty, transparency, but just  
**[0:26:26-0:26:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:26:26):**  the nuance of language as well.  That's a difficult one because everybody seems to be looking for, okay, can we come up with  a Regen label?  And then we just say, okay, this is Regen, that's not.  And of course, by definition, that's very, very difficult or probably impossible because  
**[0:26:39-0:26:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:26:39):**  it is a journey.  And it means it's not a yes or no question.  But consumers are used to that, like it's either is organic or isn't, even though there  are 50 shades of organic.  We're very used to look at the package, okay, this is without that, or this is with that,  
**[0:26:52-0:26:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:26:52):**  and that's it.  That journey is going to be very, very interesting and challenging, I can imagine.  What do you see as the biggest challenge coming into this space, relatively fresh, but obviously  with a lot of food and storytelling experience and marketing experience?  Is that explaining the journey or taking the people on the journey?  
**[0:27:09-0:27:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:27:09):**  Is that keep answering the question, why there's no label?  What do you see as the biggest challenge at the moment?  I mean, that could be different in a couple of months, obviously.  To clarify the question, do you mean the biggest challenge coming into selling regenerative  produce?  
**[0:27:23-0:27:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:27:23):**  It could be the biggest challenge and opportunity.  What do you see as with a different set of glasses, really looking at the marketing perspective,  really look at the storytelling, really looking at how do we engage large groups of people,  as you've done in the past with other brands and other work?  What do you see as that interesting tension point where maybe it's a challenge now, and  
**[0:27:43-0:27:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:27:43):**  it could be a huge opportunity a year down the line or six months down the line when  obviously a lot more things are clear because we're a bit in the dark at the moment?  Yeah.  So I think that one of the biggest things that drives marketing, to be honest, is a  sense of, like we've mentioned already, reductionism.  
**[0:28:00-0:28:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:28:00):**  It is this idea of how simple can you make the message and how often and how many different  ways can you repeat it?  And I think that that is almost then equivalent to the problems with industrial agriculture.  It has become simplistic in here's a set of inputs that you use.  They come from a few sources, a few massive companies.  
**[0:28:23-0:28:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:28:23):**  That's where you might get your fertilizers and your antibiotics.  And let's keep it simple because we're really focused on yield.  Let's just do a few crops or a set of livestock on our land.  And the diversity by which we need to approach regenerative farming is in real honesty, the  diversity with which we need to approach the way in which we present the produce to people.  
**[0:28:46-0:28:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:28:46):**  Because I don't think I am too naive or idealist, but the bit that really attracted me to New  Foundation Farms is this idea of pursuing a kind of action-based research approach.  We really are setting out to, we will have our first 1000 acre farm and we will learn  from that, I think, what are the best ways of doing this.  But I think although our ambition is to go national, what I think is crucial in all of  
**[0:29:15-0:29:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:29:15):**  this is to create the importance of connections and of each customer that will become part  of what we create at that first New Foundation Farm and to never forget that, I think.  Because one of the challenges is how much scale for any business and brand weakens the  individual human connections.  And I say this obviously kind of, that sounds quite fundamental, but I do think that's true.  
**[0:29:42-0:29:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:29:42):**  So I actually think that the challenges really are more practical of how to establish our  first farm really successfully in a way that shows that we really are interested in what  the local community care about, who they are, how they might both shop from us or with us.  And I think that that's the way in which we will model how our replication and our scaling  will work well.  
**[0:30:08-0:30:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:30:08):**  So I do, I increasingly find myself seeing parallels between how to move from conventional  agriculture to regenerative agriculture and frankly, how to then move from really commercial  marketing and branding to something that feels more regenerative as a practice on that side  as well.  Yeah, I think what's going to be interesting because for many farm shops are the ones I  
**[0:30:31-0:30:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:30:31):**  know, I mean, the marketing of the communication happens because of the farmer and the owners.  And that's usually a small team.  I'm generalizing here, obviously, don't start writing if you have a big one, but it's usually  they are the farmers or they are the story and they are et cetera, et cetera.  In this case, with 100 people working at some point there, it's going to be the interesting  
**[0:30:51-0:30:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:30:51):**  piece of how do you make all of them not ambassadors, but how do we make them really part of new  foundation farms that they are the story as well, even though they might not be the typical  organic farmer you've seen on packaging, which doesn't exist, by the way, but the ones that  you see that we've created in terms of in our minds and in the videos and in the marketing  we've seen, et cetera, et cetera.  
**[0:31:11-0:31:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:31:11):**  So how do you scale that without losing that personal story?  Because all of them will have a personal story.  And that's why it's so important to keep them obviously engaged very long term and to make  them really part of it.  So how does that that's going to be, I think, one of the interesting tensions to make sure  
**[0:31:25-0:31:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:31:25):**  to have a diverse story there, but still a sort of not central story, but a general holistic  story, even though there are 100 different people or more that are going to share at  your table at the shop at et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.  Yeah.  And I think the central story will be the themes that come from being a regenerative  
**[0:31:42-0:31:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:31:42):**  enterprise and regenerative farming.  And I think a lot of that is soil is central and that that farming is for the good of many  other things, not just the output of the produce.  And that might be the rural community.  That might be the biodiversity.  
**[0:31:57-0:31:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:31:57):**  That might be the water management.  Of course, ultimately, there's a primacy to the quality of the produce, as that's what  we're asking people to come in and buy.  But I think it is making it feel more than just a transaction, more than just I'll hand  over my money for this item that I'm going to make part of my meal.  
**[0:32:15-0:32:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:32:15):**  With these calories.  Yeah, it is much broader than that, isn't it?  And I think that's what we would look to have as central.  And then very much, as you say, actually, when with our plan to have a cafe and a restaurant  alongside the shop, and that's sort of over time, this food culture and making everyone  
**[0:32:33-0:32:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:32:33):**  that works in Newfoundation Farms feel a part of that and to have a connection to that,  as you mentioned, we will have sort of up to and over 100 employees due to the model  we have due to it being regenerative agriculture.  But that idea as well, that just because perhaps your primary work is in the shop, we will  work though for them to also have an experience on the land, I think, and to have their time  
**[0:32:58-0:33:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:32:58):**  as part of that process.  Because I think then that does mean that the way in which they're able to talk about the  produce and present it to people is just far more credible.  So I think that for us as well is quite an important part of it.  No, I think it's going to be fascinating and fundamental.  
**[0:33:14-0:33:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:33:14):**  And sometimes the stories will diverge and sometimes they won't.  And it's going to be a very interesting part of letting go.  And that's very much part of a regenerative or regeneration transition or journey.  And you're not in control of everything.  And that's OK.  
**[0:33:28-0:33:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:33:28):**  I want to be conscious of your time and end with a few questions that we always like to  ask and start with a question definitely inspired by John Kemp.  What do you believe to be true about regenerative agriculture that others don't?  So where are you contrary?  So I think on this, I actually think that there's something about regenerative agriculture  
**[0:33:48-0:33:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:33:48):**  where there's a lot of polarization and sort of labeling and moralizing around ways, both  the farming, but also, I think that we've said in types of food.  And I do think that there's something in regenerative agriculture that's so holistic in its approach  that it can integrate and sort of transcend that, if you like, particularly because one  of the dominant narratives here at the moment is around the challenges and issues with meat  
**[0:34:13-0:34:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:34:13):**  as compared to veganism as a way of eating.  Whereas I guess the interconnectedness by which you farm and by which livestock and  horticulture and all of those other aspects play a part in regenerative farming.  I do think that there's something in that holistic approach that can rise above what  maybe are the kind of combative and sort of contradictory narratives in food at the moment.  
**[0:34:38-0:34:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:34:38):**  I think a lot of work is needed there because it's, we really easily slip into those conversations  and that basically battling each other from vegan to the mob grazing guys and girls.  And I think it's just as in the fossil fuel industry, it's just delaying us.  It's delaying to get to the point of regeneration.  And it's exactly what, let's say, industrial extractive agriculture wants.  
**[0:35:00-0:35:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:35:00):**  So they keep feeding that with interesting reports that show all kinds of things that  if you look at the data, it doesn't show it at all.  But just to delay every day of delay is another week of selling industrial chickens.  And that really works well.  And then the other argument is you can never feed the world.  
**[0:35:14-0:35:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:35:14):**  It's like there are not enough calories and all of that, which has been, I think, debunked.  I don't know how many times, but keeps surfacing and surfacing.  So it's going to be very interesting to invite the hardcore vegans on a farm like that and  see, have a context discussion with everyone involved.  Like should we be eating the quantity of meat we're eating or the quality of meat?  
**[0:35:33-0:35:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:35:33):**  And that's a very, what is the role of animals if there is on this piece of land or this  farm or this estate in this context and how would that be?  Is that a separate question from should we eat or not eat?  And what's the role?  And probably there are two different questions, but that's not something you can fit on a  
**[0:35:48-0:35:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:35:48):**  one word billboard.  I mean, context, maybe yes.  Yeah.  And I think we, you know, for new foundation farms, we take, I think, a holistic view  on diet.  
**[0:35:56-0:36:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:35:56):**  And, you know, we look quite closely at something like the Eat Lancet report, which does talk  about how key plant-based eating is.  And you know, I think we do firmly believe that, but there is also a role for meat.  And I think that we have no moralizing view on meat either, that livestock and animals  are also a key part, aren't they, of the regenerative food system.  
**[0:36:18-0:36:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:36:18):**  I think the one challenge that I think I particularly feel at the moment is around the levels of  investment in lab grown meat alternatives, because I think that's taking a huge amount  of energy and interest, again, away from rural communities, rural areas, and frankly nature  in the countryside.  And that's what I think is, again, so hopeful in regenerative, but so needed is to try and  
**[0:36:43-0:36:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:36:43):**  again wean us off of view that the solutions will be human centric.  And I think that's where us being able to rediscover that we are part of nature and  that we should work as part of it and alongside it.  That is one of the ways in which I think we will really hope to present New Foundation  Farms as radically natural farming.  
**[0:37:04-0:37:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:37:04):**  So sort of irrespective of that specific term, it is looking to help people appreciate where  we sit as humans within those natural systems and therefore what farming can mean when you  look at it that way.  Yeah, I think it's again, there's an interesting simplistic approach there.  Like if we just invent lab meat, and I'm all for research and going deep in certain things,  
**[0:37:26-0:37:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:37:26):**  but it's a huge distraction because then the counterpart is let's just rewild everything  else.  But actually for rewilding, you need large animals, which is a very interesting contradiction.  And it's a huge resource suck at the moment.  Like we need smart people, we need smart money, we need a lot of things to dive deep into  
**[0:37:45-0:37:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:37:45):**  what's the role with us in nature and to really explore that.  And there's so much more to discover there than in a lab-grown meat facility, but somehow  the funding goes there and does the people and does the excitement.  And definitely they're also going up the hype cycle at the moment.  And again, I'm not against the research, but I think there are more interesting, there  
**[0:38:03-0:38:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:38:03):**  are deeper questions to ask about biodiversity, nature, how we feed ourselves, how we feed  everything else.  And these are not the deep questions.  And I see people coming from there, like let's say moving on at some point because they start  asking those deep questions.  
**[0:38:16-0:38:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:38:16):**  But it's a long journey and they get a lot of hype.  Yeah.  And I think actually to your question about soil, this idea that 25% of the world biodiversity  is in the soil, like that then is really relatively undiscovered.  And this idea, I think of trying to reposition insects and soil and that aspect of nature  
**[0:38:38-0:38:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:38:38):**  as innovative and as sources of progress.  I think there is, and I say this, I suppose, from a storytelling branding perspective,  but there's tremendous opportunity in that because I don't think that lab grown meat  alternatives don't have a role.  But I think like we've said, the level of interest, attention and funding that's going  
**[0:38:57-0:39:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:38:57):**  that way, it needs a counterbalance because I think that sort of approach to our food  future as well as then combined with our rates of urbanization, it does, I think, leave us  feeling like we've disconnected even more.  Yeah.  I think we're turning our backs on a tremendous amount of value, both economically and socially,  
**[0:39:19-0:39:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:39:19):**  as well as it being something that needs much more of our energy ecologically.  And so that's actually a great bridge to the next question.  If you had a magic wand and you could change one thing in the ag and food industry or in  general, but what would you change?  Could be consciousness, could be changing food labeling, could be in fact, could be  
**[0:39:37-0:39:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:39:37):**  anything, but only one.  What would you do?  I mean, unsurprisingly, actually, I think I would look at the branding of it and how  it's presented because I do think, you know, one of the methodologies used in the branding  world is semiotics.  
**[0:39:52-0:39:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:39:52):**  Explain what is semiotics.  Yes.  So it's a way of analyzing and looking at how a theme or a topic is presented and therefore  how people perceive it.  That's a very simplistic definition.  
**[0:40:07-0:40:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:40:07):**  I'm sure a listener would be able to give a better one, but I will try to put a link  in the show notes to something.  Yeah, I'll send one.  Yeah, please.  But there's something about the semiotics of agriculture where it just seems quite utilitarian.  
**[0:40:20-0:40:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:40:20):**  You see a lot of machinery.  It's quite masculine.  It's sort of, to be really honest, looks a bit like it's humans tidying up the countryside  for the benefit of being incredibly productive.  So you have that or you have something that really is charming of a previous era, but  
**[0:40:39-0:40:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:40:39):**  all sort of quite small and friendly, something another set of people tend to do, but probably  not you, the viewer.  And I think that both of those ways of presenting agriculture and farming make it feel distanced  from people, don't make it feel like it has energy and can be progressive.  And I think when we think about the future that agriculture can play for us, I think  
**[0:41:04-0:41:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:41:04):**  finding other ways to present it with more diversity so that more different people could  see it as something that they could do.  And I think also, frankly, more indignation and interest from the public actually around  the cost of land as well, because again, the semiotics of the way agriculture and farming  is presented to us is also part of the problem around how inaccessible UK land is now due  
**[0:41:30-0:41:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:41:30):**  to its cost.  So I personally would love to be able to make those sorts of changes so that more people  understood the value of agriculture and farming, more people saw it as something they could  actually even do themselves.  And they actually saw, recognized more of the role of that industry in the national  
**[0:41:50-0:41:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:41:50):**  interest and in our future.  And to be honest, there is definitely that part of what we can and hope to do with You  Foundation Farms is to present agriculture and food production in a different way.  And that is ideally really complimentary to a lot of what farmers are already doing in  running their successful farm shops and so on.  
**[0:42:13-0:42:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:42:13):**  It's just perhaps that we have a slightly different entrepreneurial mindset, but also  a slightly different skill set in the team that means that as part of the network that  we do feel part of, we can help do that on a larger scale.  I'm laughing because I'm asking a regular listener would notice by now I'm asking these  questions in the other order.  
**[0:42:33-0:42:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:42:33):**  And there's actually a perfect bridge to the next question.  What would you do if you would be in charge of so maybe the order all along was wrong,  the interviews we did so far, but what would you do with a billion dollar or billion pounds  let's investment fund because you touched upon land.  I'm making an assumption here that you go in that direction.  
**[0:42:51-0:42:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:42:51):**  But what if you would wake up tomorrow morning as an investment manager of quite a large  investment fund?  It has to be invested, meaning it has to come back at some point could be without a return  could be a zero, a zero percent return, but it has to come back.  What would you, Kirstie, focus on?  
**[0:43:05-0:43:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:43:05):**  I'm going to try and answer this.  Let's see.  I think that one of the most fundamental things that we could do is actually about having  more impact for children on the food that they experience at an early age.  Because I think so much of it starts with the food that you experience from a young  
**[0:43:26-0:43:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:43:26):**  age and the meal time experience that you have with that.  And for me, actually this line of thinking as well, it's massive credit to my former  boss and the CEO of Leon, John Vincent, because he and his co-founder, Henry Dimbleby worked  on the school food plan.  And that was looking at the fact that the economics for the government are better if  
**[0:43:49-0:43:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:43:49):**  they provide free infant school meals.  And I really firmly believe that.  And it's something that I care quite a lot about because I have children, they're at  the primary school age where they do get their food at school.  But I just think that that is so formative to children being introduced to different  
**[0:44:06-0:44:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:44:06):**  types of vegetables and tasting what quality food can be.  So I would say there's a lot of work later on because you mentioned the retasting or  learning how to taste, but it's a lot more difficult when you're 25 or 30 or plus compared  to when you're five.  To be really honest, yeah, once you're out of childhood, it's much, much harder to develop  
**[0:44:27-0:44:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:44:27):**  an interest in more diverse flavors and understand quality food.  So for me, investment in a really quality school food meal system that would also extend  to home economics being taught in school, but that investment would actually drive the  supply chain and drive an increase of quality.  That's a long term supply chain investment.  
**[0:44:49-0:44:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:44:49):**  Yeah, it is.  It's a long term investment, but it would also improve the culture of food in schools.  You know, there's a brilliant organization here in the UK called Chefs in Schools, which  encourages trained chefs to work in schools and just increase the pride in that preparation.  And the quality.  
**[0:45:05-0:45:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:45:05):**  Yeah.  And obviously it saves costs that goes to our health service.  So I don't really know that this is the neatest answer you'll have ever had.  But for me, that's where I'd go.  And it would be a long, long term investment.  
**[0:45:19-0:45:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:45:19):**  It is likely to not come back with return, but it would support, I think, a supply chain,  a whole system that takes more pride and can better prepare the food.  And then actually you would ultimately be helping produce more discerning citizen shoppers  when they reach adulthood, who then essentially will help lift the whole food system with  the kind of food that they are interested in and prepared to pay for.  
**[0:45:44-0:45:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:45:44):**  I think it's definitely the first time somebody mentioned children food system, but there  is for sure a way to figure out how to make this an investment.  In a sense, there's a lot of work being done on social impact bonds, which are not bonds,  but like basically outcome payment schemes.  And as you mentioned, investing in this actually saves all of us a lot of money.  
**[0:46:02-0:46:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:46:02):**  So the big challenge is not necessarily doing the food part, but it's figuring out how some  of the money that's being saved, only a small percentage is probably needed, flows back  to fund the whole scheme.  And that's something that financial wizards have been figuring out for centuries.  So that's not the impossible part.  
**[0:46:20-0:46:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:46:20):**  And I think a big part of this whole food as medicine or healthy food, and we actually  did an interview with medically tailored meals with Catherine Koucho, I'll put it in the  links below.  And like the savings are so enormous, and we're starting to slowly figure out that not  necessarily ultra processed food actually is helping that we're going to be figuring  
**[0:46:40-0:46:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:46:40):**  out how to pay for those programs and how to pay for that.  So I think it's an excellent answer to be honest.  And we're now joined by Mark Drouill, the executive chair of New Foundation Farms.  And we're going to do a few small updates and small tidbits at the end of the interview  with Kirsti.  
**[0:46:56-0:46:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:46:56):**  First of all, welcome back, Mark.  And can you share a few updates fresh off the roadshow train, which obviously is virtual.  But over the last week since we last talked, any updates, interesting meetings you had,  anything you can share, obviously, what has happened in fundraising land as you're raising  20 million?  
**[0:47:11-0:47:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:47:11):**  Hi again, Kun.  Yeah, it's great to be back.  The journey continues.  And since we last spoke, we've been focusing a lot on the question of understanding impact.  So for the first two months of the roadshow, most of the conversations have been about  
**[0:47:31-0:47:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:47:31):**  the money.  It's been all about how does the economics of this proposition work?  That makes perfect sense when you're talking to people about deploying a significant amount  of capital and wanting to offer a return on that, at least a significant portion of it,  it's important that the numbers stack up.  
**[0:47:51-0:47:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:47:51):**  But the last week, last 10 days have been very focused on this issue of impact.  And the reason is, we've been talking in much more detail to a bunch of foundations.  And that's thrown up some really interesting challenges, because the response is, okay,  yeah, we get the economics, that's super.  But talk to us about the impact of this.  
**[0:48:11-0:48:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:48:11):**  Because what you're talking about is a complete systems change.  It's not just about changing the production paradigm in the way we grow food.  It's also changing the journey between the field and the fork.  And the consequence of that is a complete transition from a sort of industrial monoculture  paradigm with big corporations, sourcing food everywhere, screwing the farmers on price,  
**[0:48:37-0:48:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:48:37):**  and then shipping it off to faceless supermarkets.  It's actually about reconnecting food everywhere locally, growing much more diverse produce  and delivering it primarily in a local context.  And that's a radical kind of mental shift that people have to make.  And so when you talk about impact, you find yourself saying, okay, well, we can talk about,  
**[0:48:56-0:49:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:48:56):**  you know, the amount of carbon sequestrated on land, or how many farmers are trained and  educated or how the food narrative changes because of the way you have better choices  for food.  But overall, the big picture here is this is about a complete systems change.  And it's quite an interesting challenge for foundation capital to think about that, because  
**[0:49:16-0:49:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:49:16):**  generally they look at interventions.  Yeah, specific interventions.  So how much carbon are you going to capture?  And we say, well, you know, a lot because we changed the whole system.  But it's not because we changed the whole system.  
**[0:49:28-0:49:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:49:28):**  It's because by showing what's possible, everyone changes.  And that's the sort of the highest level of impact investing people want to get to.  How do you change through an investment?  Or in this case, it could be a mix, obviously, of land and capital.  How do you change the system?  
**[0:49:41-0:49:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:49:41):**  But and then how do you respond?  Because I think the second question will be, okay, great, you're gonna have a lot of impact.  How are you going to measure or what are you going to measure?  Because in the world of impact measurement and management, there's a world, let's say.  What is your response there when that question comes?  
**[0:49:56-0:50:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:49:56):**  Yeah, so I'm going to ask Kirsty to respond to that, because we yesterday did a presentation  to six big foundations.  And Kirsty led on that, exactly answering that question.  So take us away.  Yeah, so I think as Mark was saying, it is taking the same holistic approach really,  
**[0:50:13-0:50:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:50:13):**  in the way that we would talk about and design the measurement of impacts as we're taking  the farming approach and farming plan.  So I think just to talk through some of the different layers of impact, if you like, there  is a course fundamentally, there's the soil health and how we measure the different characteristics  of that and its improvement.  
**[0:50:31-0:50:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:50:31):**  There's ecosystem health and the fact that we're using the ecological health index to  be able to see ourselves move along on that journey.  So very specifically, as everyone will know, seeing it as a journey, not a specific endpoint.  But I think also it's because we've got the agri-food model at New Foundation Farms, it  is also being able to think about all the way through to the human health and the social  
**[0:50:53-0:50:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:50:53):**  health.  So from a human health point of view, it is thinking about the diversity of produce that  we produce on New Foundation Farms, but also that we will sell.  So how are we introducing people to that idea that we refer quite a lot to Tim Spector and  the idea of eating 30 different types of plants each week, that really is what helps support  
**[0:51:15-0:51:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:51:15):**  a healthy gut.  So for us, as much of different produce as possible rather than just produce that is  processed in different ways, thinking about its nutrient density, how can we be monitoring  that and actually letting people know because a carrot isn't just the same as another carrot  this is part of the real promise of regenerative agriculture is the nutrient density over time  
**[0:51:38-0:51:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:51:38):**  the produce.  And of course, then there's repeat customers and there's the time in nature.  And that's where the invite we will have to people is don't just visit to buy, visit to  spend time across the farm, depending on how much time you have, but being able to come  into contact with part of the production or part of the landscape that we'll be cultivating.  
**[0:51:59-0:52:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:51:59):**  There is social health and so there's a really interesting emergence, particularly in the  UK of nature prescribing.  So how can we play a part in supporting that and being able to further create connections  for people with nature for their mental well-being.  From an economic health perspective, it's not just the economic health of new foundation  
**[0:52:19-0:52:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:52:19):**  farms as an enterprise, it's also the employment we can offer.  So rising well above the five or six employees that's typical for an 850 acre farm up to  above a hundred because we've got these stacked economic activities.  But within that, looking to make sure that there is a real diversity of the people that  we can employ that can be working with us and also apprenticeships.  
**[0:52:41-0:52:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:52:41):**  There is a real challenge in the UK industry of agriculture that it's the least diverse  industry nationally.  So we want to make sure we're playing a part in changing that.  But all of this and our model ladders up to the system change.  So how are we directly and indirectly increasing the acreage of land that's farmed regeneratively?  
**[0:53:02-0:53:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:53:02):**  And a lot of this then brings in the fact that we will be educating farmers in partnership  with 3LM.  And also just inspiring, I think, with case studies and the learnings that we will look  to share as transparently as we can, as we really are doing in this series with you.  And from a really macro level, I'm just very aware and clear on the fact that a massive  
**[0:53:23-0:53:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:53:23):**  shift in the agri-food industry can actually contribute to all of the sustainable development  goals.  So we can actually contribute to 10 of them directly and seven of them indirectly.  So for us, it's kind of all, it is literally from the ground up, but really considering  as consciously as we can what's happening at each layer of the enterprise, both for  
**[0:53:44-0:53:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:53:44):**  the way it will operate, but also how it can increase the impact over time.  And when you presented this yesterday on the call with the foundations, what was the response  and what were the questions about, if there were any questions?  At some level, we're a social enterprise because we're purpose driven.  Okay.  
**[0:54:01-0:54:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:54:01):**  But also we have this profit motive.  And overall, there's always the question of making sure that foundation money is being  used genuinely to drive change and not to make the cost of capital lower for a business.  Sponsoring some investment.  Yeah.  
**[0:54:17-0:54:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:54:17):**  So, you know, if we give you grant money, does that mean then that you're making somebody  else's returns higher?  So that's the kind of, there's a sort of underlying narrative question that always exists with  foundations that's important to get to the nub of.  So a big part of the conversation really stems around motive and values.  
**[0:54:39-0:54:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:54:39):**  And we've noticed this a lot in the regenerative space is it's, we find it very easy to notice  the difference between those who are driven in what they're doing by a deep conviction  that we should do something differently.  And those who are driven by the opportunity that this is the next best thing, you know,  the next new gravy train.  
**[0:54:59-0:55:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:54:59):**  The consequence of that is really the difference between, do I tweak the system in order to  persuade people to give me a bucket of money to make myself rich?  Or am I doing something that is with humility at the beginning of a journey of fundamental  transition?  Which could take decades and more.  
**[0:55:17-0:55:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:55:17):**  Yeah, it could take decades to come.  And it's a real challenge because the good news is that foundations are really focused  on that latter logic.  Their discernment is all about trying to figure out.  Trying to filter out the other ones.  
**[0:55:28-0:55:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:55:28):**  Yeah, exactly.  So that's the kind of, I guess the meta thing that underlies when you talk about impact.  It's very much around understanding the motive in a world where we're all innovating in just  scratching the surface of what's possible.  Thank you both so much for coming on at the back of this interview and shining light on  
**[0:55:47-0:55:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:55:47):**  an impact discussion that for sure could be a full other interview and probably a few  of them.  As impact management and measurement is a whole within itself.  But thank you so much for giving us a teaser and definitely we'll be digging deeper into  this at some point.  
**[0:56:01-0:56:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:56:01):**  Thank you.  Yeah, thanks so much.  It's great to be here.  If you would like to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and  agriculture, find our video course on investing in regenerative agriculture dot com slash  
**[0:56:13-0:56:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:56:13):**  course.  This course will teach you to understand the opportunities to get to know the main players,  to learn about the main trends and how to evaluate a new investment opportunity.  Like what kind of questions to ask.  Find out more on investing in regenerative agriculture dot com slash course.  
**[0:56:32-0:56:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:56:32):**  If you found the investing in regenerative agriculture and food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few  seconds.  
**[0:56:46-0:56:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:56:46):**  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  join my membership community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on cambrot.com slash investing regenegg or in the description  below.  
**[0:57:07-0:57:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:57:07):**  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  
**[0:57:32-0:57:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:57:32):**  After a hundred interviews and more than a hundred hours of audio asking the question  how to put money to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011  and recording this podcast since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework?  
**[0:57:51-0:57:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:57:51):**  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  What questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  
**[0:58:00-0:58:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:58:00):**  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  You the soil builders and investors in the space.  
**[0:58:09-0:58:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:58:09):**  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management consultants, etc.  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  
**[0:58:30-0:58:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:58:30):**  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  
**[0:58:43-0:58:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:58:43):**  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  that among the listeners of this podcast we have people with very different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  
**[0:59:02-0:59:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:59:02):**  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to ride along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  
**[0:59:22-0:59:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:59:22):**  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  
**[0:59:42-0:59:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:59:42):**  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  
**[0:59:53-0:59:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/kirsty-saddler#t=0:59:53):**  Before making any investment please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  