### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2021-00-20)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  Tell us everything you thought you knew about US agriculture, the family farm myth and successful  regenerative farmers.  
**[0:00:21-0:00:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:00:21):**  And take a deep dive into the good, the bad and the ugly.  Why should we treat farming as a business and why indigenous people should run them?  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture – Investing as  if the Planet Mattered, a podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative  food and agriculture space to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate  
**[0:00:43-0:00:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:00:43):**  soil, people, local communities and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we, as investors, big and small, and consumers, start paying much  
**[0:01:03-0:01:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:01:03):**  more attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  In March last year we launched our membership community to make it easy for fans to support  our work and so many of you have joined as a member.  We've launched different types of benefits, exclusive content, Q&A webinars with former  guests, Ask Me Anything sessions plus so much more to come in the future.  
**[0:01:23-0:01:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:01:23):**  For more information on the different tiers, benefits and how to become a member, check  gumroad.com slash Investing Regenerate or find the link below.  Thank you.  Welcome to another interview today with Sarah Mock, Head of Marketing and Communication  at Sylvan Aqua Farms and a freelance farmer world researcher and the writer of Farming  
**[0:01:42-0:01:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:01:42):**  and Other Efforts.  Welcome Sarah.  Hey, thanks for having me.  I'm so excited to be here.  I'm very much looking forward to this interview, but I want to start with a personal question.  
**[0:01:51-0:01:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:01:51):**  Actually, I'm also interested in the personal side of this.  Why are you going so deep in ag and soil?  So I actually grew up on a small family farm in Wyoming.  So my roots go all the way back to the beginning.  And you know, before I went off to college, I kind of felt like I was that the world of  
**[0:02:08-0:02:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:02:08):**  farming and agriculture was kind of pastoral and quaint and cute and like a great place  to grow up as a kid, but not necessarily the kind of important work that I felt as whatever  an arrogant rural kid that I felt like I was going to do in my life.  So what was important work you wanted to do at that?  Like work for the state department, I guess.  
**[0:02:27-0:02:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:02:27):**  I went off to Georgetown to study international affairs and thought like, I'm going to be  a spy or yeah, I don't know.  Being a spy is a bizarrely common thread among other kids who grew up in Wyoming.  I don't know if it's like some combination of like patriotism, but also worldliness and  then just physical fitness, I guess.  
**[0:02:46-0:02:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:02:46):**  I don't genuinely don't understand where it came from, but.  But there's like a big group of agents that are coming from that region or it's just an  idea that that doesn't happen.  Yeah, not agents, just kids, high school kids who want that.  That's interesting, but they also end up doing it like a significant percentage or just trying?  
**[0:03:05-0:03:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:03:05):**  No, I would just say they end up like either joining the military, which is a great first  step in terms of headed, being headed in that direction or like going to off to study like  international affairs, global affairs.  I live in Washington, D.C. now and there's a surprising amount of former Wyomingites  here who left the state to go abroad and spread democracy.  
**[0:03:27-0:03:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:03:27):**  I don't know, whatever the things that Americans say are and have ended up, many of them that  I know have ended up doing environmental work at the end of the day.  But yeah, so I went off to college, started learning about international affairs and basically  got to a point where I was like, wow, agricultural development is such a big part of the international  affairs conversation.  
**[0:03:45-0:03:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:03:45):**  It was so interesting to me and it was one of the unique things that I could actually  speak to that a lot of my classmates who are interested in it couldn't.  That, you know, having a background in American agriculture, which is very much driving the  international picture in terms of development.  And I actually got the chance to go abroad for a year.  
**[0:04:01-0:04:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:04:01):**  I spent six months in South Africa learning about sustainable ag and then six months in  India actually doing research with an organization that was doing like organic agricultural extension  and learned a lot of really important lessons about development and about being an American  abroad and about like the appropriate role for a white lady in all of these spaces.  And basically the biggest kind of takeaway I got from that experience was the most impactful  
**[0:04:27-0:04:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:04:27):**  thing I could do for global agriculture, especially in the global South, is to go home and fix  some problems with American agriculture because there are a lot and we export them all the  time and we pretend like exporting our problems is like a gift to other people.  And they should be happy.  And yeah, yeah.  
**[0:04:44-0:04:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:04:44):**  Yes, they should be happy with like our giant John Deere tractors and our like heavily subsidized  kind of industrial style agriculture.  And so coming back to the place where I could have a big impact here in the US, especially  in agricultural communities where I actually, you know, in agriculture in the United States,  there is a tremendous like gatekeeping going on around like pedigree.  
**[0:05:05-0:05:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:05:05):**  Like if you didn't grow up on a farm or if you don't have all this experience in agriculture,  then there's the sense that like you can't speak.  You don't have a say because you don't have the background.  And one that's like very stupid and a great way to homogenize a group and keep it very  homogenous.  
**[0:05:20-0:05:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:05:20):**  So being able to like kind of wade back into that and start asking some of the questions  around like, you know, why do we gatekeep this so bad?  You could because you grew up on a farm.  So you basically passed the gate without even trying.  Yeah.  
**[0:05:31-0:05:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:05:31):**  Bit of a Trojan horse over here.  But yeah, and just, you know, coming back, starting to ask those questions.  I actually came back to the US and went straight to Silicon Valley.  Was super interested in ag tech, saw technology and entrepreneurship is like this really impactful  way to push on agriculture, which is traditionally in the United States, very relationship oriented,  
**[0:05:52-0:05:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:05:52):**  very conservative, very conventional.  And tech seems like this place where you're speaking in the past.  I'm hearing there's a bad coming, but yeah.  Oh yeah.  So, you know, where money and economic opportunity, we're meeting these like environmental goals  
**[0:06:05-0:06:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:06:05):**  and this appetite for change.  Spent about two years working in ag tech, so much that I loved about it.  A lot of things that basically were just like, at the end of the day, I saw a lot of ag tech  companies bowing under the pressure of just, you know what, like they try and have an environmental  focus.  
**[0:06:24-0:06:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:06:24):**  They try to do a double or triple bottom line, have double or triple bottom line priorities.  They try to center communities or address some kind of like justice issue.  And at the end of the day, there's just not really a market appetite for that.  And when you accept adventure funding and you need to have some big deliverables, like  you abandon all that stuff and you get farmers to pay you to do stuff.  
**[0:06:46-0:06:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:06:46):**  And the farmers who have money to pay are the farmers who want you to help them make  more money doing often conventional industrial agriculture.  Or if you can't help them make more money, at least make their job a lot easier or make  it possible for them to farm in even bigger ways.  So my experience was that in, on the tech side, a lot of companies were diving in with  
**[0:07:05-0:07:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:07:05):**  all these high ideals and then over the course of their relatively short lifespans gave them  all up and just, we're trying to eat the lunch of the big players that were already in agriculture,  which I found kind of frustrating and didn't see it as the motivator of change that I was  looking for.  So at the end of my time in tech, I was like, well, how do you get paid to just ask the  
**[0:07:24-0:07:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:07:24):**  hard questions in agriculture?  Journalism was the answer to that.  I wish I had looked a little harder about how nobody makes any money in journalism.  It's kind of your question, like how do you get paid?  Like the payment part wasn't the question, but yeah.  
**[0:07:38-0:07:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:07:38):**  Yeah.  So I ended up at RFD TV, which is a national rural like ag rural and ag focused TV network  based in Washington, DC during like right at the beginning of the Trump administration  followed for three years, you know, ag policy from a journalistic perspective, did a daily  story, you know, hundreds and hundreds of daily stories on what was happening in Washington,  
**[0:08:00-0:08:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:08:00):**  which was a phenomenal experience and just being totally disabused of the idea that American  policy could have any impact on agriculture.  So you went from tech, which isn't of any impact from policy and then where did you  land?  Yeah.  
**[0:08:14-0:08:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:08:14):**  So I very depressed maybe.  Yeah.  Well, I took a hard look, you know, after having some of these realizations and realizing  that these places where we've put kind of our eggs in the basket of like, you know,  if we could just get policy to change, then agriculture will change.  
**[0:08:30-0:08:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:08:30):**  Or if we could just get tech to change, then agriculture will change.  Realizing that those were the wrong eggs to put our basket in.  I went back to the stories that I'd done and thought, you know, who is actually able to  keep the ideas that they came into this with?  And weirdly, right when I started reporting, I met Chris Newman at Sylvan Aqua Farms, did  
**[0:08:48-0:08:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:08:48):**  a story on him.  And three years later, I went back to him.  And the rule, basically, in like regenerative ag among farmers I knew, especially on the  east coast of the United States, was that like farmers that I met at the beginning of  my time reporting, 90% of them were out of business by the time I was freelancing.  
**[0:09:05-0:09:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:09:05):**  Three years was a pretty good time for most of them to either have like dramatically changed  the way they do their business, like went from being a business to being a hobby or  just like left farming altogether or had made some other big change that basically like  they couldn't make it work, so they're gone now.  And Chris Newman somehow was still around and he was thinking about things very differently.  
**[0:09:23-0:09:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:09:23):**  And he was trying to make some big transitions and had realized some of the same problems  that I had seen.  And so when I had the freedom to, you know, I was freelancing, I was doing stories in  a very different way than I had when I was full time as a staff journalist.  I was like, well, I might as well like if I think Chris Newman and Sylvan Aqua Farms  
**[0:09:42-0:09:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:09:42):**  is doing some revolutionary things, and I think that this of all this possible solutions  I've seen, this seems like the most likely to succeed, might as well help.  So came on board there and have been, I work with them almost full time at this point doing  marketing and communications, helping them grow their team, troubleshoot through many  different levels of scale that they're going through kind of all at once, which is nuts,  
**[0:10:06-0:10:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:10:06):**  but super fun.  And yeah, I mean, we're really tackling, I think, some of the big questions in agriculture  in fundamentally different ways than a lot of people have ever thought about it.  And do you think, I mean, compared to all the other farmers you've seen start in those  three years and didn't continue, like are there, of course, the lessons learned, but  
**[0:10:26-0:10:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:10:26):**  what are the key ones that are different with Chris and the team or the ones you've seen  there that really didn't work?  Like what are the big pain points basically you saw there and why many either went to  hobby or just stopped completely or changed completely whatever they were doing?  Yeah.  
**[0:10:40-0:10:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:10:40):**  So there's two big, especially among young regenerative, like people who come into the  work for the passion of farming or for like environmental justice reasons or for like  racial justice reasons.  If you don't own land, it's not going to work.  The fundamental part of this conversation that like no one ever really wants to talk  
**[0:10:59-0:11:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:10:59):**  about is that fewer than 2 million Americans own $3 trillion worth of farmland in the United  States.  And that's just like, you know, we talk a lot about the price of food and how the price  of food should be higher, especially when it's high quality food, like that which was  grown with sustainable or regenerative practices.  
**[0:11:14-0:11:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:11:14):**  But the reality is like the price only goes so high when there's a really low price alternative  around.  So people, you know, no matter how good we see this in other spaces, too, right?  Like no matter how good your super fancy like distilled alcohol is or your super fancy restaurant  is like, you can have a French laundry and people will pay $250 to eat your tasting menu,  
**[0:11:36-0:11:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:11:36):**  but they can't do that every day.  There's like a limit to how much people can possibly spend on really high priced stuff.  So how farmers make money when they can't charge enough to make a living is their farmland  value appreciates over time.  It's a store of wealth and that like growth and wealth makes it possible to like keep  
**[0:11:55-0:11:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:11:55):**  to stay in business to cover the cost of property taxes, which are also insanely low for agricultural  land in the United States.  And just like, yeah, even if you are breaking even every year, as long as your property  value grows, which it always does, like land values almost never drop in the United States.  And they've beaten the S&P 500, as a matter of fact, as an investment class for most of  
**[0:12:14-0:12:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:12:14):**  the last 50 years.  Yeah.  So like, as long as you have that, that's fine and on the other hand, if you don't have  that and you have to rent farmland and you're farming it regeneratively, that means your  landlord is actually charging you twice because you are both paying a competitive land rent,  
**[0:12:33-0:12:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:12:33):**  which you're competing against conventional agriculture, which is extracting the resources.  And we know that regenerative agriculture is more costly in terms of, right, we're internalizing  the costs that conventional agriculture externalizes.  So basically like, you know, when I'm a small farmer, if I was like 32 years old and I got  into Virginia and I rent 10 acres and I sell at the local farmers market, I have to charge  
**[0:12:55-0:13:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:12:55):**  a price that pays for my land rent and for the cost of my regenerative practices, which  means I have to raise my price and ask my customers to carry the weight of double rent.  And for the subsidies you're not getting, which is a missed opportunity cost and for  many other things.  Yeah.  
**[0:13:10-0:13:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:13:10):**  Yep.  And if I can't do that, if my customers won't pay that price, then I just have to stomach  it, which means basically like nobody in regenerative ag is paying themselves a living wage.  No one is paying workers a living wage.  And eventually that just like crushes you.  
**[0:13:23-0:13:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:13:23):**  You can only lose money for so long before you realize like, Hey, I have a college degree.  I'm just going to go get a job.  This is called a hobby.  Yeah, exactly.  Maybe I can keep farming on the weekends or maybe I can do something or maybe my partner  
**[0:13:34-0:13:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:13:34):**  can get a job that can support us both and the farm.  But eventually I know, you know, probably less than 5% of small young regenerative farmers  that have gotten started in the last like 10 years that I know are still farming.  You just can't, it just, the economics don't work.  Of the land.  
**[0:13:51-0:13:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:13:51):**  So the land ownership, the smallness probably is a big piece of that.  So you said there are two things, so land ownership and what was the second?  So the other thing is that is the labor challenge, which is tied directly into the cost of farmland,  which is we just pretend like it's not there most of the time in regenerative ag is like,  because we expect that farmers are getting like a lifestyle bonus.  
**[0:14:10-0:14:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:14:10):**  They just should be so chuffed to be out because they always have the view and they are outside.  Yeah.  It's beautiful and that's what people want and that should be enough.  Well guess what?  Verizon wireless does not accept a lifestyle check for your cell phone bill, but you need  
**[0:14:26-0:14:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:14:26):**  a cell phone bill even just to operate your business.  The problem is that we have built in this idea and we do it in other ways in regenerative  ag.  It's a business.  It's interesting.  
**[0:14:36-0:14:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:14:36):**  It's a business, which a lot of people won't, but it's absolutely crucial to call it a business.  Like this is an agriculture business and we haven't been operating it as a business because  it would be bankrupt a long time ago.  Exactly.  And that labor question, you know, there's lots of ways we get around paying for labor,  
**[0:14:51-0:14:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:14:51):**  especially in regenerative.  We do like lean really heavily on volunteers, which is not things that businesses do.  You should not have to donate to a for-profit business.  That's just not how that works.  We also do like, right, you do a lot of farm apprenticeship programs and things like that,  
**[0:15:05-0:15:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:15:05):**  where people get paid like a hundred dollars a month to work 12 hours a day in exchange  for education.  There's no one regulating what it means to be like educated in regenerative ag.  But you know, those, the problem of not paying for labor in agriculture is the American agriculture  history.  
**[0:15:22-0:15:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:15:22):**  Like the whole thing is just like farmers don't pay for labor.  So it's certainly not regenerative ag's problem alone, but it's not a problem that I think  most regenerative farmers have taken on and tried to solve in any serious way.  And they have to, if you want to grow this movement and take on conventional extractive  input-based ag.  
**[0:15:41-0:15:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:15:41):**  Because they don't need to make money in the normal way, in a sense of selling food because  they're not.  And they just need to keep, as long as they don't go bankrupt and they keep the land,  they are fine because it keeps going up in price.  And that's the only thing they do.  
**[0:15:55-0:15:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:15:55):**  And as long as they keep their head above the water, they're okay.  But not high enough to actually pay themselves.  And that's the difficult standard.  Yeah.  Well, and it's, and there's this really odd thing, this really odd mindset in American  
**[0:16:06-0:16:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:16:06):**  ag that coming from tech was hard to put my finger on at first, but once you see it, it's  hard to not see it.  And I summed it up.  A farmer I talked to recently who farms outside of LA and farms, you know, does value added  food products that he sells at farmers markets.  
**[0:16:21-0:16:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:16:21):**  His whole vision of like his life and like why things have gone well for him are basically  like motto is I can't afford $15 an hour salespeople.  And I can't not afford $25 an hour salespeople.  And it's like, yes, this is a thing we've forgotten in agriculture that when you pay  people, you get better people.  
**[0:16:41-0:16:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:16:41):**  Like there's this idea that like all farm labor is the same and that it's all like  valueless basically that you just like have to get bodies to do the work for you.  Hands.  Yeah.  Basically hands.  
**[0:16:55-0:16:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:16:55):**  Yeah.  Yeah.  That's the.  Exactly.  A robot's fine.  
**[0:17:00-0:17:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:17:00):**  Free labor's fine.  Right.  The whole idea that like you can run your business with volunteers is insane if you  think that your business is about value at all, because value, like everyone should not  be able to add the same amount of value in your business.  
**[0:17:12-0:17:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:17:12):**  You should be adding specific value.  And so definitely we'll link the interview with Chris below, obviously in the show notes.  You and I'm taking you plural here, taking a very different approach that we've touched  upon it with Chris, but I would love to, for anybody that didn't listen, like what's because  this is a massive.  
**[0:17:30-0:17:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:17:30):**  Undertaken and also basically challenging all the things we thought about.  Okay.  What is a farm?  What is a farming family?  What is a farming operation or company actually looks like and basically deconstructing it  
**[0:17:41-0:17:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:17:41):**  and designing it from the ground up again.  So can you walk us through what it actually looks like ideally?  And then let's talk about what it looks like now, but ideally how would we get around a  lot of these or these two main issues like labor or work in general and land ownership?  Sure.  
**[0:17:56-0:18:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:17:56):**  So in the most ideal sense, it basically, those two problems are solutions to each other.  If you don't have money, if you don't have revenue to pay workers, which is common in  agriculture and makes sense, then how would an entrepreneur use what they do have, which  is an appreciating asset to compensate people that they need to do their business with ownership?  Like that's how you do it.  
**[0:18:20-0:18:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:18:20):**  Startups do this.  Like this is nothing that agriculture will be like blazing a brand new trail and figuring  it out all on their own.  Right?  We have like decades and decades of in America, you only have to be 10% employee owned to  
**[0:18:30-0:18:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:18:30):**  be technically employee owned, which means all startups are employee owned, which I think  for a lot of people you hear employee owned farms or communal farms and people are immediately  like, Oh, it won't work.  It's socialism.  It's there's all these examples in history where it's broken and it's failing.  
**[0:18:44-0:18:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:18:44):**  And it's like, no employee owned businesses are quite successful the world over.  There's lots of good examples of employee owned businesses.  Employment owns could mean very different things like different levels, et cetera.  But it comes down to the essence of, I don't have a lot of cash on hand because I'm building  soil or building businesses, et cetera.  
**[0:19:00-0:19:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:19:00):**  But I can pay you if you believe what we're doing here.  Apart from that, I pay something obviously because you have to eat and pay your Verizon  bills.  But I also, you grow in wealth because of ownership.  Exactly.  
**[0:19:11-0:19:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:19:11):**  And that's how, you know, when I talk to farmers about you need to hire better people, you  know, one of the big things that I hear when I talk to new farmers who are starting out  or farmers who are at a place where they're trying to get to that they're in basically  like, right.  This is common in other kinds of entrepreneurship.  
**[0:19:24-0:19:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:19:24):**  There's like a valley of doom where you're, you go from being small to being midsize and  in between those is a really hard scaling period that a lot of companies don't make  it through.  And they get to that upper level of small and they say, you know, I have all this stuff.  My business is running me ragged, but I don't feel like I can afford employees.  
**[0:19:41-0:19:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:19:41):**  And the answer to that is always like, if you need employees, figure it out, like dig  deep and find.  And again, this equity question is right there and I think people don't want to access it.  And the number one reason why, when I tell farmers, like, have you considered offering  like an ownership path for your employees?  
**[0:19:57-0:20:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:19:57):**  Farmers say, well, how am I going to pass it on to my kids if I let my employees be  owners?  If they want to be employees, they can, otherwise they can't.  Yes.  But nobody ever says that if they are a tech entrepreneur, like, how am I going to pass  
**[0:20:08-0:20:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:20:08):**  this on to my kids?  Like, what are you talking about?  Yeah.  Could you imagine Larry Page being like, well, I'd love to have good engineers, but I really  want Google to be passed on to my children.  
**[0:20:16-0:20:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:20:16):**  So like, how could I possibly?  I hope they're good at coding.  They really do.  Yeah.  I'm sure they are because they've just been hanging around me for a while.  
**[0:20:25-0:20:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:20:25):**  So I'm sure they'll be great.  They'll be great.  But do you know when, I have no idea if this is a relevant question, but when that sort  of concept started in tech, like that wasn't something natural, was there a period where  they didn't do it and they got to the limit of that smallness and then said, okay, we  
**[0:20:39-0:20:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:20:39):**  just don't have the cash to pay, but we have ownership of something that might be extremely  successful in the future.  So let's offer that.  Was there a moment somebody that came up with this idea or was it a gradual thing?  Do you know at all?  
**[0:20:51-0:20:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:20:51):**  I am not the tech historian that would know the answer to that question.  But I actually think, I mean, from my experience with tech companies, it starts long before  like a small business running out of money, right?  Because most tech startups don't start out as small businesses.  They're never like family owned.  
**[0:21:05-0:21:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:21:05):**  They're just, you are like a founder with a founding team maybe, and you're just going  to investors and trying to raise money.  And what you're selling to these investors is like a stake in your business, which means  you have to have the business ownership divided up already.  So it's easy to do it.  
**[0:21:19-0:21:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:21:19):**  Yeah.  Yeah.  There's not a perfect comparison there for sure.  But yeah, this, the whole idea of employee ownership in agriculture and using farmland  assets and other capital assets as a way to pay, to compensate employees necessitates  
**[0:21:32-0:21:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:21:32):**  a deep interrogation of, are you farming as an investment so that your kids can inherit  it?  You're not worried about inheritance.  You're worried about your investment.  You're not worried about your business in that moment.  
**[0:21:46-0:21:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:21:46):**  So is this a business or is this an investment?  I think that's an important question.  And I think honestly, American agriculture would be operating entirely differently if  it was treated primarily as a business and not primarily as an investment class.  But you know, I think if we're, especially when we're talking about regenerative ag,  
**[0:22:02-0:22:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:22:02):**  when we're talking about changing diets, when we're talking about being more environmentally  resilient, we have to be talking about farming the business, not farming the investment class.  Because farming the investment class, there's just nothing.  There's nothing you can do because it's just like maximum extraction, right?  That's what an investment is, is how do I get the most cash?  
**[0:22:19-0:22:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:22:19):**  How do I optimize between long-term, long run gain and cash today?  Soil doesn't factor into that conversation.  It like can't really.  So if we're talking about farming as a business, then yeah, if your kid wants to become an  employee and work their way into ownership, like other employees have a chance to, then  
**[0:22:38-0:22:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:22:38):**  great.  And then you can pass that down.  I mean, other that's not uncommon in other parts of the economy too.  Law is a good example.  Like, you know, if your dad was a partner at a law firm, you'll probably get a job there.  
**[0:22:48-0:22:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:22:48):**  You'll probably get a chance to be a partner, but are you the only person who will ever  get a chance to be a partner?  No.  Architects are saying, yeah, it's very, I mean, you get a huge leg up obviously, but  you still have to work.  
**[0:23:00-0:23:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:23:00):**  That's the, the, and you have to prove.  Well, and the law firm will probably die if like no other one is considered except for  you.  And so how would that work in, because we not took hypothetical, how would it work in,  I would say practice or how would it work in this example?  
**[0:23:14-0:23:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:23:14):**  Like what's needed to get that done?  Obviously you get when you share that with farming friends that the first, I mean, the  student as they respond saying, what do I give to my kids?  That means they look at it as an investment or there's a business, but let's say to say,  oh, that's very interesting.  
**[0:23:28-0:23:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:23:28):**  What should I do?  What would be your answer?  Yeah.  That's a tough question because I think it looks kind of different for every person because  I'll talk about Sylvan Aqua first.  
**[0:23:38-0:23:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:23:38):**  Sylvan Aqua doesn't own any farmland, so there's not big capital assets that you can say, you  know, here's, you know, our net worth.  Is it in the plan to own it at some point or not?  Sylvan Aqua is like kind of a complex and unique situation where there's like going  to be an Atlanta trust and wealth created that way.  
**[0:23:55-0:24:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:23:55):**  I would say also there's like a mission focus that doesn't necessarily for me, I am more  interested in making a model that's kind of flexible and that different people can accommodate  to their different situations.  Cause like I hear it and we actually were just talking about this yesterday.  The idea that like if I, I own 500 acres and I don't want to farm it by myself and I don't  
**[0:24:19-0:24:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:24:19):**  want to run because this is the fundamental problem for a lot of small holding farmers,  right?  If you want to be the agronomist and the hydrologist and the accountant and the like investor relations  person and the marketer and the, then you, all of that falls to you.  You're a small business owner and you have to do all that stuff or you have to hire someone  
**[0:24:36-0:24:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:24:36):**  to do it for you.  And if you don't have money to hire people, then you need to have partners that help you  do it.  And that does not mean like you have to find someone and then like give them half of your  business.  
**[0:24:48-0:24:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:24:48):**  That's not the only way to do it.  And like you can write how startups do it is you offer shares and then people still  buy in.  It's at usually, you know, a relatively low rate and they, when it's startups, it's also  a relatively small amount of the company that is available to them.  
**[0:25:02-0:25:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:25:02):**  But you know, I think it takes a level of sophistication, financial sophistication,  basically that.  And business sophistication.  For sure.  Which all of farming should require a certain level of business sophistication that it largely  
**[0:25:14-0:25:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:25:14):**  does not in the United States a lot of the time.  But yeah, you know, I think in a lot of ways that's still being figured out in other people's  operations.  You know, we've been in communication with a lot of folks who are interested in this.  I think it's hard.  
**[0:25:27-0:25:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:25:27):**  One of the other really challenging things in this space compared to say tech is it's  really easy to split up someone else's money between you and your partners.  It's much harder to say like, this is all my capital that I brought into this relationship  and I'm going to meet it out to other people.  And I think because in the US there's basically no differentiation between farm wealth and  
**[0:25:50-0:25:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:25:50):**  family wealth.  Those are interchangeable, which is problematic, right?  Other businesses that is not true.  There's like a clear distinction between.  It becomes problematic in family companies as soon as it's pretty much the same thing.  
**[0:26:03-0:26:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:26:03):**  And then, you know, it's a recipe for disaster.  Yes, for sure.  I think this is a point that I am like always trying to make, which is just like we exceptionalize  agriculture in a lot of ways and basically every way possible.  But the reality is it's not significantly different from most other family businesses  
**[0:26:19-0:26:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:26:19):**  and its problems and its challenges and its benefits in the ways that it is regulated  and unregulated.  And so I think in a lot of conversations I've had with people about, you know, like, why  don't you consider equity?  Why don't you consider like buying your employees into your business?  
**[0:26:34-0:26:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:26:34):**  There's a lot of like, oh, well, that maybe that works in other businesses, but not in  agriculture.  The answer to that is just always like, yes, it does work in agriculture.  Like there's no reason it wouldn't work in agriculture.  Yeah.  
**[0:26:45-0:26:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:26:45):**  It's a bit of the same discussion of many farmers like, oh, but yeah, he or she is doing,  I don't know, holistic grazing or completely different ways of farming that would never  work here because it's a different climate.  No, it's not like it's a neighbor.  Like if it works on the other side of the fence, it also works for you.  
**[0:27:00-0:27:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:27:00):**  If you want to, if you want to explore, you could do differently, et cetera.  But it doesn't mean like it's not unique.  It's very difficult to find a unique situation.  Exactly.  And there's so much pushback around like, well, you know, this has been in my family  
**[0:27:11-0:27:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:27:11):**  all this time.  This is my heritage.  This is my legacy.  Everyone's family business is their legacy.  Everyone's family business is their heritage.  
**[0:27:17-0:27:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:27:17):**  And I know many people that sold it.  Yeah.  Yeah.  And like, guess what?  If we were still paying all the cobblers in America, all the descendants of cobblers just  
**[0:27:25-0:27:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:27:25):**  to cobble because like their parents and grandparents did it.  And like, that's the thing that we like believe they should do.  We would be in a very weird situation.  So let's like walk away from all the arguments about like legacy and heritage.  And remember that like, yes, absolutely.  
**[0:27:39-0:27:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:27:39):**  You inherited it and it's yours and that's fine.  And it's a business and you should operate it like one.  And if you are incapable of doing that, then we should be talking about like what comes  next because we don't just support people doing what they want to do because, because.  And it is a different sector for at least the environmental destruction and the environmental  
**[0:28:02-0:28:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:28:02):**  opportunity.  Like it's so big in terms of simple acreage, et cetera.  Like it does affect all of us.  Like if you run your bicycle shop or a bicycle company in an amazing way, it does affect  all of us as well.  
**[0:28:14-0:28:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:28:14):**  But if you run your large, large farm estate in a very destructive way, it affects everyone  around you.  Plus everybody far away because of climate change, et cetera.  So it is all of our problem quite dramatically.  And you kind of say it is my land, so I do whatever I want, which currently is because  
**[0:28:29-0:28:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:28:29):**  it does affect.  And at some point we'll come like at some point there will be enough regulation to push  you and it's not going to stop at the gate.  Like you kind of keep this out.  It's sort of, sort of all of our problem.  
**[0:28:38-0:28:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:28:38):**  Yeah.  And which is all such good points and why it's so frustrating to see the absolute lack  of environmental regulation on American farms because it's OK, the environmental working  group can basically show point source like nitrogen runoff, a phosphorus runoff from  farms directly.  
**[0:28:55-0:28:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:28:55):**  So even the argument that like we can't tell which farm it came from, so how could we possibly  regulate them is there's nothing left.  We know we know that the like the hypoxia in the Gulf of Mexico is directly due essentially  to just farmers in Iowa.  There's no questions left.  
**[0:29:09-0:29:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:29:09):**  And the idea that we taxpayers pay north have been paying more than five billion dollars  directly to private farms for the last twenty five years.  Well this problem has gotten worse and worse.  And somehow the conversation at the end of that reality is how can we pay farmers to  do better?  
**[0:29:28-0:29:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:29:28):**  We already paid.  We've been paying all this time and we didn't get the result we wanted.  As a matter of fact, the Gulf hypoxia task force met in 2007 and made the goal to reduce  runoff to the Gulf by 50 percent by 2015.  In 2015, they reevaluated and found that they had actually increased runoff by 20 percent.  
**[0:29:48-0:29:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:29:48):**  So they're actively moving in the wrong direction.  Payments directly to farmers have gone up over that time period, resulting in forty  six billion dollars in direct payments last year that overwhelmingly went to the top like  one percent of farmers, which for me is a very discouraging part of this whole conversation  about like, you know, how can companies get in on paying farmers to do more regenerative  
**[0:30:07-0:30:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:30:07):**  practices?  Sorry, we've already paid.  We've already like sunk a lot of money into these farms.  Like taxpayers at this point, it's hard to say how they are not the number one investors.  Investors in businesses get a say.  
**[0:30:23-0:30:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:30:23):**  They get to tell you how to do your job by definition.  Like when you're an entrepreneur and you've taken investment money, you have a boss now.  You're investors.  And that is just like never part of this conversation.  It's always about how farmers are in a bad situation and how they don't have the resources  
**[0:30:40-0:30:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:30:40):**  they need to do better.  And that is just not true.  And that's, I think, a very frustrating part of this whole thing.  And it comes from this idea of like, right, that these are farm families and they're just  individuals like trying to do what's best for their land and trying to perpetuate their  
**[0:30:54-0:30:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:30:54):**  legacy.  But the reality is farms are businesses, which is OK.  It's fine for farms to be businesses.  That's always what they've been.  But let's treat them as businesses.  
**[0:31:03-0:31:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:31:03):**  Exactly.  We have to treat them as businesses.  Putting family in front of the word farm does not mean that it's not profit seeking.  It has to be profit seeking.  But they're so cute on the pictures of the products I buy.  
**[0:31:16-0:31:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:31:16):**  I mean, it's fascinating.  You put a link the article below.  You pick the fight with the carbon credit people.  I think you got a lot of response to that recently.  Let's see when this interview comes out.  
**[0:31:27-0:31:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:31:27):**  But it's for sure you pick the fight with somebody else before that.  But the image of the struggling American and I think we can actually take that to many  other continents, a family farm that is really we should really pity.  And the truth is and if you look here in Europe on the direct payments go to the top one or  two percent of the farmers that absolutely don't need it and are by far the most destructive  
**[0:31:49-0:31:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:31:49):**  farmers we can possibly find and are really not the people you want to pay.  And we're not getting results, by the way, for paying.  And yeah, it's a mind boggling.  And it grew out of sort of I wouldn't say necessity, but it didn't nobody designed the  system to do that.  
**[0:32:03-0:32:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:32:03):**  But it's somehow over the last 30, 40, 50 years, depending where you start, it grew  that way.  And we completely distorted anything.  And you get paid for plowing and you get paid for many other things that let's say are not  growing food, definitely not nutrient dense, but not even food in general.  
**[0:32:18-0:32:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:32:18):**  And that's it's pretty disordered.  But it's interesting.  Like, this is a depressing picture.  But do you see is something changing?  Is something are we getting to a breaking point of all of this or are we going to see  
**[0:32:29-0:32:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:32:29):**  that in our lifetime?  What do you think?  I can only speak to the US.  I'm very hyper focused, for better or worse.  But I think between the massive amount of payments that farmers got during the Trump  
**[0:32:38-0:32:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:32:38):**  administration north of 100 billion dollars in direct payments and the fact that we just  spent 13 months and will likely spend six or eight or 10 more months being in this pandemic,  which has impoverished people, left tens of millions of Americans hungry.  And we completely botched any food aid.  We continue the most recent coronavirus aid bill that's going through Congress has more  
**[0:33:00-0:33:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:33:00):**  payments for farmers, more flexibility for them.  We know that paying farmers does not contribute to food security.  We know that farm prices are way up.  International commodity prices are at 10 year highs right now and they're still going to  get more payments.  
**[0:33:15-0:33:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:33:15):**  I think what happened in America's meat packing plants, unfortunately, since literally the  jungle was written 100 years ago, we've never cared about meatpacking workers.  We only care about food safety.  But that's a whole nother question.  And it's absolutely in the United States about racism and where we think that that like the  
**[0:33:34-0:33:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:33:34):**  right place for immigrants is.  But I think that there is a opportunity in this moment to say, you know, yeah, for people  to say like, hey, I'm done paying farmers.  They're not doing the right thing.  You know, I think the farmer I talked about in that article, what is getting paid for  
**[0:33:50-0:33:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:33:50):**  planting cover crops?  Cover crops is not enough.  First of all, you can already get paid for it in the state of Maryland where he farms.  You can already get paid for it by the USDA.  And he literally said in another article, not the main article where he talked about  
**[0:34:04-0:34:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:34:04):**  getting the money, but in another article that it has been a net benefit for his business  just by existing because it's limited the amount of passes he has to make in the field.  So he's saving on diesel, he's saving on, right?  He would have done this anyway.  That's not what we're supposed to be paying for.  
**[0:34:19-0:34:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:34:19):**  And basically what we're rewarding at this point is holdouts.  We're telling farmers, the longer you hold out, the more we'll pay.  The longer you hold.  Someone made this analogy to me the other day.  It's literally like farmers are standing in their yard with a chainsaw in their hands  
**[0:34:34-0:34:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:34:34):**  saying if you don't pay me, I'll cut this tree down.  And we say, please keep the engine running, but don't touch the tree yet.  Yeah.  And we're putting diesel and petrol in the machine just to continue running.  And we're just letting it happen instead of just saying like, you know, putting a fence  
**[0:34:47-0:34:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:34:47):**  around the tree or taking away the chainsaw.  We're just saying like, okay, okay, don't worry.  We'll pay.  We'll pay.  And it's like, no, no, we already paid.  
**[0:34:57-0:34:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:34:57):**  This is over.  We're not doing this anymore.  And I think I was actually just reading a fascinating part of The End of the Myth, Greg  Grandin's book that he published last year and won a Pulitzer for.  He talks about basically during the New Deal in the United States that New Deal Democrats  
**[0:35:15-0:35:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:35:15):**  in particular had gone to Mexico, spent a lot of time with the Mexican government at  a time when the Mexican government was doing massive land reform and how many benefits  that the Mexican government saw and the Mexican people saw and also how much FDR is basically  like administration, including people at the USDA, were excited about like, oh, we see  how many of our issues in the United States are tied directly to the fact that way too  
**[0:35:40-0:35:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:35:40):**  few people own way too much land.  And that's the thing.  Like I talk about this quite a bit in the book, but like that owning too much land is  what causes labor exploitation.  Like if you own too much land and you can't monetize it, then you have to get labor for  
**[0:35:55-0:35:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:35:55):**  free to work it.  There's no other way.  And that led to chattel slavery.  It led to the Pricero program.  It led to Japanese and Asian-American racism in California.  
**[0:36:05-0:36:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:36:05):**  It led to today's modern immigration system.  The evidence is everywhere in American agriculture that we have too much land in too few hands  that can't afford to work it.  And so we like abuse labor to get it done.  And all we do is further concentrate the land in fewer and fewer hands.  
**[0:36:22-0:36:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:36:22):**  And at the end of all of that, we get sad that farmers are so old and that young farmers  can't find a way back to the land.  But of course they can't.  Saying why don't more farmers own farmland, young farmers own farmland is like saying,  why don't more young people have trust funds?  
**[0:36:36-0:36:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:36:36):**  You need money to begin with.  So how does that go into Sylvan Aqua?  As you mentioned before, you don't own the land, you're farming and you don't own the  land in the future.  There will be a land trust, et cetera.  
**[0:36:46-0:36:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:36:46):**  How does that work on fixing that land ownership issue or partly fixing it, or at least make  a step in the right direction?  What's the thinking and more importantly actually doing there?  Yeah.  So two different things are happening.  
**[0:36:57-0:36:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:36:57):**  So on the one hand, we are very lucky.  Chris Newman builds this amazing business, which I think in Sylvan Aqua's case, the brand  alone has a lot of value.  Again, another thing that a lot of farms don't think about very thoughtfully is that like,  yes, when you build a successful business, things besides just your tractor and your  
**[0:37:15-0:37:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:37:15):**  acres have value.  Like the Instagram account.  Yeah.  And the goodwill and the sales and actually having clients and that whole infrastructure.  Exactly.  
**[0:37:25-0:37:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:37:25):**  The sales channels, all of that stuff has value.  So we are at this moment, even though we don't have land and even though we can't do the  thing of like, yeah, everyone gets some land so that we all, even when our paychecks aren't  very big, at least we know we're growing long-term wealth.  We don't have that opportunity, but we do.  
**[0:37:40-0:37:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:37:40):**  We are growing a business, a real business that has real value.  And every person at Sylvan Aqua has a path to ownership.  I am personally on a path to a path to partnership.  So not like exclusive ownership, but I'm on a path to partnership, which is really exciting  for me.  
**[0:37:53-0:37:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:37:53):**  Coming from journalism where that's not the case.  Never the case.  Or you're sort of a paid, I mean, book obviously, but it really has to go well to make any sense  and or the substack world of this, the premium, et cetera.  But yeah, I think ownership in a farming business and a food business is more interesting.  
**[0:38:10-0:38:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:38:10):**  Oh, for sure.  Not to mention that it's just, it's a team and working with a good team is never something  to be taken for granted because it's rare.  So that's how we're dealing with ownership and partnership on our end.  And then in addition to, so that's within Sylvan Aqua Farms, which is kind of the central  
**[0:38:24-0:38:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:38:24):**  umbrella of the organization.  And then within the system, there's networked farms.  So we have right now 40 acres community ranch and Choptico farm, which are both separate  businesses with their own owners owned by 40 acre community ranch is black owned and  run right now.  
**[0:38:43-0:38:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:38:43):**  And Choptico is a, like a vegetable produce operation that is currently owned and operated  by this really cool group of people.  So there's basically those two ways.  You can either join Sylvan Aqua as like a part of one of the businesses and work your  way into ownership of that business, or you could join as a business and just kind of  
**[0:39:01-0:39:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:39:01):**  get plugged into the network.  And we have some standards around what that means, what that looks like in terms of both  environmental stewardship and economic interrelation with the other businesses in the organization.  The land trust element of this and how we get the land ownership piece is a little bit  further down the line for us right now.  
**[0:39:17-0:39:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:39:17):**  We're actually in the market, the nonprofit part of what we do, which is called something  else society is going to have a land trust, going to hold some land in common that we  can then, you know, distribute leases for our farms, the farms in the system.  Yeah, because you don't want to be the one, like a lot of people are leasing, you're building  a lot of, first of all, you're building a business, you're building soil, you're rebuilding  
**[0:39:38-0:39:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:39:38):**  a lot of things that somebody else extracted, and then you're kicked off the land and you  have to move somewhere else, which is painful, but also just very, very destructive.  And you don't want that.  Yeah.  Yes, totally.  
**[0:39:51-0:39:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:39:51):**  So we are, that organization will buy farmland and rent out to, you know, do like 99 year  leases with organizations in the network, which is great.  One way to do, and you know, we're taking our cues in particular from people like the  Hutterites in the Dakotas in Montana here in the United States, which have basically,  you know, by doing many of the things that we are doing, which is like farming communally,  
**[0:40:14-0:40:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:40:14):**  paying people well, acting like businesses instead of small family independent farms  that are really about transferring land wealth, they have just out competed all other land  buyers in their area.  Like they just, it doesn't matter if they want land, they show up to an auction and  they just like, they just can beat every bid for land they want.  
**[0:40:31-0:40:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:40:31):**  And for us, you know, Sylvan Ok was based in the Chesapeake Bay.  This is our food shed.  This is our watershed.  Like we care about this land a ton and we just want to owner control and be able to  have an influence over as much of this land as possible, whether that means by buying  
**[0:40:44-0:40:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:40:44):**  it, whether that means by leasing it or by doing a third thing, which is called farming  as a service, which is where we help people do landscape management.  Basically we do like indigenous landscape management for private landowners, usually  like, you know, people who own like estates or big pieces of property that they would  like, like manage as natural systems for hunting or fishing or outdoor recreation, whatever  
**[0:41:07-0:41:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:41:07):**  that looks like.  Basically to influence as much as possible whenever you can buy and bring it into the  commons you do.  And as you have a very, very long-term view anyway, like pieces will come on the market  at some point or will be, I wouldn't say donated, but for lower prices as you've been working  
**[0:41:21-0:41:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:41:21):**  with some of these estates over the years.  I mean, that will, will happen.  I have to think of a story once, I think from a museum that was looking at a piece for a  long, long time to buy it and basically said, yeah, we're in this business for centuries  anyway.  
**[0:41:34-0:41:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:41:34):**  So at some point it will come, like we'll know.  Exactly.  It could take 40 years, could take 50, it doesn't really matter.  We're in this watershed for a hundred years.  At some point we'll control or at least influence most of it.  
**[0:41:43-0:41:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:41:43):**  And we're not tied to one piece.  Yes or one piece.  No, it doesn't really, it doesn't really matter.  That's interesting.  Exactly.  
**[0:41:50-0:41:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:41:50):**  And so to like the indigenous ethic that informs, you know, this comes from Chris Newman and  also other indigenous people on our team.  Yeah.  I mean, agriculture in its added, its essence like operates at the landscape level.  Nature doesn't care where your property line is.  
**[0:42:03-0:42:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:42:03):**  So it, when we're talking about, you know, our ethic, it doesn't make sense to say, you  know, we're just going to buy this 70 acres and we're going to take really good care of  it and like, by golly, I hope everyone else does too.  I've knew it's not going to happen.  Yeah.  
**[0:42:16-0:42:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:42:16):**  The right way to think about it.  Yeah.  That's it doesn't.  Yeah.  So, you know, the air that's been polluted, air that's been polluted, soil, invasive species,  
**[0:42:24-0:42:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:42:24):**  like those things do not stop at your property line.  So we know that if we want to rejuvenate the ecosystem around here, if we want to feed  our communities in a, you know, culturally relevant way that it cannot be small, we have  to operate at scale.  And so, yeah, we're not afraid to one realize that like we need hundreds of employees and  
**[0:42:42-0:42:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:42:42):**  we need to compensate them in basically whatever way that they need to be compensated in.  We need to support lots of different kinds of businesses run in lots of different ways.  It's truly a system.  It's truly decentralized and it's still very much being built.  That's what makes it exciting.  
**[0:42:57-0:43:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:42:57):**  I mean, it's interesting to go to Mondragon in Basque country, et cetera, where it's still  being built as well, but it feels much more established with, I don't know how many banks  they have in universities and one of the biggest cooperatives in the world.  But this is like those guys 40, 50, 60 years ago, which is potentially, I mean, we still  don't know, but it's very interesting to see that birth of a lot of these things.  
**[0:43:18-0:43:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:43:18):**  Yeah, hopefully.  I mean, yeah, and we're, you know, one of our priorities is very much just like transparency  and communication.  We spend a lot of time talking on social media and elsewhere about what we're doing and just  trying to get people excited, get people involved and yeah, trying to push back on some of these  
**[0:43:35-0:43:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:43:35):**  ideas around, you know, I'm sure that's something that Chris talked with you about was just  so many good intentioned people out in the world who are just like, oh, like let me come  by the farm, let me volunteer, let me do whatever I can.  And just like trying to change the conversation around that of like, we're a business and  we don't actually want or need volunteers because that's not how our business runs.  
**[0:43:54-0:43:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:43:54):**  But like we appreciate it and we like love fans and we'd like love for you to buy our  product and like figure out what it means, what products we could carry for you to buy  them.  It's just, we've really trained people, especially people who are really mindful about the environment  or really care about regenerative food.  
**[0:44:10-0:44:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:44:10):**  I like to think of us, I'm definitely part of this, the like omnivores dilemma generation  of people who were awakened by those kinds of writings.  Third plate.  Yeah.  The training you got out of that is like volunteer at farms, shop at the farmer's market, pay  
**[0:44:23-0:44:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:44:23):**  attention to farms, like basically like cater to their needs.  And so we're trying to do a little bit of retraining around like, Hey, it's okay for  you to tell us what you want.  We're a business.  We're going to respond to your needs as a customer.  
**[0:44:37-0:44:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:44:37):**  Either be a customer, invest or come work with us.  But yeah.  Exactly.  But you don't need to like volunteer.  You don't need to be sorry to ask a question.  
**[0:44:47-0:44:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:44:47):**  Yeah.  And so let's shift gears a bit because I'm going to be cautious of your time.  I think we can talk for hours, but you wrote a book.  You just sent it in last week.  We're talking beginning of March.  
**[0:44:57-0:45:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:44:57):**  It's going to come out at 21st of April, the first one, the second one in December.  What's the book about farming and other F words, which by the way is an amazing title,  but what's the essence of why should people preorder in a couple of weeks when it, the  preorders go up?  Sure.  
**[0:45:11-0:45:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:45:11):**  So the title is the rise and fall of small family farms.  So I will say it is about my journey of, you know, the book spans several years.  I started writing it in about 2015, 16 you'll meet Chris Newman on his very first farm intro  outside of Charlottesville VA and then, you know, journey across.  You'll meet old farms, new farms, big farms, small farms.  
**[0:45:34-0:45:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:45:34):**  I promise it's not a Dr. Seuss book.  I'm realizing just now that that's what it sounds like.  Don't worry.  Yeah.  And so I look at all of these questions, so many of the questions that we've talked about  
**[0:45:44-0:45:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:45:44):**  here really closely.  I think I at different points in this journey really came to a lot of the questions I had  and kept coming back around to centered around exploitation.  And I think there's so much exploitation in agriculture, exploitation of natural systems,  of farmers themselves and their families of workers, obviously for obvious reasons of  
**[0:46:03-0:46:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:46:03):**  the animals and plants involved in agriculture.  And just looking, you know, we have this idea of what a good farm is.  This idea of like the good farm is very central to the book of just like, you know, if I told  you we're fighting for small family farms and you said, yeah, you're thinking of a very  specific farm.  
**[0:46:23-0:46:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:46:23):**  You're thinking of like a, you know, maybe a few dozen to a few hundred acres owned and  operated by a family where the family contributes all their labor and like, you know, earns  not an excessive income, but you know, a stable income.  They have a very centered focus on the community and feeding people local to them.  They're the original environmentalists.  
**[0:46:40-0:46:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:46:40):**  They're very mindful about the way that what they do might impact future generations.  They're super hardworking.  They have this incredible land ethic.  They wake up really early, you know, down to like their kids play in the hayloft and  they drive the tractor.  
**[0:46:54-0:46:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:46:54):**  I feel there's a but coming.  Well, so basically like the point of this book, like what I was doing is just like,  can I find that farm?  Like how close do we get?  And in what ways do the farms that actually exist in the world fall short?  
**[0:47:06-0:47:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:47:06):**  And it there's a lot of data in there.  There's a lot of interesting kind of examination of what's available from USDA where the USDA  falls short in counting farms, which is like a whole other thing.  You know, who gets money?  Who are we helping when we like go to farm aid or when we donate to nonprofits or when  
**[0:47:23-0:47:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:47:23):**  we go to the farmers market even?  I tell I'll spoiler alert for the first chapter.  So it's not that big of a spoiler.  But I talked to a farmer I know in the Pacific Northwest who has been doing like a market  garden, 15 acres of market garden for 25 years, you know, came on at the very birth outside  
**[0:47:41-0:47:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:47:41):**  of Seattle at the very birth of kind of the food movement was producing over 200 vegetables  regeneratively and sustainably by the time that she, you know, spoiler alert, quit farming.  And it was basically like, you know, the most interesting tidbit that she told me was that  when she first announced that she was going to quit farming, the number of people who  came to her and or sent her an email or something to say like, oh, I'm going to be so sad to  
**[0:48:02-0:48:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:48:02):**  not see you at the farmers market.  She hadn't been to the farmers market in six years.  So just like this whole idea of like, you know, all of these things that we learned  being children of the omnivore dilemma of like, you know, go to the farmers market,  get to know your farmer, ask a farmer when you have a question, like there's those ideas  
**[0:48:19-0:48:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:48:19):**  that we strive for.  And then there's what's actually happening.  And I think that kind of the point of this book is to just try and understand, you know,  we have our ideals and we have in a lot of spaces in agriculture, we let the nebulousness  of the ideal stand as just like, you know, this is how when you hear someone from the  
**[0:48:38-0:48:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:48:38):**  Farm Bureau say like, we need to do whatever it takes to defend small family farms.  And then somehow you hear someone from like the environmental community agree with them  and you're like, oh, they must be on the same page.  And just like how much ambiguity there is in the middle of, you know, what exactly do  different people mean by a good farm and what does that mean for people who think that there's  
**[0:48:59-0:49:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:48:59):**  problems with the food system, people who think there's a problem with the farming system  and like basically where we go from here.  And that's what Farm and Other Efforts is about is basically, you know, is the small  family farm really the unit of agriculture that makes the most sense if we're talking  about a hotter, drier future where we need to feed more people better?  
**[0:49:18-0:49:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:49:18):**  I have a feeling it's not.  Deeper book spoiler, I will say, is just like, you know what?  Only in America, really, or in America and Europe, do we think that small family farms  were ever like the peak of human existence.  It's not common in the rest of the world that we like all strive to retire to a farm one  
**[0:49:38-0:49:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:49:38):**  day.  Most people in the world don't do that.  And then the second book is like the second part of that.  It doesn't have a title yet.  I'm working title is like big team farms.  
**[0:49:47-0:49:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:49:47):**  It's basically a playbook of I've called it like the lean startup of farming.  Where it's just like how to what are big team farms?  Where do they exist right now?  How are they working?  What are their challenges?  
**[0:49:58-0:50:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:49:58):**  What are their solutions, etc.  It'll be super interesting.  And now I would love to end with a few questions I always like to ask.  And to start with one, I mean, you mentioned let's not see farming as an investment.  But let's say you somehow magically tomorrow morning are in charge of a one billion dollar  
**[0:50:16-0:50:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:50:16):**  or any large amount because it doesn't have to be one billion investment portfolio and  obviously charge them.  OK, how do we make farming regenerative Lee but actually regenerative to the core meaning  including everything, not just soil.  What would you focus on?  
**[0:50:30-0:50:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:50:30):**  What would you invest or how would you put this money to work?  How would you prioritize?  That's mostly why I asked this question.  Yeah, that is tough.  And if it wasn't just I mean, if the main priority is regenerative agriculture is like  
**[0:50:44-0:50:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:50:44):**  environmental outcomes.  Now, I've said regeneration in general, like this is much I see usually ag is a nice Trojan  horse to get into a lot of other conversations on inequality, access, health, very wide health,  not just physical health, etc, etc.  So if you literally you have the freedom to invest it, whatever you want, could all be  
**[0:51:04-0:51:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:51:04):**  an ag tech if you really want to.  But oh, yeah, no, no, no, definitely not.  Well, I guess the other question is, like, what is my time scale for having a return  on this money?  So it has to come back at some point, return could be zero or very low, and it could be  
**[0:51:17-0:51:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:51:17):**  very, very long.  So you actually have the freedom and space to do 99 year things if you want to.  Okay, it's not a 10 year fund, let's say.  Okay, great, because that would make a difference.  You know, I think you could do something really interesting with like partnering with I would  
**[0:51:32-0:51:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:51:32):**  love to get I mean, we talked about indigenous leadership and regenerative ag a lot.  I think you could partner with with a billion dollars, you could partner with a tribe and  buy a significant amount of land back.  And just like, you know, I think the impact that that kind of experiment would have just  on people seeing what's possible.  
**[0:51:50-0:51:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:51:50):**  We talk a lot about, you know, indigenous communities protect the vast majority of remaining  wildlands in the world and biodiversity while only owning a very small percentage.  Yeah, seed keeping and like advanced seed breeding.  So much of that that like is being discovered right now is, yeah, is actually, you know,  indigenous knowledge that has been captured or recaptured or repurposed or their role  
**[0:52:15-0:52:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:52:15):**  is often erased.  So that would be probably my first instinct is just like one buy a lot of land because  land is always the biggest barrier and put indigenous agricultural leaders in charge  and see what they do.  Like what that I would love to say that I like know how to unlock all the most value  
**[0:52:31-0:52:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:52:31):**  and figure out how to do the best stuff.  But I think Chris Newman talks about this in a really powerful way.  So I won't try to paraphrase him.  But people who have traditionally been without resources or in marginalized positions have  built this really amazing skill of operating in the world despite that operating with fewer  
**[0:52:52-0:52:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:52:52):**  resources, operating, you know, on the margins of communities and fixing stuff and getting  stuff.  Yeah.  And that's the thing is like I think a billion dollars given to a tech company would be a  lot more wastefully spent than a billion dollars given to an indigenous community and get out  
**[0:53:06-0:53:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:53:06):**  of the way.  Probably that's the best.  Oh, yeah.  And then make sure that you use I mean, maybe you spend some amount of that money making  sure people get out of the way.  
**[0:53:14-0:53:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:53:14):**  But yeah, I think, you know, if you could buy back the other half of Oklahoma and just  giving it to local tribes there, if you could buy a lot of North Carolina for a billion  dollars.  It sounds insane to say that, but I think it's true.  And you know, offering more empowerment to like the Lumbee tribe or something like that,  
**[0:53:31-0:53:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:53:31):**  the Gullah Geechee in the coastal Carolinas.  You could buy not a lot of beachfront for a billion dollars, but you could buy a lot  of like coastal upland that you could do some awesome regenerative ag stuff with.  And then I think, yeah, so much of what what we've accepted is possible.  And I think carbon markets are in the same place of, you know, we farmers, especially  
**[0:53:52-0:53:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:53:52):**  big conventional farmers, sat out of climate discussions and were active climate deniers  for decades, decades and decades.  And the minute they walk into the conversation and decide to participate, we let them be  in charge.  What?  
**[0:54:03-0:54:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:54:03):**  What is that instinct?  Like, what?  And we know where the instinct comes from, right?  From like all of us being trained to like ask a farmer and who can make rules for farmers  except farmers.  
**[0:54:14-0:54:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:54:14):**  We have to let farmers do it.  Would we say the same for an oil executive?  Like would we let the oil industry run their own regulation or?  We do a bit, but yeah, but we at least we know.  We don't feel good about it.  
**[0:54:25-0:54:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:54:25):**  We aren't saying like, yes, we're doing this right because like we're letting.  Look at this round table.  Yeah.  Yeah.  I think we serve up, right?  
**[0:54:33-0:54:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:54:33):**  So many of the possible solutions that we've taken off the table in agriculture, whether  it's like communal farming, whether it's changes in the way that we, that land is available  and like tax credits work for land ownership and doing, you know, like letting indigenous  leadership.  I get that pushback all the time, which again is blatant racism of like when I plug indigenous  
**[0:54:51-0:54:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:54:51):**  agriculture, people are like, we can't go back to being hunters and gatherers.  Well one, you're an idiot.  Native Americans were not hunters and gatherers.  They were advanced agriculturalists.  They created corn, which is literally so advanced.  
**[0:55:02-0:55:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:55:02):**  We don't understand how it works.  Like we don't understand how it evolved.  They managed incredible landscapes.  That is a size that we can only dream about.  Yeah.  
**[0:55:11-0:55:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:55:11):**  There are places in Mesoamerica where they have grown corn and other highly extractive  crops for 4,000 years continuously.  There's no place else on earth that can like make that claim.  That can say we were such advanced agriculturalists that we were able to continuously crop this  area over and over again for not a generation, not three generations or five generations,  
**[0:55:34-0:55:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:55:34):**  for 4,000 years.  So the idea that people are like indigenous people, you know, don't have the capacity  or don't have the skills or don't have the abilities to be leaders in this is one just  like revisionist history.  It's also insane.  
**[0:55:47-0:55:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:55:47):**  It also is just like something that we've accepted as, you know, oh well white people  own all the land.  So I guess white people have to be the solution and have to be the people who choose what's  next.  And that is just, if anyone has a claim to being a successful long-term agriculturalist  
**[0:56:01-0:56:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:56:01):**  in the Americas, it goes indigenous people and then black people and then Asian people  and then literally white people have never been good at it.  We've never done it successfully for a long period of time.  We've spent the last like two to 400 years.  Extractive.  
**[0:56:18-0:56:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:56:18):**  Yeah.  Advancing technology to lengthen the time period that extraction can continue.  To slow down.  Yeah.  And so would you spend some of it on lobbying, like on the policy side of things?  
**[0:56:28-0:56:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:56:28):**  You could quote you call it an investment, that's a separate discussion, but would you  like bring some of it, let's say home to where you're now in Washington and try to take on  the tax part, take on all of the other things?  Yeah.  So I don't think I could argue that there would be an investment or a return on investment  
**[0:56:45-0:56:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:56:45):**  for that.  But if your return is just like more regenerative act, yes, totally.  So on the land tax exemption side, which is some of the worst stuff we've seen, like,  you know, for example, Donald Trump got $80,000 off of his tax for a golf course in New Jersey  because he like basically mowed the lawn there and called it hanging and then got out of  
**[0:57:07-0:57:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:57:07):**  paying his land taxes because in New Jersey, you only have to have $500 in sales or like  five acres to count as a farm and then get like 90% tax credit.  So that unfortunately would have to be state by state to deal with.  And there is a lot of strong advocates against it, basically because the argument is like  if you don't have a tax, ag land tax exemption, then it'll all just get developed immediately,  
**[0:57:28-0:57:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:57:28):**  which is just blatantly not true.  But also there is like some weird development pressure there.  So you'd have to have a thoughtful strategy around doing that that I don't know if anyone  has tried to put together basically because nobody likes to make rich people mad in America.  And then on the other hand, I think there is some very easy like I am shocked that there  
**[0:57:50-0:57:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:57:50):**  hasn't been more coordination around.  There are so many common parties who could push against the way that our ag subsidy system  currently works from like, you know, like food, hunger people, hunger advocates.  They should be getting the money that's going to farmers.  If like the point of the farm bill is to make sure Americans don't starve to death, then  
**[0:58:09-0:58:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:58:09):**  farmers should not be getting that money.  Food banks should be getting them probably, or we should just regulate companies to pay  a living wage would be another option.  But we don't want to do that either.  You know, like the far super capitalist purists hate the farm bill because it's all subsidization  
**[0:58:24-0:58:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:58:24):**  and market distorting, which like, great, I'll take an ally where you can get one.  Environmentalists, obviously, we've very unfortunately seen a lot of environmental groups in the  US like just get on board with conventional ag and just say like, we'd rather work with  them than not work with them.  Just sort of the impact investing argument of let's not divest from some of the impact  
**[0:58:44-0:58:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:58:44):**  investment, I'm not saying, but let's not divest from fossil fuel companies because  we can have a dialogue.  And I think there are very strong arguments that that doesn't work, even though your proxy  vote and all of that, I mean, they don't really care.  And divest is starting to scare them and or the new businesses around renewable energies  
**[0:58:59-0:59:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:58:59):**  are starting to scare them more.  So I think let's focus our energy on the new businesses instead of trying to transform  an old one anyway.  Yeah.  And I think the easiest place, the easiest in road to address what's going on in agriculture  
**[0:59:12-0:59:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:59:12):**  and to change the policy is just around the basic farm bill risk management payments.  Yeah.  Right.  Because I think people don't understand that between subsidized crop insurance and revenue  protection risk management programs, you're insured against both bad weather and bad prices.  
**[0:59:29-0:59:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:59:29):**  Those two things are inverses.  When there's bad weather, there's good prices because there's not a lot of stuff.  And when there's bad weather, there's good prices because there is a lot of stuff.  So when you're insured against every eventuality, that's not insurance anymore.  It's guaranteed basic income.  
**[0:59:44-0:59:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=0:59:44):**  If we're going to have a guaranteed basic income for anyone in America, is it going  to be for the two million people who own three trillion dollars worth of land?  I think there's like a real conversation that could be had there that like is not very controversial.  That's just like, hey, do we want to give rich people these direct payments or would  we like that money to go literally anywhere else?  
**[1:00:05-1:00:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=1:00:05):**  Or at the very least, could we attach, should there be some strings attached to getting  this money?  Because rather than paying farmers for conservation practices, you have to do conservation practices  to get this money to get anything.  Yeah.  
**[1:00:16-1:00:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=1:00:16):**  And one other quick thing, which I think is super hopeful to me and really interesting  is that there actually are some really interesting ag law folks in the United States who are  looking really hard at basically doing something that looks like tenant laws in farmland in  the United States.  So like I live in an apartment building.  
**[1:00:34-1:00:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=1:00:34):**  The apartment owner is not allowed to rent me an apartment that's not fit to live in.  It has to have running water.  It has to have like a toilet and a shower and it has to like not give me cancer or like  the roof is not allowed to fall in on me.  There's lots of arguments in agriculture that you can't possibly regulate the quality of  
**[1:00:50-1:00:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=1:00:50):**  farmland, but because then no one would buy it, I guess is the argument.  Because like if it's not a perfect money making investment, then like people won't be interested.  The thing is, in real estate, it works like that.  Yeah, exactly.  Like I live in Washington, D.C. and it's not hard to see that people are clearly making  
**[1:01:07-1:01:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=1:01:07):**  money off of renting apartments.  And so I don't actually think that's a good argument.  And there's people who are working on the idea of having a required minimum quality  for farmland to be able to rent it.  And actually, we also do that for ownership, right?  
**[1:01:22-1:01:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=1:01:22):**  A private building can be condemned if you don't keep it up, which basically is like  a type of repossession by like the government or something.  So the idea that there is legal things happening to say you can't just degrade your land into  oblivion.  Like, there is actually requirements.  
**[1:01:39-1:01:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=1:01:39):**  Your land is part of a system that is part of a public system that we pay for as a country  and hold collectively at some level.  So yeah, no, you can't just like burn it all down.  You're not free to do that.  We don't live in a society where that's OK.  
**[1:01:53-1:01:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=1:01:53):**  So holding people to, you know, that would fundamentally transform what it means to be  a tenant farmer, because then, yeah, you wouldn't be paying for improving your landlord's property.  Your landlord would pay you for that.  Like my building employs a guy who does maintenance in the building.  That doesn't make this apartment building not work financially.  
**[1:02:13-1:02:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=1:02:13):**  It actually helps it work much better.  So, you know, the idea that we would have actual maintenance happening on farmland,  improve the quality, actually invest in like the professional skill of farming and farmland,  you know, maintenance.  I think there's other ways besides just changing farm bill policy to do that.  
**[1:02:29-1:02:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=1:02:29):**  I think there's potentially legal routes.  I think however much I'm a deeply impatient person and passionate about that future, I  think it's probably pretty far off.  So we took away your fund, unfortunately, but you have a magic wand.  You can change one thing in the ag and food system.  
**[1:02:44-1:02:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=1:02:44):**  What would that be or industry or whatever you want to call it?  No question.  Enforce all the existing laws because we basically don't.  We basically don't enforce any environmental laws on farms.  We basically enforce like almost no labor laws on farms.  
**[1:02:58-1:03:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=1:02:58):**  If there was just a serious enforcement mechanism for, I mean, right.  I don't know a farmer who hasn't sprayed a pesticide off label.  That's illegal to do, but they just don't care.  No one enforces it.  No one ever checks.  
**[1:03:11-1:03:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=1:03:11):**  You know, at this point, I don't know a farmer who thinks that the organic certification  is enforced.  I just talked to a farmer who just got his organic certification renewed not too long  ago.  It was literally just like a guy drove onto his farm, handed him his certificate through  
**[1:03:24-1:03:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=1:03:24):**  the truck window and drove away.  Like that's organic certification.  So just like any oversight, you know, give enforcement to EPA to regulate pollution,  give enforcement to the Department of Labor to regulate how workers are treated, how workers  are housed, how workers are paid, remove all the exemptions from small family farms and  
**[1:03:43-1:03:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=1:03:43):**  just say like you're a business and we have expectations for how businesses treat public  resources, customers and employees.  And now you're going to start acting like it.  I think that would be transformative.  Act like a business.  
**[1:03:57-1:04:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=1:03:57):**  I want to thank you so much for your time.  We have a lot more to discuss, but it will be another one.  I'm very much looking forward to the book or the books, actually, and to obviously your  work with the team at Sylvan Aqua and to follow your journey.  And thank you so much for taking the time to come on the podcast.  
**[1:04:13-1:04:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=1:04:13):**  Yeah, thanks so much for having me.  This was super fun.  Can't wait to be back.  If you would like to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and  agriculture, find our video course on investing in regenerative agriculture.com.  
**[1:04:27-1:04:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=1:04:27):**  This course will teach you to understand the opportunities to get to know the main players,  to learn about the main trends and how to evaluate a new investment opportunity.  Like what kind of questions to ask.  Find out more on investing in regenerative agriculture.com.  If you found the investing in regenerative agriculture and food podcast valuable, there  
**[1:04:49-1:04:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=1:04:49):**  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  It's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  
**[1:05:09-1:05:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=1:05:09):**  join my membership community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on cambrot.com slash investing region egg or in the description  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  
**[1:05:36-1:05:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=1:05:36):**  investing in regenerative agriculture and food.  How to put money to work in regenerating soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while  doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After a hundred interviews and more than a hundred hours of audio asking the question  
**[1:05:50-1:05:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=1:05:50):**  how to put money to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011  and recording these podcasts since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  
**[1:06:07-1:06:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=1:06:07):**  How have we picked interviewees?  What questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  
**[1:06:15-1:06:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=1:06:15):**  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  You, the soil builders and investors in this space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  
**[1:06:28-1:06:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=1:06:28):**  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management consultants, etc.  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  
**[1:06:47-1:06:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=1:06:47):**  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  
**[1:07:02-1:07:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=1:07:02):**  that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  
**[1:07:17-1:07:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=1:07:17):**  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to ride along.  We're gonna look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  
**[1:07:40-1:07:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=1:07:40):**  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're gonna look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  
**[1:07:56-1:07:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=1:07:56):**  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately, that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  
**[1:08:12-1:08:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-mock#t=1:08:12):**  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  