### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2017-01-29)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  Welcome to another episode of investing in regenerative agriculture, investing as if  the planet mattered.  
**[0:00:21-0:00:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:00:21):**  Podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  
**[0:00:42-0:00:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:00:42):**  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  In March last year, we launched our Patreon community to make it easy for fans to support  our work.  
**[0:00:59-0:01:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:00:59):**  And so many of you have joined as a member.  We've launched different types of benefits, exclusive content, Q&A webinars with former  guests, ask me anything sessions plus so much more to come in the future.  For more information on the different tiers, benefits and how to become a member, check  patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or find the link below.  
**[0:01:17-0:01:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:01:17):**  Thank you.  Welcome to investing in regenerative agriculture investing as if the planet mattered.  I'm Koen van Zeyen, your host.  In these interviews, I'm talking to people who are scaling up the regenerative agriculture  sector, either by increasing the inflow of investment capital or by scaling up the enterprises  
**[0:01:36-0:01:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:01:36):**  on and in the ground.  And by doing so, exploring what it means to be an impact investor in regenerative agriculture.  Why am I focused on regenerative agriculture?  Because the roots of so many of the issues we're facing in the world today can be found  in agriculture.  
**[0:01:51-0:01:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:01:51):**  From droughts, migrant flows, obesity, social issues, water wars, climate change, hunger,  they all have a connection to how we treat the land, grow food and what we eat.  I hope you will enjoy this interview as much as I did making it.  If you have any comments, please share them on SoundCloud or Twitter.  And if you think this content is relevant or interesting for someone else, please feel  
**[0:02:11-0:02:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:02:11):**  free to share the interview.  You're going to listen to an interview with Judith D. Swartz, writer, author of two very  important books in the regenerative agriculture space, one on cows and soil carbon mostly,  and one on water and the water systems we usually don't consider.  Luckily, we had time to discuss many things in this interview, from how natural systems  
**[0:02:32-0:02:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:02:32):**  work to manage particular problems, in this case, heat or carbon, how plants are running  the show, how plant life is actually cooling the planet, and of course, how it's actually  possible to restore large scale ecosystems, but that most people still don't know that.  And that's really holding back this revolution.  So enjoy.  
**[0:02:50-0:02:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:02:50):**  So welcome to investing in regenerative agriculture, agriculture as if the planet mattered.  I'm Koen van Zeyen, the host of today.  And in the podcast today, I'm very lucky to be interviewing Judith D. Swartz, author  of two books, which were very instrumental to my personal view of regenerative agriculture,  cows save the planet and her latest water in plain sight.  
**[0:03:09-0:03:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:03:09):**  Both of the books are full of examples from around the world on how to manage land very  differently.  Welcome, Judith.  Well, thank you.  So to start with a personal question, how did you end up in the regenerative agriculture  
**[0:03:22-0:03:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:03:22):**  space and ended up writing these two, but hopefully more very interesting books on this?  Well, it's always an interesting question to find out how people kind of leap into a  new area.  And for me, there actually was an aha moment.  So I had been writing about new economics, which is basically the notion that the economy  
**[0:03:46-0:03:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:03:46):**  should serve the people and the planet as opposed to the other way around, in which  I fear that that's kind of where we are now, where people and the planet seem to exist  to serve the economy.  So I was at a conference here in the state of Vermont in the US for slow money.  Do you know about the slow money movement?  
**[0:04:09-0:04:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:04:09):**  Yeah, I haven't had the pleasure to interview Woody Tash yet, but I've followed it and read  about it quite extensively.  What's their slogan?  Bringing money from Wall Street to Main Street, right?  Yes, yes.  
**[0:04:23-0:04:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:04:23):**  Bringing money down to earth.  So basically, it's a critique that one of our challenges right now is that money moves  too quickly, that it's kind of spinning around quickly in an ever more abstract way, chasing  finer and finer profit margins rather than doing the work in actual communities and keeping  money in the community.  
**[0:04:46-0:04:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:04:46):**  So what they've been doing is steering investment towards small food enterprises that are, by  definition, local.  So I was at this conference, and I heard a statement that simply would not let me go.  And that was that over time, more CO2 has gone into the atmosphere from agricultural  practice from the soil compared to the burning of fossil fuels.  
**[0:05:15-0:05:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:05:15):**  And that fairly hit me over the head, because I felt that I was somewhat knowledgeable about  climate change.  And my assumption had always been that it was all about fossil fuels.  But here was another element.  And my reaction was, well, if indeed it has anything to do with the soil, if the soil  
**[0:05:35-0:05:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:05:35):**  has been the source of much of the carbon that we have been lofting into the atmosphere  over time, well, that certainly seems like something we might want to know.  So I started exploring that.  And as I explored carbon in the soil and how we lose carbon in the soil, which is by tilling,  which is by industrial agricultural practices such as adding a lot of synthetic nitrogen,  
**[0:06:05-0:06:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:06:05):**  such as leaving soil bare, which happens in a lot of our industrial agriculture, well,  then I posed the question, then if we reverse that, can we bring carbon back from the atmosphere  into the soil?  And so that kind of sent me on this whole journey to understand how soil works.  And I learned that by drawing down carbon into the soil, that not only reduces the load  
**[0:06:39-0:06:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:06:39):**  of atmospheric carbon, but also it's really important for the water cycle, because carbon  in the soil acts as a sponge.  And that allows us to hold water.  In fact, I'll give you a statistic, because I think it's just so important at a time that  we are collectively concerned about water and water-based crises such as floods and  
**[0:07:03-0:07:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:07:03):**  droughts are a problem all over the world.  And the statistic is this, that for every increase of soil organic carbon of 1%, that  represents an additional 27,000 gallons per acre of water that can be held in the soil.  And that is huge, because with all that water being held in the soil, that means that that's  a whole extra layer of resilience that we have.  
**[0:07:38-0:07:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:07:38):**  That means that we can last that much longer between watering in terms of growing of plants  and also when we're holding that water, it makes it that much harder to make a flood  because the land absorbs the water.  So anyway, as you can see, I got very excited about the possibilities inherent in the restoration  of soil.  
**[0:08:05-0:08:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:08:05):**  And that led me to write a book about soil, which as you said is Cows Save the Planet  and Other Improbable Ways of Restoring Soil to Heal the Earth.  And it's basically kind of a soil's eye view of the world, a look at many of our environmental  and economic challenges and how soil is a hub for them.  That the depletion of the soil makes these problems more of a problem.  
**[0:08:34-0:08:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:08:34):**  And by restoring the soil, we can address these many problems.  That is extremely interesting.  And how did you, as a journalist, you're writing books, how did you choose cows as the first  entry point and then water instead of, for instance, the other way around?  So the title Cows Save the Planet, I mean, that's a little bit to draw attention.  
**[0:08:59-0:09:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:08:59):**  It works.  Yes, to alert the reader to the fact that in this book, you will be surprised.  And the way that I came upon that is twofold.  So the title is a nod to holistic plan grazing, holistic management being a decision-making  framework that has been developed by a fellow named Alan Savery, who is from Zimbabwe, lives  
**[0:09:24-0:09:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:09:24):**  part-time in the US and part-time in Zimbabwe and these days part-time traveling around  the world talking about how we can reverse desertification.  So that's how I came to use that.  But in a very literal, how do you pick a title for your book perspective, I was thinking  about it and writing a book about soil.  
**[0:09:50-0:09:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:09:50):**  I mean, soil is kind of like a word that might, in many instances, end the conversation.  Oh, I'm writing a book about soil.  And someone might look at you and say, okay, that sounds very interesting.  I think I'll move to the next person I might meet at this cocktail party.  But just soil isn't considered sexy, although these days people are understanding just how  
**[0:10:12-0:10:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:10:12):**  important soil is.  And there's a whole kind of soil movement that I can also mention.  But so I was wondering what title can I choose for a book about soil?  Because I just didn't think that a title like Soil is Really Important, We Should Care About  It was going to work.  
**[0:10:32-0:10:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:10:32):**  And I was just wandering around my house and noticed a book that my son had strewn on the  floor.  And it was a comic book by Gary Larson of the Far Side comics that are always very amusing  and often draw on talking animals.  And the title of that book was Cows of Our Planet.  
**[0:10:56-0:11:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:10:56):**  I thought, hmm, Cows of Our Planet.  Cows save the planet.  So that's how I came up with that title.  Very interesting.  And I still remember the first time I read something about holistic management was in  
**[0:11:10-0:11:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:11:10):**  a book, something like 12 Solutions to Save the Planet, something like that.  It was the story of Tony Lovell and Bruce Ward down in Australia.  And that was the first time I read something also about Alan Savery, because it was mentioned  there.  And it was an aha moment.  
**[0:11:30-0:11:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:11:30):**  The whole soil, water, drought, cow discussion is slightly more complicated or complex than  we lead to believe.  Right.  Right.  And so the way I often look at it is so in trying to understand challenges that we have,  
**[0:11:47-0:11:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:11:47):**  one can look at natural systems and ask, how did our natural environments deal with those  challenges?  And holistic management, this particular way of approaching the management of grazing animals,  it resolves a challenge that in nature, how do arid environments, specifically areas of  seasonal rainfall, which is a large percentage of our climate, it happens to be of our planet,  
**[0:12:22-0:12:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:12:22):**  not where you live in the Netherlands or where I live in Vermont in the United States, where  we have moisture distributed fairly evenly throughout the year.  But in much of the world, we have rainy season and a dry season.  And so nature had the challenge, how do we maintain moisture in the soil in order to  sustain plant and microbial life from the end of one rainy season to the beginning of  
**[0:12:52-0:12:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:12:52):**  the next?  And the solution that nature came up with was through the behavior and the digestive  system of grazing animals.  So since the way that we humans have been managing the earth, we lack the predators  that had managed those animals and we lack the huge roving herds that had existed in  
**[0:13:21-0:13:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:13:21):**  these seasonally dry landscapes through history.  And so that leaves a void.  So that void can be filled by humans managing grazing animals in a way that they had acted  in natural ecosystems so that the grazing animals, they would nibble the plants in a  way that stimulated the growth of plants, their waste hydrated and fertilized the soil,  
**[0:13:54-0:14:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:13:54):**  and their trampling pressed in the decaying, the dying plant matter, the dried out plant  matter so that it could be acted upon by the microbial life, all of which maintain moisture  in the soil.  And those animals were in turn were managed by predators that would keep them on the move.  And without those predators in our landscapes right now, then we humans can manage those  
**[0:14:24-0:14:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:14:24):**  animals in the same way.  And if you look, because it's a very, I mean, it's funny how we both not coming from a,  let's say a rangeland with wet and dry seasons got so interested in that topic.  But it's a side note.  I mean, if you, because this looks at the movement of livestock on rangeland, and then  
**[0:14:44-0:14:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:14:44):**  you decided to, for the latest book, to take it a bit more broader and at the same time  more specific, and you ended up on water.  Did that come down because of you looked at soil and then basically, like you mentioned  before, the enormous role soil carbon plays with water?  Or how did it come about and you decided to write a book on water and especially water  
**[0:15:07-0:15:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:15:07):**  that we normally don't consider or don't even look at or don't see?  That's right.  The water that, so it's a look at how water moves across the landscape and through the  atmosphere.  It's a look at the water processes, how at water processes.  
**[0:15:24-0:15:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:15:24):**  Sometimes when I explain the book, I say that it's an exploration of water as a verb as  opposed to merely water as a noun.  Because we often think of water as a thing that can be divided up and maybe I have water  and you want it and so we fight over it as if water were a matter of zero sum, that one  person gets it, one country gets it.  
**[0:15:49-0:15:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:15:49):**  Like we used to think about economy.  Exactly.  Exactly.  So a couple of things happened.  One thing that happened was here in the US, we had the California drought when so much  
**[0:16:03-0:16:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:16:03):**  of our produce, our fruits and nuts and vegetables are grown in California.  And so with the drought, that was really putting a lot of stress on California's ability to  maintain its extraordinary agricultural production.  And of course, California has such a huge population.  So when Californians are inconvenienced, that means many, many, many millions of people  
**[0:16:29-0:16:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:16:29):**  are feeling it.  But what struck me was that in our conversations, our public conversations about the California  drought, what was missing was land.  That drought was looked upon as a matter of what does or doesn't come down from the sky.  And land degradation was not mentioned at all.  
**[0:16:51-0:16:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:16:51):**  And I felt that this was something that really needed to be corrected for us to truly address  our water challenges in this country.  So there was actually, it was very amused, there was one article that made the rounds  in California, all over the US during the California drought.  And the headline was something like, we needed, I think it was 11 trillion Olympic swimming  
**[0:17:21-0:17:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:17:21):**  pools worth of rainfall so that we could beat the drought.  And that amused me because, well, that's all very well and good.  But if we continue to degrade the land, the huge expanses of land in California that are  used as, that are rangelands, once thriving grasslands or agricultural lands, if we mismanage  them well, then 11 trillion swimming pools worth of rainfall won't really help the problem.  
**[0:17:55-0:18:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:17:55):**  In fact, that would be a waste of perfectly good swimming pool water.  However, if we did restore those lands and really focused on how to manage them better,  then maybe we could get away with much less in terms of our swimming pool use of water.  So I sort of laughed at that.  So that was one motivation to write the book Water in Plain Sight, to bring land to the  
**[0:18:23-0:18:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:18:23):**  center of our conversations about water.  And the other aspect was that in the writing of Cow Save the Planet, I was struck by a  huge missed opportunity that we have in terms of climate change.  That while we look at climate change as a matter of carbon, we're missing the fact that  water is a huge thermoregulator of our planet, that our water processes, infiltration, transpiration,  
**[0:19:03-0:19:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:19:03):**  evaporation, condensation, have such a huge impact on the energy balance of our planet  that I wanted to bring in water as it can affect climate.  So in other words, right now when we make the connection between water and climate,  we look at how climate change may affect our water sources and perhaps the water cycle  itself in terms of more intense storms, that warmer atmosphere means that more moisture  
**[0:19:41-0:19:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:19:41):**  is held in the atmosphere.  But we really hadn't looked at how we can work with the water cycle to help cool the  planet.  And I felt that that was a gap that needed to be filled.  So to basically look at it as almost a human body that's able to sweat and of course naturally  
**[0:20:04-0:20:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:20:04):**  cools us and probably that system is in use in other parts of the earth and not just on  our skin when it's a summer day.  Absolutely.  So what really, really interests me in particular is this wonderful water process called transpiration,  which is the upward movement of water through plants.  
**[0:20:28-0:20:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:20:28):**  And at a very basic level, that consumes energy.  Basically it takes the solar radiation that descends upon the earth and hits the surface  of the earth.  And rather than sensible heat, which is what you get if you have no plants there, if you  have let's say pavement, a sidewalk, or a degraded landscape which is not supporting  
**[0:20:59-0:21:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:20:59):**  plant growth, then you get sensible heat and that surface of the earth heats up.  But when you have plants on the surface, those plants are cooling the surface.  It's taking that solar energy and it's dispersing it and turning it into latent heat, which  is embodied in the water vapor.  So I just think it's such an extraordinary thing that plants are continually cooling  
**[0:21:35-0:21:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:21:35):**  our climate, cooling the planet, and yet we don't give them any credit for it.  And if you look at the book or the research you did for the book, is that also the story  that jumps out most?  If somebody asks you, could you tell one example or one story or is there another one in the  book that really tells this story as well, Vapor, but then more on the ground?  
**[0:22:00-0:22:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:22:00):**  Wow.  Well, there are so many stories, but basically-  I know it's a tricky one.  Yeah, it is a tricky one.  But to answer your question, if someone said, what did I learn from this book that has stuck  
**[0:22:16-0:22:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:22:16):**  with me and continues to drive me?  Yeah, or surprised you.  Yeah.  The first is that plants are running the show, the extent to which plants are running the  show.  
**[0:22:27-0:22:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:22:27):**  So there's an Australian farmer author, kind of maverick thinker named Peter Andrews.  And there's a quote from him that I like to refer to because I think it's so telling.  And that is this, that plants manage water and in managing water, they are managing heat.  And that to me is really, really powerful.  And then a corollary to that is that he notes that that kind of, again, this goes back to  
**[0:23:05-0:23:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:23:05):**  the question that I like to ask, which is how did natural systems deal with a particular  challenge?  What are the challenges to manage the heat inherent in the solar radiation that the planet  receives every day?  And so Peter Andrews calls attention to the role of plants in that management.  
**[0:23:25-0:23:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:23:25):**  And he also notes that we have, I was about to say, I'm trying to think, de-vegetated.  I knew that there was a word I was trying for.  De-vegetated about one quarter of the planet by paving over it, by building buildings that  have surfaces that are absorbing heat, and by deforesting, and by cutting down, by having  areas of land that are degraded and are therefore not supporting plant life.  
**[0:24:03-0:24:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:24:03):**  So that's about one quarter of the planet that is no longer managing solar radiation  as effectively.  And so while on the one hand, that's a very distressing fact, the way I like to turn it  around and say, wow, what an opportunity we have to start managing the heat better.  So we do have lots of opportunities, but we need to understand what it is that we want  
**[0:24:31-0:24:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:24:31):**  to do in order to restore ecosystem function all over the earth.  And if you look at, let's say, a year ago until now, you released a book.  Obviously you've had a lot of discussions on water and water in a bigger system and  water systems.  Have you seen the discussion change in the last year or so?  
**[0:24:57-0:24:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:24:57):**  And if so, what has changed?  So in terms of water, I have not seen it change.  And one thing I think that must be said is that here in the United States, the conversations  about ecology have kind of stalled.  I don't want to say they've stalled.  
**[0:25:14-0:25:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:25:14):**  That's overstating it.  But at this point in the US, people are so distracted by politics.  I don't mean to say that as a judgment, because I'm distracted too.  But I think that it has really taken our focus away from ecological processes, which is really  a shame because we need to be focusing on that more.  
**[0:25:37-0:25:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:25:37):**  So I haven't seen the conversation change around water, but I have seen a tremendous  change in the conversation around soil.  So I can say that, so the Cow Save the Planet, the book on soil came out in 2013.  When I was writing that book, it was basically kind of me sitting here at my desk in Vermont  reading information about the importance of soil carbon, about the importance of soil  
**[0:26:07-0:26:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:26:07):**  for biodiversity, about what wonderful things happen to areas when the soil is restored.  And I was sitting here by my lonesome saying, oh my gosh, this is amazing.  I mean, I had my sources.  But it was really kind of me in contact with my sources, in contact with my editor, in  isolation.  
**[0:26:28-0:26:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:26:28):**  Whereas now, there are several global and local organizations organized all around soil  restoration.  And articles being written all the time, and just internationally conversations around  the importance of soil and soil carbon are happening just constantly.  So it's a very, very different thing compared to when I was writing that book.  
**[0:26:58-0:26:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:26:58):**  So that's exciting.  I mean, I can just rattle off names of a few of these organizations.  So there's Regeneration International, which is all about regenerative agriculture.  There's the Carbon Underground.  There's Biodiversity for a Livable Climate.  
**[0:27:15-0:27:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:27:15):**  Soil for Climate, Soil for Climate Vermont.  There's Soil Solutions, which is part of the Center for Food Safety.  There's Kiss the Ground, which is based in Los Angeles.  So all these organizations, and I'm sure I've missed a few, the Soil Carbon Coalition, that's  been going on, but that's been expanding.  
**[0:27:36-0:27:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:27:36):**  And they do incredible work, including there's now an app, which is an atlas of biological  work so that you can see the impact of restoration of soil and how that enhances the capacity,  that lands the capacity for photosynthesis.  So there are all kinds of, there's all kinds of work going on.  Just another couple of examples that your listeners may or may not know about.  
**[0:28:06-0:28:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:28:06):**  There's the 4 per 1000 initiative, which was introduced at COP 21 in Paris.  And this has been driven by the French Agricultural Ministry.  And it's a voluntary initiative in which nations or entities, NGOs, organizations, all kinds  of entities can pledge to increase soil carbon at a rate of 4 per 1000, 0.4% per year.  And by doing that, if we do that in a, I think it's all agricultural lands globally, then  
**[0:28:48-0:28:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:28:48):**  we can stall the increase of adding carbon to the atmosphere.  They talk about the carbon gap.  So that we need to not only stop emissions, but we need to also start drawing down.  And so the 4 per 1000 initiative calls attention to the capacity for us to start drawing down  carbon.  
**[0:29:15-0:29:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:29:15):**  Just last week in Rome, there was from the FAO, the UN organization, an event focused  on the opportunities inherent in soil carbon sequestration.  So this is happening constantly now, and it's really, really exciting because, as I said,  when I was just beginning to get into this area, I felt very much like a voice in the  wilderness.  
**[0:29:44-0:29:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:29:44):**  But now I am among many, many colleagues, and that is a really good feeling.  That's amazing to hear.  And I will make sure I'll link to all of the organizations you mentioned and the initiatives  down below.  And if you look at the agriculture space, you talk a lot with farmers, you talk a lot  
**[0:30:05-0:30:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:30:05):**  with ranchers and land users.  Has that discussion changed?  And what do you see as the biggest opportunities for the next, let's say, year or two years?  What do you hope to see changing in your discussions with the people that at the end are responsible  for managing the lands?  
**[0:30:25-0:30:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:30:25):**  Okay, well, where I think that it has changed is that regenerative agriculture has become  a much more known concept and a phrase that can be used to communicate with consumers  so that people can buy products that are not only not hurting the environment, but that  are actively restoring the environment.  So for an example, here in Vermont, there is a fellow named Jesse McDougall who has  
**[0:31:00-0:31:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:31:00):**  a sheep farm, and he has a regenerative CSA.  So my husband and I purchased lamb from that farm, and I have actually seen how that farm  is restoring land.  I've seen where the grasses are growing much more fully and that there's much more biodiversity  in the plants that are growing.  
**[0:31:29-0:31:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:31:29):**  The land is healthier.  One little story that Jesse told me is that when the land started getting better, when  there was more carbon in the soil, which supported the growth of grasses, and then the growth  of grasses supports the carbon in the soil and it kept getting better and better, that  as the land improved, foxes returned.  
**[0:31:55-0:32:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:31:55):**  And as the foxes returned, then the number of ticks, these are little insects that are  kind of haunting us here in Vermont and in much of the US.  I also hear the Lyme disease is striking.  Oh, are they there too?  I did not know that you had it there.  
**[0:32:14-0:32:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:32:14):**  Is that true that you have it?  Yeah, they've been moving because there are many reasons why probably, but for sure heating  climate plus less animals outside, they're looking for another host, which usually ends  up being either a pet or a human being.  So after you've been outside, you need to check.  
**[0:32:35-0:32:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:32:35):**  Right.  This is news to me that that's the case in the Netherlands, but I can tell you that here  in Vermont, this is personal because I did get a tick illness, not Lyme, but something  called anaplasmosis last year.  And I'm really, really lucky that I was only knocked off my feet for about five weeks.  
**[0:32:56-0:33:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:32:56):**  So when Jesse told me that because the foxes have returned and that means that the rodents  that were carrying these ticks are now being managed, their population is being managed  by the predators, that the ticks have disappeared, that certainly caught my attention because  I just know that I know how damaging these animals can be.  So that actually brings up the topic of biodiversity.  
**[0:33:27-0:33:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:33:27):**  And I want to call attention to that because that was something that was really interesting  to me in the book.  So I went to an area of Mexico, the Chihuahuan Desert, where there's a really interesting  project that's happening right now, which is that bird conservation organizations are  working with ranchers to create habitat for endangered migratory grassland birds.  
**[0:33:56-0:34:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:33:56):**  And this is fascinating and again surprising because we don't really think that the presence  of livestock can help something like bird habitat.  But basically because these ranchers are using their management of livestock to restore the  land, they are creating this habitat and the birds are returning.  So that was really interesting.  
**[0:34:26-0:34:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:34:26):**  So they are restoring the land and they are restoring the water cycle, which allows for  the grasses to grow, which allows for these birds that otherwise would have no place to  nest, no place to hide from predators and no food.  It creates a good environment for these birds.  So I was exploring that and I found it interesting, although it wasn't particularly surprising,  
**[0:34:58-0:35:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:34:58):**  that when you restore the water cycle, that is good for biodiversity.  That kind of follows logically that when you have a healthy water cycle that you can support  more different kinds of species.  But that is something that I did observe there and that was really good to see because where  I was, it was not only the birds that they were supporting, but all other kinds of species  
**[0:35:25-0:35:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:35:25):**  of insects, butterflies, and also predators.  But what was also interesting and what I didn't expect was that it works the other way as  well, that when you restore biodiversity, that helps restore the water cycle.  So it helped me see that a lot of what we're dealing with when we're having problems with  the water cycle, when there's too much flooding, we're losing water in the landscape too quickly  
**[0:36:00-0:36:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:36:00):**  so that the land is not holding the water and therefore we're getting floods or we're  having droughts or we're having erosion because the rain creates gullies and we're losing  topsoil because the water streams off the landscape so quickly.  But when we restore biodiversity, that biodiversity helps us restore the water cycle.  So when we bring back such animals as beavers or prairie dogs, that that is slowing down  
**[0:36:39-0:36:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:36:39):**  the water, that is holding water on the land.  Other creatures that we might not think about because they're not so obvious or as cute  and cuddly like earthworms and dung beetles, those also help create in the land space for  the water to percolate and linger in the soil.  So it's not just leaving the landscape so quickly and leaving the land often dry.  
**[0:37:12-0:37:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:37:12):**  I think that the whole notion of it's not a zero sum game and when you bring back biodiversity  that of course also uses water, it's actually not taking water away from your farm, your  livestock, your produce, etc.  But it actually adds more and probably more than it's taking away.  So that's I think quite a lot of organic or sustainable farmers or biodynamic farmers  
**[0:37:35-0:37:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:37:35):**  or whatever we call them always knew that.  But getting that into the current agriculture system I think is essential and actually gets  me to a question that which is a first in this podcast that a previous guest asked a  question to a future guest.  We have Joanne Gais of Landlife Company that read your book and asked me to ask you the  
**[0:37:57-0:38:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:37:57):**  following question where he said the book offers a very interesting array of examples  of very inspiring examples of relatively small scale projects or relatively small scale initiatives.  What would be necessary to fix this on a world scale, on a global scale?  What is necessary to get this to that level in your view?  I would say it's a matter of awareness because we're still thinking very small.  
**[0:38:25-0:38:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:38:25):**  I mean you just had a perfect example right there that the notion that say having more  cattle on the land can actually generate water in the landscape.  That's something that I don't think that most people have been able to grasp.  I mean we're used to thinking in linear terms as opposed to whole system terms.  So I think that that's one example of what's needed is just for us to think more systemically.  
**[0:39:04-0:39:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:39:04):**  And in the US I mean I'm not really knowledgeable about policy in other parts of the world such  as Europe but here in the US all of our regulations and our farm agricultural policies is fixed  in a sense to support industrial agriculture.  Whereas industrial agriculture is ravaging the surface of our planet and in doing so  it is interfering with ecological processes in a really, really important way.  
**[0:39:45-0:39:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:39:45):**  So I think if we shift our understanding of wealth away from what is produced to and towards  function because without ecological function nothing can be produced.  I think that that is the shift that we need to make.  I hope that I said that in a way that makes sense.  Please let me know if I need to elaborate on that.  
**[0:40:21-0:40:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:40:21):**  I think for me it makes a lot of sense and it's a really interesting discussion to have  that with impact investors who of course try to balance those two things.  Like I want to invest in the future but I still want to invest and not do philanthropy.  So that discussion at least in that little niche of investors is very normal.  But I think if you can elaborate on it a bit just for the people that are not used to have  
**[0:40:48-0:40:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:40:48):**  that discussion and maybe come more from the agriculture side or from the Wall Street side  that would be great.  Our financial system does not make any sense because we are rewarded for practices that  are ultimately diminishing our natural wealth.  So we are companies, corporations, investors.  
**[0:41:18-0:41:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:41:18):**  We're at a moment in which our earnings come from extraction from the planet whereas we  also know that that is diminishing our future capacity to continue to produce what we need  to produce to feed and sustain the people that are living on the earth and the numbers  that will be added until hopefully that number will stabilize.  So it's a very, very weird moment.  
**[0:41:58-0:42:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:41:58):**  It's a kind of cognitive dissonance.  And I would say that the political challenges, the political tension that we have certainly  here in the US and by extension because we are all interdependent and what happens in  the US has ripple effects all over the world.  So by extension the political tension globally, I would say that this is a symptom of that  
**[0:42:33-0:42:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:42:33):**  economic and ecological cognitive dissonance that it's not working but our institutions  have not figured out a way to get things to work.  I hope that's not too abstract because I'm still kind of working out my own understanding  of this but we are at a really, really important inflection point.  And restoration, restorative processes are what will rebuild our wealth, the natural  
**[0:43:13-0:43:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:43:13):**  basis for our wealth.  And one thing that I just really think is so important because I don't think that most  people know this is that we can massively, we can restore those ecological processes  and we can do so on a large scale.  And I think that people don't really know that.  
**[0:43:38-0:43:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:43:38):**  I think partly because we don't see ecological change and because we tend to look at how  conditions are right now and assume that it has always been that way.  So it was very illuminating to me when I was in Chihuahua, Mexico with a rancher named  Alejandro Carrillo and he was showing me land and he pointed to some land that was really  in pretty bad shape, that there was very little that was growing there, maybe a little bit  
**[0:44:20-0:44:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:44:20):**  of mesquite which in the Southwest United States is considered a kind of pest species.  CB, IAN, and RL, invasive species.  Yeah.  KF Right.  So the land looked pretty bad and he just sighed and he shook his head and he said,  
**[0:44:36-0:44:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:44:36):**  when I was growing up in the 1970s, this was the best land.  This is where the best grasses were growing.  And so most people looking at that land would only see the way it is today.  But also the stories of where land is restored have not been sufficiently told.  Most people don't know that it's possible to restore land and to do so on a really pretty  
**[0:45:11-0:45:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:45:11):**  massive scale.  So one of the best examples of large scale land restoration is the restoration of the  Los Plateau in China.  And that's a story that's been told in a really powerful way by a Chinese American  filmmaker named John D. Liu, L-I-U.  
**[0:45:36-0:45:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:45:36):**  And it was pretty astounding for him when he was in 1995 hired by the World Bank to  document through film, he was a cameraman producer at the time, to document through  film the restoration of this area the size of Belgium in what had been the breadbasket  of China, this once fertile landscape.  And I can't do it justice verbally, you must see it.  
**[0:46:09-0:46:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:46:09):**  I will link the documentary below because I think it's on YouTube.  I even heard it's the size of France, but maybe the story starts expanding as it's  bigger, but it's striking.  The difference is day and night.  Right.  
**[0:46:22-0:46:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:46:22):**  The Los Plateau is the size of France, but the area that was restored was the size of  Belgium.  Here, the geopolitics of land restoration.  It's just striking that you had really dirt, just brown, empty soil that was no longer  able to support any plants, that hardly any plants were growing at that point.  
**[0:46:46-0:46:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:46:46):**  And people were bringing their remaining goats up to the hillside just to kind of get the  last little sprigs of growing green.  And then after people were, the government had this huge, huge project in which people  were paid to create terraces, to plant trees, to restore the landscape.  They didn't use restorative grazing, but it would certainly be interesting to see what  
**[0:47:21-0:47:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:47:21):**  happens when that gets brought in.  But just over the several years, the land turned green and all these people that would  have had to have been supported by the state were able to sustain themselves through their  own growing on the land that had regained its fertility.  It's really an extraordinary story.  
**[0:47:48-0:47:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:47:48):**  And I don't know why this story is not better known by the general public because it shows  what can be done.  Yeah.  And to put the impact investor had on, it was probably one of the best loans the World  Bank has ever made because it kickstarted, of course, with all the support from local  
**[0:48:08-0:48:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:48:08):**  population, local communities and the state.  But it made this, and luckily also they had some budget for John D. Louis.  So we actually have the footage before and after and the process because otherwise we  would have just had words.  And now we actually have the visuals which make it so much more striking.  
**[0:48:27-0:48:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:48:27):**  Yes, it's really wonderful.  And one thing that John Lu also talks about and something I think about a lot is that  often when we look at our economic policies globally, the concern is how do we create  jobs?  And often it's discussed from a perspective of it's either the economy or the environment.  
**[0:48:50-0:48:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:48:50):**  Well, we need jobs.  So even if these jobs involve extractive practices that perhaps are harmful to the environment,  well, what are we going to do?  We have no alternative.  We have to put people to work.  
**[0:49:02-0:49:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:49:02):**  But there's a lot of work that needs to be done and can be done to restore our ecological  systems.  So why not put people to work to restore their environments?  And then we have win, win, win because the ecology rebounds.  The people are no longer at the margins of society being frustrated and not having an  
**[0:49:31-0:49:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:49:31):**  income.  And also many areas of the world that have seen a lot of land degradation are areas where  there are political tensions.  So then that takes that pressure off too because populations where they are not able to sustainably  manage their food systems, for example, these are people that are going to be flooding the  
**[0:50:03-0:50:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:50:03):**  cities and then the cities can no longer sustain their population.  Then you get overflow and then you get these kind of mega city scenarios where you have  areas of slums and water problems and sanitation problems.  And that's a recipe for unrest.  No, definitely.  
**[0:50:26-0:50:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:50:26):**  I think that has been said many times, society that doesn't manage their land and their soil  well, which will eventually go under.  And I think we're running that risk.  I think it's a great point too because I don't want to take too much of your time to also  end this interview.  
**[0:50:42-0:50:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:50:42):**  I want to thank you so much.  I will link as many links as I can find you mentioned in the description below.  And I also put a link to the books, obviously, and also to the documentary of Don Du Liu  to give people a good overview of what we've discussed here.  And I will definitely keep checking in.  
**[0:51:03-0:51:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:51:03):**  I'm curious what the next deep dive will be in the regenerative agriculture space.  And I guess we'll find out in a year or two or so.  Thank you so much.  Absolutely.  I'm working on it.  
**[0:51:16-0:51:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:51:16):**  You just listened to an interview with Judith D. Swartz, author of Water in Plain Sight  and Cows Save the Planet.  We talked about many things in this interview, how plants are running the show and how they're  actually cooling the planet.  Thank you for making the time to listen to this podcast and making it all the way till  
**[0:51:33-0:51:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:51:33):**  the end.  I hope you enjoyed it as much as I did.  If you have any comments or ideas for future guests, please share them on SoundCloud or  Twitter.  And if this content is relevant or interesting for someone else, please feel free to share  
**[0:51:45-0:51:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:51:45):**  the interview.  And I hope to see you again here soon for more of these type of interviews.  If you found the investing in regenerative agriculture and food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  
**[0:51:59-0:52:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:51:59):**  It's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  join my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or in the description  
**[0:52:23-0:52:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:52:23):**  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  
**[0:52:49-0:52:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:52:49):**  Why are we doing this course?  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to put money  to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011 and recording  this podcast since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  
**[0:53:07-0:53:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:53:07):**  How have we built our decision making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  What questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  
**[0:53:17-0:53:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:53:17):**  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  
**[0:53:25-0:53:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:53:25):**  You, the soil builders and investors in the space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management, consultants, etc.  People that are building soil at scale.  
**[0:53:45-0:53:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:53:45):**  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  No.  
**[0:54:00-0:54:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:54:00):**  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you.  And I'm very aware that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very  different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you, and if you have the means to  
**[0:54:17-0:54:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:54:17):**  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to write along.  
**[0:54:30-0:54:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:54:30):**  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find, or what kind of investors you could  find if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  
**[0:54:52-0:54:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:54:52):**  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design, and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately, that doesn't exist in this world.  
**[0:55:06-0:55:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/06/05/judith-d-schwartz/#t=0:55:06):**  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea, or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up, and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  