### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2021-00-15)
**[0:00:00-0:00:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:00:00):**  What is the role of a food company doing 93 billion, yes that's a B, a year in sales in  the regenerative transition?  If we like it or not, large food companies, actually large food conglomerates, play a  very important role in our current food system.  Go to any supermarket and most of it comes from a few brands.  
**[0:00:18-0:00:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:00:18):**  And increasingly they are making claims and are setting goals around regenerative agriculture.  Do they have a role to play here?  And if yes, what is their role?  And what are their challenges?  Improving an intransparent, opaque, fundamentally extractive food system towards a regenerative  
**[0:00:33-0:00:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:00:33):**  one.  Welcome to a special mini-series where we explore the role of corporates in the regenerative  transition.  This series is supported by the Earthworm Foundation.  Find out more in an interview we did with Bastien Sarchais, the CEO of Earthworm, in  
**[0:00:47-0:00:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:00:47):**  the show notes below.  And more information on Earthworm at earthworm.org.  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture, Investing as if the  Planet Mattered, a podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and  agriculture space to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil,  
**[0:01:08-0:01:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:01:08):**  people, local communities and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we, as investors, big and small, and consumers, start paying much  
**[0:01:28-0:01:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:01:28):**  more attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  In March last year, we launched our membership community to make it easy for fans to support  our work.  And so many of you have joined as a member.  We've launched different types of benefits, exclusive content, Q&A webinars with former  
**[0:01:44-0:01:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:01:44):**  guests, Ask Me Anything sessions, plus so much more to come in the future.  For more information on the different tiers, benefits and how to become a member, check  gumbro.com slash investing region egg or find the link below.  Thank you.  Welcome to another episode today with Benjamin Ware, the global head of climate delivery  
**[0:02:03-0:02:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:02:03):**  and sustainable sourcing of one of the biggest food companies in the world, Nestle.  Welcome Benjamin.  Thank you.  And to start with a personal question, what brings you to agriculture and soil, regenerative  agriculture and obviously climate?  
**[0:02:17-0:02:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:02:17):**  But what was your path towards that?  Well, I mean, overall, of course, Nestle is linked with this because of the DNA of what  we do, which is food, health, nutrition for the world.  Me, more personally, I'm an agronomist by background and I've grown up in one of these  countryside in Switzerland and France.  
**[0:02:37-0:02:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:02:37):**  So it's naturally that I've evolved to these kinds of studies and I reach out to Nestle  as a Swiss citizen to make my career into that.  I mean, naturally you say, but it could also be, I mean, I know many people that grew up  on the countryside and definitely didn't want to work in anything to do with the countryside.  So do you remember if there was a trigger or a moment or something that really made  
**[0:03:01-0:03:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:03:01):**  you study agronomy, which is quite a specific study.  I mean, after that you can do many different things, but you're not going to work in banking  probably.  Yeah, no, I would say it's just like nearby my village, there was a potato factory from  a French company that was not Nestle.  
**[0:03:16-0:03:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:03:16):**  And I was just surrounded by, you know, agri agro food businesses.  And it was obvious that this was linked with nature.  I'm very much someone that enjoy nature, sports outdoors, good food and somehow good life  at Nestle.  So I haven't really even thought about that.  
**[0:03:35-0:03:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:03:35):**  It was a natural pass for me because of the positive vibes I was getting from my surroundings.  And within Nestle, did you immediately start, let's say on the sustainable side of things?  Is it something you grew into?  What was your career path or your path within such a large company?  I mean, it's bigger than some countries, so you can do many different things in there,  
**[0:03:56-0:04:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:03:56):**  but you ended up definitely on the sustainable side of things and the climate side.  What was your path there?  Yeah, so I was actually put in touch with some Nestle individuals while I was working  in the US and immediately when I started at Nestle, they sent me to India, to China to  be exposed to the sourcing of fresh milk and, you know, the new challenges of the agri and  
**[0:04:20-0:04:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:04:20):**  agro industry over there.  And for the last 17 years at Nestle, I've been always into sourcing related position,  always linked with farmers, more at the beginning related to really agronomical practices, yield,  optimization, understanding of, you know, the risk attached to the growing of certain  crops in certain locations for the given farmers.  
**[0:04:47-0:04:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:04:47):**  And through this basically risk mitigation approach that I was taking on sourcing, I  slowly derived on the SESMT agenda.  More on the animal welfare at the beginning, then derived to definitely sustainable sourcing  practices and as a natural evolution to climate afterwards.  And do you remember, because I think many food companies have been working on sustainable  
**[0:05:10-0:05:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:05:10):**  sourcing for a long time, but it was never, or at least not that I saw it connected to  your climate and connected to not even soil in general and the regeneration of soil.  Is that something that has been growing for a while?  Honestly, do you remember when that came or became a thing or where we suddenly started  connecting climate and food and ag?  
**[0:05:30-0:05:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:05:30):**  Not just let's use renewable energy for the factories, let's et cetera, et cetera, but  actually let's change the farming practices and approaches.  Seems to me something relatively new or recent in large food companies.  Would you say so or what has happened there?  Definitely.  
**[0:05:46-0:05:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:05:46):**  It's definitely something new and kind of a great upgrade and shift of how we look at  sourcing practices.  I think for many decades farming, farmers and practices applied, you know, on land and  territories have been looked at from the practices angle to reach an overall ambition of saying  practices are okay.  
**[0:06:07-0:06:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:06:07):**  They are in line with ethical standards and expectation.  Some of them can even reach a certification status and claim a third party, you know,  organization logo, but it was really looked at from a practices standpoint, less from  an output standpoint, less as you know, how many farmers are benefiting from the practices  to improve their livelihoods, how many animals are being treated in the right way so that  
**[0:06:41-0:06:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:06:41):**  they better produce or they do X, Y, Z and definitely what's the carbon output of these  given practices.  So I think this is one of the very positive consequence of the 1.5 degree pledge that  we have signed 18 months ago, which has really put a different spin to the sustainable sourcing  practices in basically calling for the measurements of the outputs rather than just the practices.  
**[0:07:11-0:07:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:07:11):**  And that brings, you know, a challenge because we don't have yet all the methodology to really  measure adequately the outputs of the given practices that we all like at farm level.  That brings us to a very, very good question.  What is for a company your size or any company, let's say a large food company, it doesn't  have to be the behemoth that Nestle is.  
**[0:07:31-0:07:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:07:31):**  What's the biggest challenge after you take a pledge like that at 1.5 degrees?  I will definitely link it below in the show notes.  What's the biggest challenge to then, because that then comes to you to implement it.  It's all nice and funny when people sign, but then what's the biggest challenge for  a large company to implement things like that?  
**[0:07:47-0:07:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:07:47):**  I mean, the biggest challenge is the scope and basically the baseline.  So what is behind these words is the type of raw materials that we are sourcing, the  location where we are sourcing them from, and then the practices in this location.  Because you don't own any farms.  Like it's not that you are the farmer and you can tomorrow switch a switch if you would  
**[0:08:09-0:08:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:08:09):**  want to know you are working through a long chain and sometimes a short chain, but yeah,  it's not your land.  Yeah.  So let's tackle that as a second step.  But I think the first step is definitely really again, the ecosystem, the locations and the  
**[0:08:23-0:08:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:08:23):**  farming model that we are talking about.  And you know, if it would be about just, or I mean just tackling the agricultural practices  of Nebraska where I did my master's degree, then you know, you work on one country on  two or three specific crops and the certain climatic and weather conditions, everybody  is more or less trained the same way.  
**[0:08:46-0:08:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:08:46):**  And here we go.  But we basically source 29 million tons of agricultural raw materials per year.  How big is it?  It's three times the agricultural output of the entire Swiss agriculture.  And we source these from 86 different countries.  
**[0:09:05-0:09:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:09:05):**  And of course each of these ton of agricultural raw material is linked with a different crop  and is linked with a pool of different countries and origins.  And the farming practices are very different from Peru to Mexico to US to France.  So where do we start?  We start, you know, with no really big surprise on the quick wins.  
**[0:09:29-0:09:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:09:29):**  So where we believe we can demonstrate progress and we can practice what we preach with a  certain supply chain player.  So how do we do that?  We basically of course trace all our commodities.  We identify the biggest volumes from where are they coming from?  
**[0:09:48-0:09:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:09:48):**  And then basically when we realize that, okay, let's say 20% of our volume of derivatives  are coming from three countries, we will embark with the supply chain partners of these three  countries to implement, to understand the practices at farm level and to implement the  new one that we would love to have being practiced in the years to come.  Which now touch what you were talking again, talking about a few minutes ago, which is  
**[0:10:21-0:10:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:10:21):**  the nature of the supply chain.  As you have said, we basically don't own any of the farms that are supplying this 28, 29  million tons of agricultural raw material to Nestle per year.  For I would say 10 to 15% of it, we do source directly from farms where of course it's kind  of a very simple and easy situation where it's a Nestle factory sourcing directly fresh  
**[0:10:47-0:10:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:10:47):**  milk from a cooperative and a group of farmers behind the same for coffee and cocoa.  But for the bulk of this 29 million tons of raw materials, it's through what I call the  trade channels.  So through the procurement channels sourcing from the agricultural commodities of this  world, the Cargill, the ADM, Louis Dreyfus, Ecom, Volcafe sourcing themselves through  
**[0:11:12-0:11:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:11:12):**  aggregators, mill, elevators, cooperatives, sourcing themselves from farmers.  And basically we shouldn't look at that as an issue, but rather as an opportunity for  everybody to basically team up.  There is no intent at Nestle to source more directly at farmer level.  Yeah, I was going to ask that.  
**[0:11:35-0:11:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:11:35):**  Do you see that change from like 15 or 20% to 30 or 50?  So you have more control also from a risk perspective or what do you see?  Like is it a natural limit for a company your size to be at the 15, 20%?  Yeah, I think you're touching the reality check is trying to control 29 million tons  of raw materials from 86 countries by ourselves and sourcing everything from farmers ourselves  
**[0:12:02-0:12:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:12:02):**  is just unrealistic.  And that's why the agricultural industry is set up like this, to have aggregators, to  have organizations that consolidate these volumes to provide contracts to farmers that  are long term because they are aggregated, consolidated, and sold to the market on an  ongoing basis.  
**[0:12:23-0:12:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:12:23):**  So the idea is not really to vertically integrate the supply chain and to own more.  The idea and the strategy is definitely yes to stabilize the supply chain.  And when I say stabilize, it doesn't know everybody start to talk about then decommoditize  the industry.  That was going to be my next question.  
**[0:12:45-0:12:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:12:45):**  Which is in a way, yes, the right terminology to use in the sense that we are going to move  away from buying just an asset, which is a ton of raw material to buying an asset together  with soft attributes, which is, you know, for example, a carbon weight or carbon footprint.  Yeah, because many would say that the anonymization and this ton of grain or this ton of dry milk  or powder milk, it's all the same.  
**[0:13:14-0:13:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:13:14):**  Doesn't matter where I get it from, as long as it shows up on my factory door.  That's sort of the extreme example, obviously, but it does lead to a very long distance between  consumer and farmer or land steward.  And obviously, it leads to a very unhealthy situation for many farmers because they basically  always sell to the lowest bidder or the other way around.  
**[0:13:33-0:13:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:13:33):**  So that I think with decommoditization, it's an interesting term.  It's a bit of a buzzword now.  But as you're saying, it's without owning the full supply chain, we're already moving  away from just buying everything on the spot market, or just does not care where it comes  from and any soft attributes are irrelevant.  
**[0:13:48-0:13:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:13:48):**  Exactly.  And actually, it's I mean, what we're passing is the message and the call for action from  the consumers, the consumers, they don't want this anymore.  They want to know what is the origins.  How do you see that?  
**[0:14:00-0:14:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:14:00):**  Do you see that in buying specific brands with a story?  Do you see that as surveys?  We see that in market share and marketing and sales.  When we run all of this consumer study in, you know, fast moving economies, China, India,  and also develop markets in sense checking what the consumers expect from the food that  
**[0:14:20-0:14:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:14:20):**  they buy.  And all of them, they expect the food and the ingredients that they are buying to disclose  on back the main origins of the ingredients, and how they've been produced and what are  the soft attributes behind the food that they eat.  So has that changed?  
**[0:14:38-0:14:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:14:38):**  It has changed, yes.  If you've seen that, because you've been doing these studies forever, I think, how has that  changed?  I think, as you have said, these studies have been done since a good 10 years.  But in the last two, three years, we've seen really a spike, a true change of answers to  
**[0:14:55-0:15:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:14:55):**  this consumer study, especially in the way consumers talk about their willingness to  reward for food that are able to disclose origins and to disclose practices.  In the past, they were saying, we are interested and we want, but we are not super ready to  give it a preference in the purchasing act or in premiums kind of thing.  So in the last two, three years, definitely there is a big drastic change on that piece  
**[0:15:25-0:15:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:15:25):**  that maybe comes from the generation, but more, you know, from the broader vibes that  climates, but also governments and regulations are making on the need to preserve our ecosystem  for the long term and for the new generation to come.  Super, super interesting.  I mean, that's what everyone I think is hoping for as soon as the consumer or a good percentage  
**[0:15:48-0:15:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:15:48):**  of the consumer, we don't need everyone.  We need enough to a stubborn minority enough to move the sector.  But it means I'm imagining, I'm assuming that's one of the main reasons, apart from the climate  pressure, biodiversity pressure, that you're all part of those discussions, but that the  consumer is moving, which means that if you are able to disclose, if you're able to source  
**[0:16:08-0:16:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:16:08):**  differently, et cetera, et cetera, you will find a group of people at least willing to  buy and make a different purchasing decision or come back to you or change over another  brand or change within the brands of Nestle, which makes the case a lot stronger, I think,  throughout the organization.  And so the biggest barrier, I mean, it seems to be the size, the quantity you're sourcing  
**[0:16:29-0:16:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:16:29):**  and then the complexity, because it's not that you're sourcing one ingredient that is  always done everywhere the same.  It's sort of counterintuitive to the regenerative movement.  So what do you see as the biggest opportunity?  What do you see as the role of corporates?  
**[0:16:41-0:16:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:16:41):**  What can you, with the size you have and your colleagues that have a similar size, what  can you do in this regenerative transition?  At the moment we are now, you've made pledges, you're buying a lot of materials.  A lot of them are not regenerative with regenerative practices yet, but you're doing a lot of work  there.  
**[0:16:56-0:16:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:16:56):**  What do you see as your role as such a large player in the space?  I mean, we could talk about our role in regards to content and into encouraging the implementation  of the practices or more the operational side.  But look, I think what matters for Nestle and company like ours is to send the right  commercial signals.  
**[0:17:19-0:17:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:17:19):**  And that's the way we will basically transform or help to transform the industry.  And when I say send the right commercial signals, I would divide that into three things.  Point one, to send signals that we are not interested that, let's turn that into a positive  angle, that we are interested to buy multi-crop and not anymore single crop.  That's a massive one.  
**[0:17:47-0:17:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:17:47):**  And so to give you an example, today we have cocoa buyer.  They are in one office, in one desk, and then we have wheat buyer in another office, in  another desk.  Coconut buyer the same way.  We don't basically send signals to the industry that we are interested to buy multiple crops  
**[0:18:06-0:18:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:18:06):**  together coming from the same land.  So what is behind and what is in the corridor is we want regenerative agricultural practices  at farm level.  But of course, if you ask a farmer to start to crop coconut on top of cocoa trees, he  will say, I don't have a market for this coconut.  
**[0:18:26-0:18:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:18:26):**  And I get you that this will capture more carbon and that these two crops will feed  each other.  But who is going to buy this coconut?  So I think a company like Nestle, we basically barely buy any type of raw metals out of the  earth.  
**[0:18:43-0:18:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:18:43):**  So one of the signals is definitely to make a bit of an adaptation of our way of buying.  To put those two buyers in the same office at a different desk.  Exactly.  To buy crops together so that when a buyer make a request for proposal or request for  information, he basically call for coconut together with cocoa and he negotiate volumes  
**[0:19:06-0:19:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:19:06):**  of both and price of both together so that it basically trigger this commercial pull  for this change and this transformation at farm level.  So that's one.  The second one, which is a bit more political, we want farmers to get federated and to unionized  and to get together.  
**[0:19:29-0:19:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:19:29):**  I still see this as an opportunity for doing things better.  There are too many cases where we reach the farm communities and yes, the farmers, they  know each other, but they don't really work together.  So one of our role is really to engage the farming community in an inclusive manner and  that we try to engage these farmers with the meals that are sourcing from them or the cooperatives  
**[0:19:57-0:20:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:19:57):**  that are sourcing from them so that this community has the opportunity to better know each other  and then do what?  Do things together in regards to regenerative agriculture.  So again, if you look at what is in the corridor, basically what we would love the farmers to  do is to upgrade and update the machines that they are using.  
**[0:20:19-0:20:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:20:19):**  For example, for reduced tillage, no tillage, but all the farmers will tell you for this  type of practices, like my coconut and cocoa example, it relates to assets and infrastructures  and very difficult for a single farmer to do that on its own.  So why not to take the opportunity of this boost on regenerative agriculture to try to  put these farming assets into a collective pot and say, okay, now I know my different  
**[0:20:52-0:20:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:20:52):**  farmers, my different neighbors.  I know that I'd like to implement this.  This is what my client wants.  I need to buy this type of machines.  Let's buy it together as a group of farmers.  
**[0:21:04-0:21:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:21:04):**  And that's where Nestlé will help as well with co-financing.  So the second thing is where we can help to transform and upgrade the industry is by taking  all our action in a way that it's federating this farming community and it helps all the  farmers to work together in the way they implement.  It could be also a risk for you, right?  
**[0:21:27-0:21:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:21:27):**  They could get together and start negotiating much more interesting prices for them.  And you as a buyer that have committed to long-term relationships and cannot, I mean,  you are decommodifying your value chain, meaning you're not going to the neighbors or to another  country to buy.  Is that something that could backfire as well?  
**[0:21:44-0:21:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:21:44):**  Or because it is such a different approach.  Like it used to be, we play everybody a bit differently.  We just keep them anonymized and in the dark.  And this is really a step change away from that.  But I'm also imagining that there might be some risks involved from your, as a corporate  
**[0:22:00-0:22:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:22:00):**  perspective, obviously.  Yeah, I think it's definitely fair to say.  I think we need to look, the way to not get too much worried about that is really to look  at the entire life cycle of this transformative change that needs to happen in regards to the  implementation of regenerative agriculture.  
**[0:22:19-0:22:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:22:19):**  And if you try to not take a full inclusive end-to-end approach of everything that you  need to do to make the things happen, then you may not federate these farmers.  But then what you have to do is to embark each of them one by one.  This will cost a bomb in onboarding farmers one by one and embarking mills one by one.  So you need to look, yes, at the entire end-to-end things that you need to do and choose the  
**[0:22:50-0:22:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:22:50):**  best return on investment on having all of this being implemented.  And yes, there are some cons, which can be characterized as cons from a commercial standpoint,  but really from an end-to-end cost management standpoint, it's much more cost effective  to help to trigger a feeling of agricultural community, federate all the farmers together,  aggregate the assets at this farming community level, co-finance the asset at this level,  
**[0:23:21-0:23:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:23:21):**  train everybody at this level.  And it also helps as well in the decommoditation side, because what we need to keep in mind  is it's impossible for a company like us to actually say we are going to source only from  these farmers in the next 20 years to come, because they have implemented this set of  practices that we want in regards to climate.  
**[0:23:45-0:23:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:23:45):**  It's unrealistic.  Because simply of the size of the amount of tons you can buy?  No, because of things that you cannot control.  So drought, climatic weather conditions, breakdown, something happened, even the family, personally  something happened, the political situation, things like this.  
**[0:24:08-0:24:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:24:08):**  So you need to look at the implementation of the regenerative agricultural practices  at the landscape and community level.  And basically try to implement and sponsor, co-finance the practices within this pool  of farms within this state in a given country within this landscape.  And at the end, what matters is that you stay in this state, you stay in this landscape.  
**[0:24:36-0:24:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:24:36):**  And basically, that's the rule of carbon accounting.  You need to make sure that basically you're connected with this value chain.  It's great that this is linked with these precise farmers.  But overall, long term, we need the practices to be implemented in this state so that if  we switch from this given farmer to this given other farmer still in the same state, it's  
**[0:24:59-0:25:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:24:59):**  still OK from a carbon landscape accounting standpoint.  So the third aspect of how we can really help the industry to embrace the challenge is to  move away from this thinking that everything needs to be one to one.  It has to be multiple to multiple.  So multiple buyer, multiple end user like Nestle, Danone, Pepsi, Coca, et cetera, coming  
**[0:25:29-0:25:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:25:29):**  to one state, producing many different crops from many different farmers and many different  cooperatives and everybody putting a share of an effort into the pool of what we want  in regards to regenerative agriculture so that it benefits everybody.  And what do you see as not the role of corporates?  What is clearly outside?  
**[0:25:50-0:25:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:25:50):**  I mean, there's a lot outside your scope because there's limited things you can do.  But what do you see as the role of, let's say, the public or politics or mainly those  two?  So a bit of a call of action here.  I don't see our role is to set the scientific methodology and tools to measure the benefits,  
**[0:26:13-0:26:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:26:13):**  the outputs of the practices that we have to implement.  Like the ecosystem services, the outcomes, the water quality, things like that.  Yeah.  So we are basically expecting the academia or the governmental organization to come with  the methodology to measure soil carbon capture, organic matter, soil organic matter, and the  
**[0:26:37-0:26:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:26:37):**  way to give it a carbon tag.  So I think our role is really to give technical assistance, dialogue with the farmers, co-finance  rewards for environmental services, really practices-based, and basically make a call  for actions to measure the return investment with outputs, with, for example, carbon sequestration  or number of hectares or tons of agricultural metals tagged as regenerative agriculture.  
**[0:27:09-0:27:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:27:09):**  Our role is not to set the methodology to measure soil organic matter or soil coverage  or the output of these practices.  I guess we could, but the challenge is that if we would do it, then it would be the Nestle  approach.  Then we need to make sure that we socialize that with all our peers and competitors.  
**[0:27:33-0:27:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:27:33):**  We need to come to a common understanding and agreement on how to measure, and it will  take decades.  We don't have time for this, and that's basically what we kindly ask regulations, governments,  NGOs, and academia to set for us out of all the PhD and the theses that are triggered  in the world in regards to these topics.  
**[0:27:59-0:28:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:27:59):**  There's the food as medicine discussion, and you have a big piece of Nestle that's actually  health-focused already since years.  What do you see there?  Because obviously there isn't an issue or a potential challenge with a long value chain  with a lot of processing around health.  
**[0:28:14-0:28:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:28:14):**  Do you see that interest as well in terms of the audience or the potential consumers  as they are looking for, let's say, clearer or more transparent labels?  Are they also looking for different things from the food, or is that staying the same?  What are your ideas and thoughts on that whole food as medicine and the quality of the ingredient  piece?  
**[0:28:33-0:28:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:28:33):**  Definitely, there is a pull for that.  I think basically sustainability in general related to the raw materials or packaging  is an entire part of the expectation of our consumers in regards to quality.  When they talk about, I expect a good quality product, somehow in their mind, and that's  what comes out of the consumer study, they also mean sustainable raw and packaging materials.  
**[0:29:05-0:29:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:29:05):**  Probably one day or another, we'll have a color coding or a grading on pack as we have  today in regards to the recipe and the health status of the given product that you purchased.  It's already there in France, right?  In Europe, and I know it's in the Netherlands, it's coming in the color code that the traffic  light system is starting to, and in Australia as well.  
**[0:29:27-0:29:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:29:27):**  Exactly, A, B, C, D. I think one day or another, the sensitivity angle will be embedded in  either into that or with its own dedicated visuals.  As an example, in Europe, you have this already color coding that exists and it takes into  consideration if the raw materials has an organic certification.  I think you get some points if it's there.  
**[0:29:52-0:29:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:29:52):**  I think the door is already half open and basically sustainability will get embedded  into that.  I think this will also pull for simplification of the value chain in general and probably  pull for simplification as well of the recipe, of the number of the ingredients that are  being used and the kind of industrial transformation which is applied to get the food that we get  
**[0:30:16-0:30:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:30:16):**  as packaged food.  I'm far from being an expert from this, but to your question, yes, I think it's going  to pull for this.  I think there's an interesting challenge there from uniformity as well.  We expect packaged food to potentially always taste the same except when we buy wine, etc.  
**[0:30:33-0:30:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:30:33):**  Then we know, okay, different years are different things.  But then if we go into the chocolates and go to the coffees, we as consumers, I'm saying,  have to go through a transformation as well.  Things taste different in different years and things taste different in different seasons.  Butter is not always the same and milk is not always the same.  
**[0:30:50-0:30:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:30:50):**  We sort of know that, but as we are in the supermarket choosing certain things, we sort  of expect the flavor to be constant.  As you are probably embarking on a journey to make the ingredients simpler and more flavor  will come through, more different flavors will come through.  That would be interesting to see how consumers say a lot of things, but if we at the end  
**[0:31:09-0:31:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:31:09):**  we want it always to taste the same or similar, then it could be a challenge for these ingredients  to shine basically.  To ask a few questions I always like to ask and I'm very curious about your view on them.  What do you believe to be true about regenerative agriculture that others don't?  This is definitely inspired by John Kempf who always asks in his podcast on agriculture  
**[0:31:29-0:31:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:31:29):**  in general, but where are you contrarian in this regenerative movement?  What do you believe to be true that others don't?  Yeah, that's a tough question.  I think everybody has the tendency to argue and I started our monologue, our dialogue  on this to say that regenerative agriculture differs from one crop to another, from one  
**[0:31:50-0:31:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:31:50):**  location to another, and there is almost no common foundation about regenerative agriculture.  I slightly disagree with this.  I think regenerative agriculture has two main foundations.  The first one is the main concept of not harming nature by using things that are not supposed  to be used over nature.  
**[0:32:16-0:32:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:32:16):**  That's the fundamental principle of regenerative agriculture that you're here basically to  have a positive impact and of course not to harm.  I think this is a common foundation of regenerative agriculture regardless of the crop, regardless  of the location, regardless of the farming production methods and way of doing things  that apply to everybody.  
**[0:32:39-0:32:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:32:39):**  What do you do with criticism then of people pointing out or saying big food companies,  everything is evil.  They just, I wouldn't say greenwash, I mean there was a word we used before, sustainable  wash or now for sure we're going to call it regenerative washing.  They come out with big claims and at the end of the day, of course, you're going to find  
**[0:32:57-0:33:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:32:57):**  something in the value chain that doesn't work and there will be articles also about  Nestle but all the others with big claims.  What do you say to that criticism?  Not harming nature, yeah, but you're actually doing X, Y, Z in this and this field.  What is your response to that at a birthday party when somebody brings up an article or  
**[0:33:14-0:33:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:33:14):**  brings up something that they read somewhere?  Yeah, so I would say, I mean, first of all, fair, there is no perfection anywhere and  we are not claiming that everything will be perfect on every places where we are sourcing  these raw metals and there will be always pockets of improvements needed.  I would say we really try our best to be as transparent and as granular as possible in  
**[0:33:41-0:33:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:33:41):**  regards to this topic.  So I think we are really one of the few companies that already today disclose on Nestle website  all the origins, all the locations for all our ingredients.  And when I say that, it's not only the tier one suppliers from whom we have the commercial  contract, but it's also the upstream supply chain partners with the volumes and the status  
**[0:34:06-0:34:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:34:06):**  of practices.  So I think the best way to have this discussion in a birthday party is to say fact-based and  also to be a bit humble and to say there is no way you can reach perfection on a topic  like this, embarking into a transformative journey.  Whereas I was taught when I was in school that chemists and chemicals is the feed for  
**[0:34:31-0:34:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:34:31):**  agriculture.  This is what I was taught 20 years ago.  I was taught to run agriculture by basically using synthetic inputs.  And I think we cannot expect the world to change this in just one decade.  So to your question on that, I think it's about us making sign of being humble and being  
**[0:34:55-0:34:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:34:55):**  as transparent as we can in regards to facts and figures.  And come and help.  I mean, if you have, there's a lot of work to be done in order value change and it's  easy, not easy, but it's sort of easy to point it out, but it's definitely not easy to change.  Yeah.  
**[0:35:11-0:35:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:35:11):**  So the second point in regards to what people don't believe is true.  And I believe is true and it's really controversial is somehow regenerative agriculture doesn't  mean that you phase out entirely the use of synthetic fertilizer.  And a lot of the community believes that basically if you cruise for regenerative agriculture,  you are basically cruising for organic agriculture.  
**[0:35:41-0:35:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:35:41):**  And one day or another, the farmers will just switch to organic to achieve the additional  premiums and to gain even more return on what they have done.  I don't believe this is true.  I believe that to be really regenerative, there will be from time to time a little need  of a boost just in a sporadic manner.  
**[0:36:05-0:36:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:36:05):**  And this boost will still come from the chemical industry and the agrochemical industry.  I've been visiting a lot of different farmers showing me the structure of the soil and a  few of them were saying, if I really, and I'm going to touch a very touchy point and  name if I really phase out glyphosate really entirely, I have a big problem and I cannot  control this problem with natural solution.  
**[0:36:36-0:36:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:36:36):**  If I do so, then I truly have a yield issue and then business wise, it doesn't make any  sense.  So what crops are we talking about?  What kind of farmers?  We're not talking about the cocoa.  
**[0:36:49-0:36:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:36:49):**  Perennials, so annual crops.  Wheat, et cetera.  Exactly.  So they were saying, you know, in the past I was using probably glyphosate twice a year.  Now I have switched to these practices and I'm using glyphosate sporadically every three  
**[0:37:04-0:37:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:37:04):**  years, but I have to.  Which is a 6X drop.  Yeah.  And it's very controversial because again, there is this movement of saying regenerative  agriculture means that again, you replace every single things by practices or by natural  
**[0:37:22-0:37:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:37:22):**  solution, which I think is right in 95% of the case, but I don't believe we'd be able  at least 2020 to 2030 to achieve such status.  And it basically, you know, open a debate for hours, but I think that's a second thing.  No, I think it's interesting.  I think it's the context that is always very specific.  
**[0:37:42-0:37:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:37:42):**  I mean, we had Zach Bush on the podcast about Roundup and glyphosate and glyphosate, I always  mess up the name.  And yeah, it's interesting the argument on if you have a very healthy soil, you don't  need these chemical inputs, but if you are on a journey to the healthy soil and you don't  have the space to replace it with organic inputs or not, or your soils are not ready  
**[0:38:02-0:38:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:38:02):**  or your context doesn't make sense, you cannot have the yield drop, et cetera, et cetera,  et cetera.  Is there a place for, and I think that makes the movement interesting that it's not binary.  It's not you are or you are not regenerative like organic everywhere is because it is a  certification and it is a standard.  
**[0:38:18-0:38:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:38:18):**  And in many cases it's not regenerative.  Like it definitely was in the beginning when it was about chemical inputs and not necessarily  about soil, but we've, I think all visited organic farms that are far from building soil  and many that are, I mean, just to give credit to our credit is due, but I think the direction  of how do you build soil to a moment where you maybe need it once every 10 year or never  
**[0:38:38-0:38:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:38:38):**  need it depending on where you are, what rotations you're doing, but it doesn't mean that in  year six, potentially you cannot use it, lose everything just because you want to stay within  a system or stay within the boundary.  So I think it's a very challenging concept for many.  I'm happy you bring it up and we can probably spend another few hours.  
**[0:38:55-0:38:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:38:55):**  We'll for sure get reactions on it, which is great, but it's the direction I think that  counts and it's a continuum.  You're somewhere on the journey.  Every farmer, every land steward, every land owner is on a journey either down to extract  more from their soils or either to rebuild them and we have to help them.  
**[0:39:12-0:39:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:39:12):**  We have to meet them wherever they are.  You cannot expect people to change overnight, buy all new machines, have a yield drop of  20, 30, 40% in five years.  And then yeah, then after that you will, you will recover.  But yeah, that's not fair for us to ask from anybody.  
**[0:39:27-0:39:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:39:27):**  And I think what is important in what you've just summarized is the transition phase.  I think we need to keep that in mind.  We are in a transition.  Things will be different in the future once this transition is implemented, but we need  to find and to choose the right solutions to make the best chance that this transition  
**[0:39:49-0:39:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:39:49):**  succeed.  And as you have said, maybe it's about, you know, using still few practices to help the  new one to get implemented and once the new one are really paying off and are scaled up  at the land level, then you can stop and decrease and phase out completely.  Yeah.  
**[0:40:07-0:40:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:40:07):**  And I want to ask two final questions before we have to sign off.  I want to be conscious of your time.  If there's one thing you could change overnight, so you have a magic wand, you have magic power  to change one thing in the food and agriculture sector or in general, what would that be?  What would be your one wish?  
**[0:40:23-0:40:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:40:23):**  To have all of the farmers virtually connected to us.  So having a, you know, a single identifier for all farmers and having all farmers having  an app where they make themselves connected to a cloud and then everybody's see and is  connected to each other.  So I think the really big foundation of everything that we do, let's spell it like this, it's  
**[0:40:47-0:40:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:40:47):**  the identity preservation, which will resonate with a lot of agri colleagues.  It's traceability is knowing who is there.  So it is this wish today, this industry because of us, you know, because of everybody in the  value chain.  It's a very opaque one.  
**[0:41:05-0:41:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:41:05):**  It's very cumbersome, extremely difficult for the farmers to know who are their clients  and for the clients to know who are their farmers.  So if I could have a, one of these magic thing that suddenly gives a single identifier to  everybody and connect everybody in a cloud and then traceability is not anymore a challenge  that will help.  
**[0:41:26-0:41:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:41:26):**  I think it's a very good answer.  We never had that like that.  And to end, this could be another rabbit hole where we can keep it for another discussion  as well, but we took your magic wand away.  So you no longer have that power, but you do have, and in this case maybe you do actually,  
**[0:41:39-0:41:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:41:39):**  but a billion dollar investment fund.  So you are putting your investment hat on.  This is a podcast about investing in regenerative agriculture.  What would you focus on with that fund?  So you have a long, you could have a long-term view, very short.  
**[0:41:53-0:41:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:41:53):**  You can choose whatever you want, but it is an investment fund.  So it cannot do grants.  What would you focus on?  Is it technology?  Is it food companies?  
**[0:42:01-0:42:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:42:01):**  Is it transition finance?  What would be your, your focus as a fund manager from tomorrow?  Yeah.  So I would say one thing which is for sure is that climate change is going to impact  everybody or industries together.  
**[0:42:16-0:42:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:42:16):**  And that's a big threat and opportunity at the same time for our economy.  So point one, if I would have a billion funds to invest, we look at investing that to something  connected to climate, because that's the way to help the earth.  And that's the way to basically probably definitely make money and help the way to forward.  And when you say connected to climate, is that solar panels, electric cars?  
**[0:42:43-0:42:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:42:43):**  Yeah.  Let me go to that.  So then when you think about climate, there is one thing that I would do as well is to  make sure that I invest into organization companies, technologies that generate carbon  reductions and removals.  
**[0:43:02-0:43:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:43:02):**  So what I think is very dangerous today is the race for sponsoring and financing the  decarbonization not linked with the value chain of the industries.  And what I see coming is basically a competition between carbon reductions and removals of  organization and then the offsetting market.  So I would try to give a boost to technologies and organization that create solutions to  
**[0:43:33-0:43:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:43:33):**  decarbonize the company within the value chain of the different industry.  And I would make sure that the money is not used to basically boost the carbon credit.  And it's not that I'm trying to pull that on the side of Nestle, but if I would invest  this money, I will think like, OK, I would invest into a company that create a new type  of fuel for the airlines or a new type of engine or a new type of infrastructure instead  
**[0:43:59-0:44:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:43:59):**  of boosting things that create carbon credits for the airline companies then to come and  compensate.  So I think we need to be extra careful in this race for carbon that we invest our time,  energy and money into an in-setting decarbonization and that we make really extra care that we  don't boost things that will boost the compensation market.  
**[0:44:26-0:44:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:44:26):**  And definitely today, governments and regulation, they are trying to do the same because they  have identified that if we do things the wrong way, we are going to end up into a competition.  It's going to basically trigger business as usual.  It's going to trigger and boost the compensation market and not really make the proper upgrade.  So that would be the extra care that I would make.  
**[0:44:50-0:44:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:44:50):**  Thank you so much, Benjamin, for your time, for your openness.  And I'm very excited to follow this.  I mean, there's an enormous role for companies like Nestle and I'm happy you're taking the  challenge being humble.  There are going to be barriers and roadblocks and it's a rocky ride, but for everyone.  
**[0:45:07-0:45:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:45:07):**  So I'm happy to have you here.  So let's take an appointment and meet again in one year.  And I tell you where we are in our journey and our KPIs and performance on carbon and  regenerative agriculture.  Let's look at the outcome and the outputs.  
**[0:45:21-0:45:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:45:21):**  Exactly.  Thank you so much.  Thank you.  If you found the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  
**[0:45:31-0:45:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:45:31):**  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  It's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  join my membership community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  
**[0:45:53-0:45:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benjamin-ware#t=0:45:53):**  You can find all the details on gumroad.com slash investing region egg or in the description  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  