### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2017-16-04)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  You're going to listen to an interview with Gregory Landau, CEO of Terra Genesis International.  We're going to talk about of course the opportunity impact investors have to get active in the  
**[0:00:24-0:00:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:00:24):**  regenerative agriculture space.  But most importantly in this interview we're going to discuss the role of blockchain, what  can smart contracts and a distributed ledger do for the regenerative agriculture space.  Enjoy!  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture.  
**[0:00:43-0:00:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:00:43):**  Investing as if the planet mattered.  Podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  
**[0:01:01-0:01:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:01:01):**  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  Before we get started, I've been recording these interviews next to my day job and I  
**[0:01:21-0:01:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:01:21):**  will definitely continue to do so and release about an episode a month.  But at the same time I would love to take this further, share more interviews, there  are many more stories to share on investing in regenerative food and agriculture.  More depth, improve the quality, maybe even doing some video series.  So I started a Patreon community which makes it easy to support creators like myself.  
**[0:01:42-0:01:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:01:42):**  If these podcasts have been of value to you and if you have the means, I invite you to  support me and make this happen.  For more information please find a link to my Patreon account in the description below.  And now, without further ado, the interview.  Enjoy!  
**[0:01:58-0:02:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:01:58):**  So welcome to investing in regenerative agriculture, investing as if the planet mattered.  I'm Koen van Zeeijen, the host of today.  In the podcast of today we have Gregory Lambdaou, CEO of Terra Genesis International, a regenerative  design consultancy based in Idaho.  Welcome Gregory.  
**[0:02:13-0:02:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:02:13):**  Thanks for having me on the show.  Thank you for coming.  And to start with a personal question, what's your journey into regenerative agriculture  and why did you end up here?  Well that's a great question.  
**[0:02:23-0:02:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:02:23):**  I think I went to school as an undergrad student in environmental science and at that point  and I think still that discipline is pretty focused on explanations of the problems of  sort of the planetary crisis of species extinction and global warming and environmental toxic  ecology and at that point there was a lot of talk about the impact of aerosols and the  stratosphere and ozone depletion and other things.  
**[0:02:56-0:03:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:02:56):**  And I really, honestly I really just got tired of all of the doom and gloom and started sort  of my own exploration of what kind of solutions exist out there and how can humans through  our economic activities be a force for health and balance on a global scale and in our home  ecosystems.  And that search led me to encounter permaculture when I was quite young and start engaging  
**[0:03:32-0:03:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:03:32):**  with the art and science of designing human systems that increase ecosystem health while  meeting human needs instead of extracting value from ecosystems in order to meet human  wants is how I would sort of juxtapose the search that I was engaged in with sort of  business as usual.  So from there it's just been a deepening exploration of how that search for how to meet human needs  
**[0:04:03-0:04:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:04:03):**  and increase ecosystem health can appear and where the most strategic intervention points  are in the system to help the economy start to shift towards one that is really celebrating  and honoring all life in the way that the economy functions.  And when you look at these entry points or where the most possible impact could be made  at the beginning you identified supply chains and you identified companies in that supply  
**[0:04:34-0:04:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:04:34):**  chain.  Can you explain why that is and what you actually do in those supply chains?  Sure.  Well so one thing to recognize is at Terragenesis we very rarely use the word the concept supply  chain actually.  
**[0:04:50-0:04:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:04:50):**  And there's a whole history of how that term came to be used in business.  But the short version is that term basically represents an extractive mindset.  A linear system.  To yank and extract value in a linear way out of from sort of a pool of value and put  it in a place where it is of relatively more value.  
**[0:05:15-0:05:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:05:15):**  And so we sort of think of the value adding stream.  So there's a stream where a so we speak about value adding streams and the potential of  engaging either at different points in that value adding stream or with the stream as  a whole with businesses is really enormously potent.  So my passion and my quest early on was and still is in a way to transform as much of  
**[0:05:46-0:05:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:05:46):**  the agricultural landscape to towards a landscape that can draw down carbon from the atmosphere  and uplift the farmers and communities that are the stewards of that landscape at the  same time.  And so in order to do that we really need to be working systemically connecting to the  businesses that are purchasing ingredients and adding value to those ingredients before  
**[0:06:12-0:06:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:06:12):**  they come to the end customer.  And so really in order to change on a large scale land use especially agricultural land  use we need to be working with the businesses that are making the big purchases and that  are complexifying and adding value to that which they're purchasing.  The ingredients that come from you know the Amazon rainforest or for the soy fields of  
**[0:06:43-0:06:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:06:43):**  middle America wherever it might be.  So as an entry point that's the leverage point you're using in this stream basically.  And what do you do with these companies when I mean you have many examples obviously when  a company comes to you and say OK we want to stop looking at our supply chain as a chain  but as a circle or as a stream.  
**[0:07:03-0:07:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:07:03):**  Where do you start.  Yeah.  So there's there's sort of a change from you know I oftentimes describe it from sustainable  supply chain is sort of a concept and people have a fixed idea of what that means.  And then you know so oftentimes companies come to us with this sort of sustainable supply  
**[0:07:21-0:07:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:07:21):**  chain business paradigm where they're looking to optimize for certain key metrics or indicators.  And we're sort of taking them on a journey that leads them to the next step which is  what we would call the regenerative producer web which is in a producer web you're starting  to recognize what you just spoke to in your question which is oh this isn't a linear chain.  And actually everyone in the network of value adding is adding value.  
**[0:07:52-0:07:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:07:52):**  There isn't sort of this strictly linear relationship.  There's a more complex relationship.  And in that so so working with companies to help them with their mindset shift from sort  of a linear we're extracting X value to OK there is a there's a web of reciprocity here  and we're playing a key role.  
**[0:08:13-0:08:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:08:13):**  How do we understand the role that the other members of this web are playing and grow their  capacity to do that better while we're growing our capacity to produce a better product for  our customers.  So the way that that looks in a very tangible way is we engage with analysis and assessment  of the system of supply risk assessments opportunity assessments.  
**[0:08:41-0:08:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:08:41):**  We engage with the company to sort of invite them to be able to see an image of what the  ecosystem that they're purchasing ingredients out of could look like at its optimal health.  And in order to do that with a business person it's sort of like a crash course in ecology  and oftentimes even sociology understanding the cultural dynamics.  So we're really inviting our clients into a much deeper understanding of the places  
**[0:09:14-0:09:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:09:14):**  that they're interacting with and making purchases from so that they can become a partner to  that location in generating healthier results for both the ecosystem and the clients of  the company.  And I can imagine that's a process that takes much longer than the average client purchaser  agreement etc.  
**[0:09:37-0:09:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:09:37):**  What's the role of time in this in this space.  Yeah we generally like you know of course it's important to sort of have a period of  courtship so that they so that we can all build trust in one another.  So we usually engage with a discrete bit of work to do the assessment process and a few  key bits of education where no matter what happens they can have kind of a strategic  
**[0:10:02-0:10:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:10:02):**  roadmap moving forward that's highly valuable really rooted in the ecological social realities  of the places that purchases are being made.  So there's a discrete engagement and that usually lasts you know somewhere around six  to eight months where there's assessment and education happening.  But generally we're looking at sort of a three to five year timeframe because the goal here  
**[0:10:29-0:10:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:10:29):**  is to grow the company's capacity to be thinking and acting regeneratively so that there the  effect that they have on the systems that they're interacting with is to actually grow  the capacity of that system itself to evolve in response to climate change in response  to innovation whatever the dynamic needs are.  And what that does is it creates a really robust and resilient relationship between  
**[0:10:58-0:11:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:10:58):**  the company and the place where they're both growing capacity.  So that also invites the customers of the company in an extraordinarily exciting journey.  So there's sort of a lot of ways to see the value proposition of our work but as you were  noting it isn't a short term solution.  In order to start to learn to engage with complexity and do so in a way that has regenerative  
**[0:11:24-0:11:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:11:24):**  results it's a journey and it's building new business habits it's building new capacity  and really it's being able to see problems with new eyes so that the solutions that are  inherent with those problems can actually be identified and nurtured.  And maybe that's actually one of the barriers.  What are the barriers you see after being working in the sector for a while?  
**[0:11:46-0:11:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:11:46):**  What are the barriers to the regenerative agriculture sector to scale up?  Maybe not scale up as we're used to in the software world but to reach more of those  hectares and many more of those farms and land stewards.  What are those barriers that are currently holding the sector down and not making it  reach its full potential?  
**[0:12:06-0:12:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:12:06):**  Yeah well that's a great question and I think points to some of in fact points to some of  the solutions that software may actually offer.  So for an ecological system to be healthy it needs to have biodiversity and your listeners  who are somewhat familiar with ecology or keep up with environmental news oftentimes  will have heard you know we're losing biodiversity at a rapid rate.  
**[0:12:35-0:12:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:12:35):**  Well that's not just in the wild lands of the world that's also in agricultural systems.  So the enormous richness of heirloom crops has been diminishing as companies optimize  for yield and usually chemically fed yield.  You know over 50 years or so of the Green Revolution there's sort of been this bottleneck  where the diversity the agricultural diversity of the world has collapsed.  
**[0:13:06-0:13:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:13:06):**  And that's because of the single big problem which I'm going to sort of speak about that's  limiting the spread of regenerative agriculture which is sort of the logistics of bringing  diversity to the marketplace.  So we have a global marketplace that's built very efficiently to bring single crops from  large scale farms to into the commodities market and then from there spread it amongst  
**[0:13:36-0:13:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:13:36):**  the diversity of businesses that then add value to the crop and create food or cosmetics  or medicines whatever it might be.  We've basically forced ecology to match our abstract logistics and economic system.  Instead we need to redesign the logistics and systems of exchange to match a healthy  ecosystem.  
**[0:14:05-0:14:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:14:05):**  And what that means is the potential here with this problem I think is in software that  allows distributed purchases into diverse agroecosystems.  So if a farmer no longer has to optimize for a single crop in order to just sort of sell  bulk and have very low margins but instead could sell you know five or even ten different  crops off of the same piece of land and have those crops efficiently distributed to all  
**[0:14:40-0:14:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:14:40):**  of the different buyers in a way that that system of supply can aggregate at the appropriate  scales and then distribute at the appropriate scales.  We would basically have a system of supply that can meet a healthy ecosystem where it's  at and in fact increase the health of the ecosystem and the farmer while engendering  a very vibrant economy.  
**[0:15:10-0:15:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:15:10):**  And is that the angle because I read some articles before the angle of where blockchain  and the distributed technologies or software we're seeing the birth of now come in and  could play their potentially vital role?  That is my opinion 100%.  In fact we're devoting substantial resources at this point to the development of agricultural  
**[0:15:36-0:15:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:15:36):**  specific applications of blockchain technology because the potential to have a verification  system of the increase of ecosystem health right through key indicators like carbon the  drawdown of atmospheric carbon into soil and above ground biomass biodiversity.  These are all things that we know how to monitor and can be embedded into a smart contract  and in a distributed ledger system.  
**[0:16:04-0:16:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:16:04):**  So when you combine that sort of layer with the ability for blockchain to track provenance  and create transparency through a value adding stream you have this enormously powerful tool  for disrupting and transforming the way the entire global system of supply works and regenerate  that system of supply in a way that is in service to the health of the ecosystem.  Now I don't know I know that there's a lot of buzz and there's a lot of excitement about  
**[0:16:36-0:16:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:16:36):**  the blockchain both in investment circles as well as in development circles and even  in agricultural circles to a certain degree but I don't really know of very many other  projects that are really asking what's the highest use of the blockchain as a tool for  regenerating agro ecosystems in service to the health of the planet.  And that's really the next big thing for Terogenesis International and what we're devoting our  
**[0:17:04-0:17:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:17:04):**  coming year to in partnership with some of our existing clients and a growing pool of  investors who are interested in sort of pioneering that disruption.  And if you can tell of course where would be the first application of this technology  in your eyes.  Like if we speak in a year from now I mean you're devoting your time now to that and  
**[0:17:28-0:17:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:17:28):**  your resources and focusing on that and if we talk in a year from now what would we be  discussing now in terms of blockchain and regenerative agriculture in an ideal scenario?  Well I think in an ideal scenario we will have a robust proof of concept in beta already  running with several ingredients so that people can see how it works and some of the troubleshooting  and problem solving that inevitably will come up can sort of be underway and we will have  
**[0:18:00-0:18:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:18:00):**  basically have a pretty powerful and robust information product based on the blockchain  that companies large and small and as well as in customers and producer communities can  all engage with in order to make decisions together about what does regeneration mean  in their shared context.  And that's something that's very important to me is that we start to understand that  
**[0:18:28-0:18:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:18:28):**  regeneration isn't an abstract ideal.  It actually has to be recreated in specific context.  So a regenerative agriculture system that has to include the farmer, the businesses  that are engaging with it and the details of the geography, the culture, the context,  the ecology.  
**[0:18:51-0:18:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:18:51):**  So every place actually is going to have sort of this unique expression and in one year  I am really passionately excited to see groups of stakeholders come together in a way where  the blockchain can sort of mediate and capture the conversation and agreements in order to  ask explore what's the highest potential expression of this agricultural system for this entire  group of stakeholders including the living world, including nature.  
**[0:19:26-0:19:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:19:26):**  And to ask a bit more technical question, how are you building a blockchain?  I mean I've read a lot about it and but it's still not completely clear to me where do  you start from a vision that you just draw in the last few sentences to how do you get  concrete and where do you even start?  Well that's a great question.  
**[0:19:45-0:19:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:19:45):**  Luckily we have a really great group of allies that have been pioneers in the development  of some of the large blockchain systems.  We're currently working towards building our vision on the Ethereum platform for a variety  of different reasons, mostly pragmatic.  It's the most flexible.  
**[0:20:08-0:20:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:20:08):**  Yeah there's such a robust development community right now and several of our allies are very  integral in that community.  So it gives us the ability to sort of both know what we don't know and know who to talk  to about that.  And I think that's key for businesses who are engaging with the blockchain because it  
**[0:20:27-0:20:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:20:27):**  is pretty esoteric on a lot of levels as is regenerative agriculture interestingly enough.  So we have these two sort of highly specialized skills and from my perspective really what  we're doing right now is we're sort of we're working on a project that can marry the technosphere  with the biosphere again so that the tools that we're using, this amazing technology,  are working in service to the health of ecosystems, not just extracting value for sort of a utopian  
**[0:21:01-0:21:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:21:01):**  ideal that's disconnected from the health, the sort of basic functional health of our  planet and water and the carbon cycle and biodiversity but instead is interconnected  and interdependent with that health.  And so to speak really directly to your question about how are we proceeding technically very  carefully and we're slowly building a team.  
**[0:21:29-0:21:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:21:29):**  So our expertise for years has been very grounded in our ability to work with communities and  to work with the soil and to work with the agro ecosystems and all the stakeholders who  engage with that.  And so at Terragenesis we've sort of developed a capacity in design for complex ecosystems  and stakeholders and so from our perspective we're approaching the blockchain not as sort  
**[0:21:56-0:22:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:21:56):**  of a holy grail but as another member in an existing and complex ecosystem that we're  inviting to the table to infuse the work that's already underway.  So we're not looking at the blockchain and asking you know sort of what's the abstract  potential here, we're looking at the blockchain and inviting a conversation about what's the  potential in our specific context.  
**[0:22:20-0:22:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:22:20):**  And to speak about a specific context can you walk me through let's say again we're  talking a year from now and I'm I was one of them or I'm still one of the people involved  in the pilot.  I'm a cocoa farmer in Central America.  Of course I'm completely regenerative so I have multiple ingredients that I'm growing  
**[0:22:37-0:22:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:22:37):**  of multiple things that come of my land that might have value and maybe didn't have value  before.  How do I engage?  Does it work on my phone?  What do I do to be part of this stream?  
**[0:22:48-0:22:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:22:48):**  Yeah so you're engaging on your phone basically or at a desktop computer at the internet cafe  down the road and you're engaging with a platform where you can actually see you know who is  enjoying the chocolate bar made out of your cacao.  And you're able to with by engaging with your cooperative, the cooperative that you're a  member, you're able to go on and not only track global commodities prices but also make  
**[0:23:17-0:23:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:23:17):**  decisions sort of informed financial decisions about together with the other with the buyer.  You're able to make decisions about the sale price that are informed by the variables that  everyone has decided are important.  Quality right so there's a contract about quality and you can test that.  Land use is the land use really up to snuff?  
**[0:23:43-0:23:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:23:43):**  Are you producing multiple ingredients?  Is carbon being sequestered into your agro ecosystem?  And not just sort of enforcing things on the farmer but the farmer then gets to look upstream  and say oh is that chocolate business doing what it promised?  Are they you know are they selling that chocolate bar with a story that's an integrity with  
**[0:24:06-0:24:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:24:06):**  what's really happening on the ground?  Are they using my photo fair enough?  Exactly.  Am I getting value for the extra layers of marketing that I supported them with, with  the tour and the photo and other things?  
**[0:24:20-0:24:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:24:20):**  So it starts to we start to be able to level the playing field so that the farmer is actually  participating as a user in this market ecosystem instead of just as the sort of the foundation  of a pyramid where value is being extracted.  And to ask this stupid question why is that possible now or in the near future with blockchain  and not with all the tools we already have on the internet?  
**[0:24:49-0:24:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:24:49):**  Well I actually think it was completely possible before.  So why is it not done?  So this is just sort of philosophical perspective and I perhaps am going to receive some hate  mail from people who are true believers in blockchain technology.  We can handle that.  
**[0:25:10-0:25:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:25:10):**  But my belief isn't so much that blockchain is sort of a radical difference.  It is that people because people believe it's a radical difference we're having conversations  that people were scared to have before.  And so the enormous amount of attention going into the question about what a distributed  economy means and how it could manifest in a way that is in service to not just centralized  
**[0:25:43-0:25:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:25:43):**  sort of economic power but all of the participants of the economy is something that's happening  at an increasingly frequent rate and with higher and higher quality.  So that discourse is generating the ability from my perspective for people to actually  believe that it's possible.  Whereas before something about the conditions meant that most people would just eschew and  
**[0:26:12-0:26:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:26:12):**  say no no that can't actually happen.  We can't actually have that kind of a system.  I do think you know just a caveat to what I said it's not just sort of the larger shift  in belief that's taking place although that's a big part of it.  And I think it shouldn't be the reason why I'm focusing on it is because I think it's  
**[0:26:30-0:26:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:26:30):**  too often times forgotten.  I also think that there's some very clear that the power of a distributed ledger of a ledger  that is hosted by everyone not just a single entity who holds all of the cards is enormously  potent and opens up vast realms of possibility that didn't exist just 10 years ago.  Yeah so maybe it's not the we didn't go from 20 percent to 100 or it didn't become 10 times  
**[0:27:02-0:27:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:27:02):**  better or more potent because of the blockchain it did get.  I mean there's a development in there that's unique.  But because everybody believes it did get 100 times better we suddenly have discussions  investments attention focus.  So it actually is becoming better and actually is becoming used which before was only a theoretical  
**[0:27:20-0:27:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:27:20):**  discussion and maybe some research papers that we wrote about the distributed economy  and now actually people are doing it.  That's my belief is that it's a combination in the synergy between that that there is  a better tool and it does exist and there are sort of proof of the proof is in the pudding  as they say right.  
**[0:27:39-0:27:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:27:39):**  That there are you know Bitcoin is a global phenomenon and the value keeps going up.  There's attention there's a massive amount of attention in altcoins there's a massive  amount of attention to a theory and the Ethereum enterprise platform and it's growing.  And that's bringing attention to the conversation you know just five years ago if I had just  outlined and five years ago frankly I was thinking about all of this stuff and working  
**[0:28:07-0:28:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:28:07):**  on it and I may have said most of the exact same things if you would ask me those questions  just minus the ability to use the blockchain in a way that had you lean in and say oh wow  because I've heard it all over my social media what this guy is saying actually might be  true or it might be possible I think that's the difference.  Exactly exactly it might be more than possible it might be a good investment.  
**[0:28:32-0:28:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:28:32):**  Because everybody from IBM to your your old hacker geeks friends are talking about it  so there's something there and that that makes it suddenly.  That's right and so it's an enormously exciting time I think if we can invite the highly intelligent  but somewhat abstract cyber community engaged with the blockchain to really be actively  engaged with how this technology increases the health of ecosystems agricultural systems  
**[0:29:12-0:29:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:29:12):**  and the trade systems that connect humans to those systems will really have something  exciting to be talking about in a year from now.  Which is not easy if you see most of the research or the money and investments are flowing towards  making bank transactions faster and just a few milliseconds because they earn on that  and so it's not looking I mean it's not connected to earth literally.  
**[0:29:40-0:29:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:29:40):**  That's correct.  And I think it's absolutely essential but it's not going to be an easy stretch to get  IBM or whoever looking at ecosystem ecosystems and biospheres etc.  They have to at some point anyway but we hope we do it a bit before that.  Yeah I mean absolutely I agree I mean I think the potential here where I think we're really  
**[0:30:02-0:30:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:30:02):**  very much at a crossroads and the potential is that this technology is only used to optimize  the extractive economy more.  But there's another potential and that potential is that this technology is used to engage  in an inquiry about how investment creates multiple forms of return multiple forms of  capital not just financial capital but the living capital that out of which all other  
**[0:30:39-0:30:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:30:39):**  wealth is born and how to actively create ways for us to be engaging and including the  health and vibrance of that living capital pool into our systems of trade.  And I'm not just as a disclaimer I'm not actually a big fan of just sort of monetizing ecosystem  services because I think that the complexity of living systems is too much to be accounted  for in quotes.  
**[0:31:17-0:31:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:31:17):**  So we're really walking a razor's edge here.  So I sort of I personally have this philosophical belief that we can't simply just sort of have  a quote unquote true cost economics and internalize all the externalized costs in the form of  ecosystem services and have sort of an economy that works perfectly.  I don't actually believe that.  
**[0:31:39-0:31:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:31:39):**  However I do believe that some very pragmatic steps in moving forward using block chain  distributed ledger systems for trade and for accounting for ecosystem services is clearly  the next step for shifting the economy in a way that actually is serving the health  of the planet and not only needs to happen but already is happening.  So there's a certain point here where sort of my personal philosophy is very likely to  
**[0:32:13-0:32:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:32:13):**  be tested.  But at the moment I think it's very it's very aligned with what sort of the imperative that  is the exploration of how this technology can serve the communities and ecosystems that  are the foundation for all whether we believe it or not all of the wealth that's being exchanged  in a millisecond in a nanosecond as financial capital liquidity actually sublimates and  
**[0:32:45-0:32:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:32:45):**  gasifies and turns into sort of this global omnipresent ether that makes transactions  instantaneous.  That can only be supported with a very clear connection with the slower rhythms of planetary  health.  Yeah at the end I don't know who did the quote but it's you can't eat money at the end.  
**[0:33:08-0:33:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:33:08):**  There's always and a lot of people live a bit of outside that biosphere or think they  live outside the biosphere until they stopped.  But I think it's an interesting the true cost is an interesting example of extracting companies  thinking about their externalities and letting these reports being written and then usually  get really scared because they are actually making a huge loss if you even if you just  
**[0:33:31-0:33:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:33:31):**  internalize a few of the externalities because most of them you simply cannot even measure.  You get quite far right but already with only maybe half of it or a third etc.  They are way deep in there in the red numbers if you start calculating that.  So maybe it serves as a wake up call that their supply chain as they are still calling  that is in fact broken or at least not functioning if you look at the bigger picture.  
**[0:33:57-0:33:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:33:57):**  That's right.  It's a huge step.  It's a huge step and the companies and investors who invest and that's so that sort of true  cost and internalization of externalities is going to happen I believe because there's  growing awareness and growing pressure.  
**[0:34:14-0:34:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:34:14):**  It's sort of the writing's already on the wall.  Companies aren't going to be able they'll find ways to externalize but many of the things  are externalizing right now will they will be forced to internalize and companies and  investors who realize that that's happening that that that trend is underway and sort  of in the process of actualizing into the economy and the disruptive force that that  
**[0:34:40-0:34:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:34:40):**  will create people who have the foresight to invest in regenerative agriculture and  in the systems of supply and technology that support regenerative agriculture will be in  a very solid position for the new economy that's being born because those are industries  where there are no externalities where the net benefit to the system is greater than  the cost and that I think even just as a hedge right that even there's a small probability  
**[0:35:16-0:35:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:35:16):**  that what I just said is true it's worth investing significant amount of capital.  So I fully believe that even if you know we could invest 10 or 15 percent of the available  financial capital that's buzzing around the planet right now in regenerative agriculture  and the foundation of the regenerative economy in the next two or three years we would change  the world we would change the world it would completely transform things and and that to  
**[0:35:48-0:35:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:35:48):**  me is a very attractive proposition to investors because if you're saying you know look we  need a group of you know five hedge funds and you know a hundred venture capital funds  and we want all of you to dedicate 10 percent of your assets to this project not our project  in specific I couldn't even metabolize that amount of capital but the larger project of  you know regenerating the agro ecosystem and the system of supply as the foundation for  
**[0:36:20-0:36:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:36:20):**  a new bioeconomy and invested in the land base for that and the technology for that  and you know all of the other aspects the upskilling that's going to need to take place  and all of the myriad millions of different exciting business opportunities everything  from sharing economy eco tourism plays to real estate ventures I mean there's a lot  there that could be very attractive if just 10 percent of investment portfolio of like  
**[0:36:52-0:36:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:36:52):**  I said you know five or ten hedge funds and a hundred venture capital groups we would  have enough working capital to actually change the direction from you know pending doom of  our biosphere and our ability to live here where we have to go to Mars or something you  know in a futurist scenario to a vibrant earth where humans are actually living in a way  that's coherent with the health of the larger ecosystem and we can still go to Mars and  
**[0:37:26-0:37:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:37:26):**  do all those other things so yeah we still have 90 percent left that's right we can pay  for a few rockets that we still have plenty of capital and I believe that eventually many  of much of that capital would cycle down will flow in as we'll show the different ways to  return not in an infinite growth economy that's based on extracting more value and producing  more needless goods and marketing it but the new burgeoning economy of creativity where  
**[0:37:59-0:38:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:37:59):**  the knowledge that is born out of this exploration shows a myriad of different returns on investment  and let's say we're in front of a theater full of smart impact investors or as all investors  including us think we're smart what would you say what would be the first step they're  all interested or excited after after this half an hour and they want to get in where  do you start and what should you look out for well so of course give me a call I'm always  
**[0:38:31-0:38:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:38:31):**  happy to chat but you know that aside in a sort of general pattern level I think the  places to start are really where are you as an investor interested and passionate about  what and what are the linkages with your existing investment portfolio to regenerative economy  and a regenerative agro economy because there's enough complexity here that you know you can't  just dive in to you know project X that's all the way across the world and expect to  
**[0:39:11-0:39:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:39:11):**  have good venture returns you need to be investing in places where you have some ability to sort  of vet the potential for success because there'll be many good ideas out there but not all of  them will have a solid return because not all of them will succeed I mean that's why  we're all in this in the end is because we love to gamble and be right so find the places  where you can be right and concentrate on asking the question what does this sort of  
**[0:39:44-0:39:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:39:44):**  sector whether it's commodities sort of bulk commodities or you know vegetables and grocery  or confectionery and cacao or cosmetics or real estate what does this place where I already  have some understanding of the way the extractive conventional economy looks what might a play  look like in the new disruptive distributed regenerative economy look like in this place  where I'm already excited about right do a little mapping and then start to look for  
**[0:40:24-0:40:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:40:24):**  people who are active in those places and have conversations with them I mean that's  a very practical roadmap for engaging I think the most important from my perspective the  most important place to engage right now actually is in the information side of this we need  to figure out how to monetize the knowledge economy around regenerative agriculture so  that we can rapidly accelerate our research and development of agro ecosystems and that  
**[0:40:58-0:41:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:40:58):**  to me is is you know complimentary with this play into the blockchain are the two highest  leverage places to begin the conversation about regenerative agriculture investing so  what does R&D in regenerative agriculture look like it looks like investing in the potential  to have model farms in every ecosystem across the planet that are basically highly monitored  and wired so that the practices both ancestral and indigenous as well as modern that increased  
**[0:41:35-0:41:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:41:35):**  biodiversity and increase soil carbon and increase the health of the the whole ecosystem  increase the quality of the products that come out of it can be monitored and then used  to extrapolate into this larger global system of value exchange you know people who invest  in that and companies who have that kind of capacity to share that information in a to  share that information in a distributed but monetized way with a global economy are going  
**[0:42:05-0:42:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:42:05):**  to have enormous capacity not only to make big moves in the future but also to have a  steady income stream because everybody needs that information so those would be the two  places where where I personally would start from my vantage point.  I want to thank you so much Gregory for for taking the time today and sharing your knowledge  and interest and I'm sure we'll check in in a year to see where the blockchain has has  
**[0:42:32-0:42:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:42:32):**  landed for the first time in regenerative agriculture and to discuss the potential the  lessons the early stage diseases etc that were for sure in the system and we'll see  about the future.  Yeah well thank you so much for for having me on the show Koen and I look forward to  checking back in in a year from now to see where we're at.  
**[0:42:54-0:42:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:42:54):**  You just listened to an interview with Gregory Lundau.  I hope you enjoyed it as much as I did and learned as much as I did about the potential  role of blockchains in the regenerative agriculture space.  I'm sure to be checking in with Gregory in a year to see where his projects have led  him.  
**[0:43:11-0:43:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:43:11):**  Thank you for making the time to listen to this podcast and making it all the way till  the end.  I hope you enjoyed it as much as I did.  If you found the investing in regenerative agriculture and food podcast valuable there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  
**[0:43:24-0:43:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:43:24):**  Number one rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  It's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few seconds.  Number two share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means please join  my patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  
**[0:43:46-0:43:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:43:46):**  You can find all the details on patreon.com regenerative agriculture or in the description  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food.  
**[0:44:11-0:44:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:44:11):**  How to put money to work in regenerating soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while  doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After a hundred interviews and more than a hundred hours of audio asking the question  how to put money to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011  
**[0:44:27-0:44:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:44:27):**  and recording these podcasts since 2016 we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision-making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees and what questions should you ask?  
**[0:44:44-0:44:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:44:44):**  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  
**[0:44:51-0:44:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:44:51):**  For whom is this course?  You the soil builders and investors in the space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management consultants, etc. etc.  
**[0:45:10-0:45:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:45:10):**  People that are building soil at scale and the investors who are putting their own money  to work through their family office or as private individuals or people who are putting  other people's money to work through foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies,  etc.  Is this course free?  
**[0:45:26-0:45:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:45:26):**  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  that among the listeners of this podcast we have people with very different means.  So I'm inviting you if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  
**[0:45:44-0:45:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:45:44):**  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to ride along.  
**[0:45:57-0:46:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:45:57):**  We're gonna look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  
**[0:46:19-0:46:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:46:19):**  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're gonna look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  
**[0:46:33-0:46:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/05/gregory-landua/#t=0:46:33):**  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  