### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2021-00-07)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  The extreme power of direct-to-consumer.  How one of the largest biodynamic farms in Europe is managing over 2000 hectares of vineyards,  
**[0:00:21-0:00:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:00:21):**  olives, pastures, grain and vegetables and processes everything before selling it directly  to their end consumer.  No middlemen, no shops, fully vertically integrated.  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture.  Investing as if the planet mattered.  
**[0:00:40-0:00:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:00:40):**  Podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  
**[0:01:00-0:01:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:01:00):**  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  In March last year we launched our membership community to make it easy for fans to support  our work and so many of you have joined as a member.  
**[0:01:19-0:01:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:01:19):**  We've launched different types of benefits, exclusive content, Q&A webinars with former  guests, ask me anything sessions plus so much more to come in the future.  For more information on the different tiers, benefits and how to become a member check  gumroad.com slash investing region egg or find the link below.  Thank you.  
**[0:01:38-0:01:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:01:38):**  So welcome to a new episode today with Annette Muller of La Villalla.  We're here outside as you can hear.  We're going to have some, I'm saying between brackets, background noise, but it's actually  not noise.  It's actually really nice to be on the farm, one of the largest biodynamic farms in Europe  
**[0:01:52-0:01:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:01:52):**  to hear more about the role of investing money and of course what has been built here over  so many years.  So welcome Annette.  Hello, nice to be here.  And to start with a personal question, how did you end up, first of all here we're in  
**[0:02:05-0:02:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:02:05):**  Italy in Tuscany close to Arezzo and you're not from here, but how did you end up working  so closely to the soil, so closely to agriculture and food?  So well, actually I moved here from Spain, from the Canary Islands and well it's a simple  reason for love.  My husband is Italian and that is the reason why we went back to Italy.  
**[0:02:27-0:02:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:02:27):**  Working for La Villalla, actually I love nature and for a long time I was working and was  doing social work.  I did meet the Lo Franco family.  I just loved what they were doing and decided to be part of it.  The Franco family, you mentioned them.  
**[0:02:44-0:02:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:02:44):**  What is La Villalla and if you had to describe it, which is tricky obviously in a few sentences,  but what would you say where we are here?  Hattoria La Villalla is a farm and wine estate.  It's a biodynamic, family owned and family run farm in the middle of Tuscany.  We're about 60 kilometers from Florence and about 10 kilometers from Arezzo.  
**[0:03:06-0:03:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:03:06):**  And it's really almost like a small, big world because we actually, I mean the way we farm  obviously in biodynamics we really have a whole circular economy in the sense that we  don't only have olive oil and wine, but we also produce vegetables.  We also have sheep for the pecorino, for the sheep's cheese.  And the other important thing is that we do everything ourselves in a sense.  
**[0:03:33-0:03:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:03:33):**  We grow everything and then we transform it and then we also sell it directly to the end  consumer.  And so we really always try to, while taking nature as an example really, to really try  and close the circle.  For example, we have sheep, which we obviously use for the milk, for the pecorino, but we  
**[0:03:53-0:03:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:03:53):**  also need manure for our compost.  We also have grains, so when we make our flowers, the remains, the brand that we don't use,  we actually add to their feed.  And always trying to look that we don't really produce any kind of waste.  And obviously doing it in a regenerative way.  
**[0:04:11-0:04:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:04:11):**  You mentioned a lot of interesting things there to unpack, but the direct selling I  think is an absolutely crucial bit here as well, apart from closing the loops.  And I think many people might have, or I hope some have visited Agritorismos, etc.  But this is a very different scale.  You're not a few hectares here and there making some cheeses and some wines and selling it  
**[0:04:31-0:04:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:04:31):**  in your, with all respect, farm shop.  This is a different, what are we talking about in terms of hectares and in terms of people?  We have almost 1,600 hectares.  Well, actually a little more, including the forest.  So we have almost 1,000 hectares just of forests.  
**[0:04:48-0:04:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:04:48):**  And we have over 300 hectares of wine.  We have 400 hectares of olive trees, almost 40,000 plus minus olive trees.  We have 800 hectares of fields for grains, vegetable patches, fruit.  And I guess the one important aspect of it, the way it started, I mean, Fatuia La Vialla  was founded, this is now the second generation of Los Francos that is running Fatuia La Vialla.  
**[0:05:15-0:05:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:05:15):**  But when they started out, it actually simply started not with the idea to become this huge  farm and wine estate, but it actually started as a personal project.  Their father, or their parents, Piero and Juliana Los Franco, wanted their children  over 40 years ago to have this idea of being close to nature.  And so they bought a rundown farmhouse here in the hills around Arezzo and decided to  
**[0:05:43-0:05:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:05:43):**  put it back into use with a small olive grove.  They wanted to make some olive oil, maybe a little wine, vegetable patch.  For mostly their own use.  For their own use.  And then what started as a hobby, they realized, oh, there's another field that has been abandoned.  
**[0:05:57-0:06:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:05:57):**  Oh, there's some sheep that nobody's taking care of.  And so slowly La Vialla grew.  And in the beginning, their idea was to sell the produce here in the area, but La Vialla  has always been organic.  They've never done anything else.  
**[0:06:12-0:06:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:06:12):**  Started in 1978.  And at the time, people were actually laughing at them here.  So what they also did is they had some farmhouses, which they slowly renovated.  And so people started coming to spend their vacation here.  And those people came from all over Europe, mostly from Germany at that time.  
**[0:06:30-0:06:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:06:30):**  And so obviously there was a little bit of pecorino and a little bit of olive oil that  the family was producing.  And so the guests started saying, oh, but this Chianti is so wonderful.  I would love to have that at my house.  And so they actually started packing up a small van, getting the addresses of people  
**[0:06:48-0:06:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:06:48):**  that were interested and drove over the Alps and to Germany in that case, and delivered  by hand everything that they had produced and people had ordered.  And so from there, it just organized itself in a way.  So the direct-to-consumer started literally by people visiting here for a holiday, staying  in one of the farmhouses that happened to be on the land that they happened to be literally  
**[0:07:13-0:07:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:07:13):**  renovating and the houses and then asking for stuff to be sent to them, things they  couldn't bring or when the harvest, probably they came in summer and then the wine harvest  was later.  So they wanted to have it shipped and almost accidentally.  Now we are at a different scale.  
**[0:07:28-0:07:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:07:28):**  You have distribution centers in both Germany, the Netherlands and the UK, but still a lot  of people come here and visit, but a lot of people order and never come here and visit.  So I mean the agriturismo where people can come and stay at the farm, we have 17 small  farmsteads with 33 units where people can actually stay and spend their vacation.  But obviously it's also a way for people to come visit.  
**[0:07:53-0:07:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:07:53):**  We have a transparent production area.  People can actually visit the fields, they can see the olive mill, they can see the wine  cellar, they can taste the wine, they can get a feeling for La Viola.  And it's still where the heart of Fattoria La Viola is, is actually that, you know, showing  people what we are doing and giving them an experience, which I think is really important.  
**[0:08:13-0:08:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:08:13):**  How many people work here now?  You mentioned the hectares, but it's a big company.  Yes, we have over 150.  And not just here.  It's not one estate.  
**[0:08:23-0:08:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:08:23):**  It's not just here around Arendt.  Also you are managing other pieces of land as well.  Yes, what we started doing, because we also have a small foundation, the Lou Franco Family  Foundation, and its main aim is actually to find abandoned land that isn't being used  and to then try and lease it, sometimes maybe buy it, and then convert it to biodynamic  
**[0:08:41-0:08:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:08:41):**  agriculture.  Because you see there's more demand for what you're making, or is it both getting abandoned  land back in production or you also see a growing demand of the produce?  Well, I think it's both in a way, it's really being able to restore the land.  I mean, we do a lot of land restoration and in part that also includes using farmland  
**[0:09:01-0:09:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:09:01):**  that is just sitting there.  And the other thing is obviously we also continue growing organically.  So slowly, you know, we also need more fields to live for our products.  What does the, because you said everybody thought they were crazy, which is something  we've heard many times on the podcast when people are changing farming practices, but  
**[0:09:20-0:09:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:09:20):**  it was back in the day when they went organic or they've been organic from the beginning.  So then did the step to biodynamic come naturally and what did the, let's say, the local environment  or the local community thought about that?  And then I would like to know what they think now.  So I mean, organic was given.  
**[0:09:36-0:09:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:09:36):**  I mean, I think the family always, I mean, Gianni Lou Franco, he's the oldest of the  three brothers, always said, I mean, why in my right mind would I want to poison my land  or the food or the fields where I grow the food that I want to eat?  So that would have never made any sense to them.  And then in the nineties, that's when they started with biodynamics and that was more  
**[0:09:57-0:10:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:09:57):**  of a conscious choice, you know, organic was natural and that's, they have a great grandmother,  Nonna Catarina, and she already, I mean, in Tuscany actually people were relatively poor.  So they went with what nature gave them.  And so they already started using the moon cycles in terms of pruning their trees and  so forth.  
**[0:10:19-0:10:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:10:19):**  And biodynamics was the choice because they realized that it gave them a certain amount  of regenerative practices that were helpful.  And also it put basically the farm kind of like a little universe where every aspect  of it, you know, the sum of each part is greater than each principle alone.  And that there was no market here for biodynamic products and the fact that you were already  
**[0:10:45-0:10:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:10:45):**  selling in Germany, the Netherlands and the UK and for people from outside, I think Germany  is still one of the main markets for organic and for biodynamic in, especially in Europe  and the market has continued to grow.  So the relationship you had there immediately understood biodynamic and certification, et  cetera.  
**[0:11:00-0:11:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:11:00):**  While here in Italy, that's been something of the last years, maybe that's...  Yes, especially because, well, in Italy people were much more skeptical, but then again,  I mean, there's a lot of skeptical people still that don't understand the way biodynamic  works and I think it's cool that one puts cow horns in the ground and they don't understand  that it's basically just a simple farming practice that dates back, you know, thousands  
**[0:11:23-0:11:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:11:23):**  of years.  It's not something new.  No, it's not something new.  And in a way, though, slowly people are understanding more and more and also through the foundation,  obviously we also tried to help our neighboring farmers to convert to first organic and then  
**[0:11:39-0:11:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:11:39):**  slowly also to biodynamic agriculture by supporting them with our knowledge, sometimes  also with a financial contribution.  And are you then buying of them as in, because that also completely changes your relationship  in the region as you are having a potential sales channel and of course...  Sometimes, yes.  
**[0:11:57-0:12:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:11:57):**  We call them like our friends, farming friends, so to speak.  And it also obviously say, okay, now we did all that, but what are we going to do with  the products?  So we have, for example, for some olive oils that come from farms that have been converted  to organic farming.  
**[0:12:13-0:12:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:12:13):**  Now what's the perception in the region here, especially the nearby ones, because it's not,  let's say, La Vialla in Italy is not very known because all of the sales goes toward  those over the Alps, but of course you employ more than 150 people and are an important  player here in, especially in agriculture and other.  So what's the, are you still the weirdos on the fields and the hippies or has that shifted  
**[0:12:36-0:12:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:12:36):**  a bit?  Well, it has shifted a little bit.  Because you're winning a lot of prizes for wine.  It's not, I mean, the quality, you must be doing something right, not just for the land,  et cetera, because you've been constantly winning prizes for wine, which is probably  
**[0:12:48-0:12:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:12:48):**  the sector where biodynamic has grown the most because it translates in many cases into  really, really good wine.  So there's something there that people start to see first, maybe compared to tomato sauce  or other.  Yeah, the perception has changed and there's actually more interest.  
**[0:13:02-0:13:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:13:02):**  And so we do get more requests, so also do maybe some seminars for other farmers.  But it also happens at a certain point, it becomes more difficult to scale it the way  where you get so many interesting projects, you do a lot of research, but then at a certain  point you also stop having the manpower to do everything that you are requesting.  You're becoming more than only your...  
**[0:13:24-0:13:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:13:24):**  Yeah, I mean, it's interesting because you really only can maintain what you can sustain.  And I think that goes for everything in a way.  I mean, just the way our food culture is globally right now, we are literally not being able  to maintain the lifestyle that we have.  And I think it's interesting and hopefully there's always more awareness and a shift  
**[0:13:45-0:13:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:13:45):**  in consciousness that people really, in terms of their consumer choices, do understand that  agriculture in terms of regenerative agriculture is really one of the most impactful positive  change that one can make in terms of the climate change.  Shifting gears a bit to the consumer obviously is buying from you.  What do you see or have you recommend?  
**[0:14:09-0:14:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:14:09):**  You mentioned the foundation, but in other ways, what's the role beyond our role as a  consumer, but also our role as an investor, which could be big or small.  What do you see as the role of money in, say, the next 40 years of La Viala, but also by  dynamic agriculture or the region of Tuscany and agriculture?  Are we in that phase of speeding up?  
**[0:14:27-0:14:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:14:27):**  And is there a role of finance as you have been very successful, but it hasn't always  been easy?  It's not that money is grown on trees here for 40 years.  Do you see a role for another role for investors instead of just buy our stuff or other stuff  from by dynamic farms and hope that it will be enough?  
**[0:14:42-0:14:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:14:42):**  Because that's what I used to say.  If we just all buy some slightly better food, then we'll be okay.  I come to see us.  That would definitely be the first step.  And then the second step, I think, is that yes, of course, it would be helpful if people  
**[0:14:54-0:15:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:14:54):**  would understand that there are projects that one can invest in that actually, in a way,  speed up the process of regenerating landscapes and regenerating food production and really  looking at soil.  I mean, soil is such an important part.  People always ask me or a lot of times ask me, Oh, why are you is your pasta so good?  
**[0:15:15-0:15:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:15:15):**  Well, it's simple.  It's the soil that our grains are grown on.  I mean, if the soil isn't very good, you will never get food that is delicious, nutritional  dense.  It's kind of like you reap what you sow.  
**[0:15:30-0:15:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:15:30):**  So the biodiversity and the fertility of the soil is one of our main focuses actually at  La Viala.  And do you have those discussions within the company as well?  Like, okay, how can we scale up faster or scale up or scale the impact?  I'm not saying we should endlessly grow La Viala and occupy all of Italy, but shifting  
**[0:15:52-0:15:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:15:52):**  from that mindset of or do you get those discussions or is it still very much focused?  Okay, we make an amazing product.  We keep growing organically in terms of we get other lands, maybe leased, maybe bought,  or is there starting to become okay, there is an opportunity to the next 10, 15 years  to really, because we need to, because we have 10, 15 years left.  
**[0:16:11-0:16:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:16:11):**  We're in another huge drought.  We're in floodings in Germany, the Netherlands and the UK or in Belgium.  So we are...  Yeah, we tend to lean more towards an organic growth because it becomes so difficult to  say, oh, let's get another piece of land.  
**[0:16:27-0:16:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:16:27):**  But yes, in a way, yes, of course, we're always interested in being able to invest in another  piece of land, invest in the naturalization of something that is completely degraded.  And in Tuscany there is a lot of land degraded, right?  Well, not a lot of land, but there is a lot of abandoned land still.  And now I think slowly there's another shift that people are going, well, it's kind of  
**[0:16:52-0:16:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:16:52):**  weird because there's a movement from younger people that are going back to the land, but  there's also an older generation that is saying, okay, we're done.  We don't want to do this anymore.  And so, yeah, for us it's always interesting to have opportunities.  And it's not so much focused only on Tuscany because one thing that we started doing or  
**[0:17:11-0:17:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:17:11):**  that actually the founders, Piero and Giuliana, did quite early on is to also diversify.  I mean, we have some vineyards in Sicily.  We have vineyards in the Maremma, which is still Tuscany, but still not here around Arezzo.  We also have vineyards in the Marche.  And the idea is really we have olive groves in Puglia.  
**[0:17:32-0:17:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:17:32):**  And the idea is really to see that we can also, you know, let's say there is a natural  catastrophe for a farmer and that's really horrible to not lose something immediately  and lose a whole harvest, but to be able to say, okay, but we still have...  The diversifying in terms of, yeah, one hailstorm can do a lot of damage, but not if you're  in Maremma, which is quite a long road from here and Puglia is even further.  
**[0:17:56-0:17:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:17:56):**  And so that's something that we are really interested in.  And what we have found though is really, and I don't know, I think you can feel it when  you're especially here in Paturia La Vialla.  I mean, after so many years, it just has a certain energy and a feel to it.  And what we've noticed, I mean, obviously not for the crops like grains or the tomatoes.  
**[0:18:15-0:18:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:18:15):**  Well, the tomatoes actually do, I mean, they taste so much better and actually they have  a higher brick and sugar and are more nutritionally dense.  We do measure that.  But for example, that our olive trees, olive groves and vineyards are so much more resilient.  And I think that is what is important.  
**[0:18:32-0:18:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:18:32):**  We've noticed that there's been more droughts, but our plants are actually able to deal better  with it.  Let's talk about measurement because you brought it up.  What do you measure?  Because you measure quite a bit.  
**[0:18:43-0:18:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:18:43):**  Yeah, we measure the soil fertility.  We do that yearly.  I mean, of all the different plots in order to really see whether...  What you measure is the biomass in the soil.  And what we've noticed that even though we are farming the land, it actually increases.  
**[0:19:02-0:19:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:19:02):**  Which already is not such an easy feat to pull off.  Then of course we do, we measure the nutrients in our food.  We actually, every batch we produce, we also do a complete chemical analysis in order to  ensure that nothing is in there, is contaminated since there's always, it's a big discussion  how you might be farming biodynamically, but actually things like glyphosate, they're actually  
**[0:19:30-0:19:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:19:30):**  spreading.  I mean, they're not just going into the water, but they also connect to the sand particles  and travel like thousands of miles.  So to ensure that whatever we produce and sell to the end consumer is actually completely  free of any kind of chemical residues.  
**[0:19:47-0:19:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:19:47):**  And you do that as well with some stuff you can buy in the supermarket, like the colleagues,  let's say, or the competitors.  Well, it's just we're curious.  Curiousity, yeah.  We do sometimes also test other producers not to be, just to see where they're at.  
**[0:20:02-0:20:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:20:02):**  And we found that a lot of times some of the organically produced wines or foodstuffs actually  are contaminated.  Which is very scary if you think about it.  And in terms of you measure soil health as well, you've been carbon negative or positive  like on the right side of the scale for a long time.  
**[0:20:20-0:20:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:20:20):**  Yeah, we've been actually measuring our carbon footprint since 2008.  Which is very early.  Yeah.  And then also slowly adapting because obviously the farm itself, the land itself, I mean,  we're carbon positive because we're able through biodynamic agriculture sequester the carbon  
**[0:20:35-0:20:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:20:35):**  into the soil.  However, obviously we do have the whole transportation.  Packaging.  Packaging, even though it's glass, but glass is actually quite a high impact in terms of  CO2 emissions.  
**[0:20:48-0:20:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:20:48):**  But so we do the balancing.  We're able to, some of those aspects we have to compensate.  But so starting last year, we're actually climate positive.  Yeah, and you had a, I remember visiting here quite a few years ago and you had a massive  solar panel.  
**[0:21:07-0:21:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:21:07):**  Yes.  And you had already up then, which for many years has been producing more than enough  electricity to cover a lot here.  So what would you say, because you have an amazing restaurant here or you have an amazing  place where people come and eat and for sure people come here on a holiday mindset with  
**[0:21:23-0:21:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:21:23):**  their holiday hat on, but they might work in banks or insurance companies or they might  invest in their own money or their foundation money.  What would you, if they ask, because they don't want to be bothered in their holidays,  a different atmosphere, what would you tell them if they ask, okay, what should I do?  I understand the soil is extremely important.  
**[0:21:39-0:21:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:21:39):**  I visited the farm, I ate the quality and I feel and I see the nutrients are different,  but now I want to become active.  What would your, obviously without giving investment advice, but what would your advice  be of next steps?  Should you become a farmer yourself?  
**[0:21:53-0:21:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:21:53):**  Should you buy something?  Where should they put their money to work?  I think there's already, there's quite a bit of funds that actually invest in regenerative  agriculture.  And I think something like that can be good.  
**[0:22:04-0:22:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:22:04):**  But of course I think investing like this, but also of course your consumer choices.  I mean, I think that's the most important thing because so many times people say, yeah,  but it's so expensive.  But I think there's a whole aspect of two cost accounting, which still isn't considered  very much that, you know, a regenerative agriculture or in our case, biodynamic agriculture, we  
**[0:22:26-0:22:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:22:26):**  do not only create goods that have a certain value, but we also by sequestering carbon  into the soil, we also create a commodity that is a benefit to society and that is never  measured or taken into account when you do an overall price range.  Are you looking into or already being compensated for these ecosystem services so far?  Because there hasn't been a market for it.  
**[0:22:54-0:22:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:22:54):**  Like the biodiversity, water and carbon are the first, but there are many others that  were early there, but there's a lot happening, which could, at least in the transition phase  of whatever the transition is, help with that gap in price of the very, very cheap.  Right now what we need is more like a shift in consciousness and really people understanding  much more the overall connectedness of how, you know, I mean, what the way we consume,  
**[0:23:20-0:23:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:23:20):**  what foods we consume, the way we live, and especially in agriculture, it can have such  a big impact.  You know, if you think about it, one third of all climate emissions, CO emissions actually  come from conventional agriculture.  I mean, one third, that's a high number.  
**[0:23:37-0:23:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:23:37):**  And if we could manage to shift that and really shift to regenerative agriculture, I mean,  that would already be so helpful and make a big impact in terms of the current climate  crisis.  So would it be helpful or do you see a lot of opportunity to, say, educate between brackets,  but the consumer on the bigger picture, the whole picture of buying certain types of food  
**[0:24:02-0:24:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:24:02):**  compared to others?  You have a role there, obviously, and you play that very well.  You communicate a lot on certain things, on quality, on taste, on carbon, etc.  Would it be helpful if many others, would there be more regenerative, let's say, regenerative  food brands that can actually bring the story from the soil to the table and hopefully get  
**[0:24:21-0:24:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:24:21):**  more consumers into it?  Or do you see there's enough demand that we need more supply of those products?  Oh, I think we first need to educate.  It's not our way to raise the finger and say, oh, we shouldn't be doing this, but kind of  leading by example.  
**[0:24:36-0:24:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:24:36):**  And so many times when people come here, and sometimes the people that are staying with  us, we have like an olive harvest.  We give people the opportunity to help us harvest for a couple of hours, and only a  couple of hours already people understand that a bottle of olive oil cannot cost three  euros if it's extra virgin, or in general, and that something has to be wrong with it.  
**[0:25:03-0:25:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:25:03):**  And just understand also the value of the land and how much effort and how much risk  and how much sweat it actually takes to produce a liter of olive oil or to produce a kilo  of tomatoes.  And I think people have gone, in a way, we have the ability to have such a banquet in  terms of food, but we've really lost the ability to relate to it, how it's grown and what it  
**[0:25:30-0:25:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:25:30):**  takes.  And I think that is an important piece.  And like have a little vegetable patch, you can even put it on your balcony, just to go  back to really having an experience of seeing something grow and understanding how much  it takes actually to bring it to fruition.  
**[0:25:48-0:25:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:25:48):**  Yeah, I think it's something we come back to very often, also for investors that read  the books and looked at the watch the documentaries, etc.  But go and visit a few farms, spend time help if that's possible.  In many cases, it's probably not very helpful because you do more damage.  Yeah, we get a lot of requests for people to say we would love to come and work for  
**[0:26:07-0:26:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:26:07):**  two weeks with you guys.  And that for us, it's been as much as we would love to do it.  It's just not helpful, you know, because you have to train them and then you have to follow  them kind of and work behind them.  But I think if I had a lot of money, I think that would be something that I would add to  
**[0:26:24-0:26:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:26:24):**  a farm to have that one aspect where people can really have that experience.  Without doing too much damage.  Yeah, well, you're still making high quality wines.  It's very important to pick the right grapes.  And it actually leads naturally to another question we always like to ask.  
**[0:26:39-0:26:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:26:39):**  So what if tomorrow morning, Annette, or this evening, even you're in charge of a large  investment fund, you have to invest it, but it could be evergreen, it could be extremely  long term, let's say a billion dollars or billion euros in Europe here.  What would be your priorities?  Well, how would you not to the exact year, obviously, but what would be the main sectors?  
**[0:26:58-0:27:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:26:58):**  A large portion, I would definitely invest into abandoned land and farming and the general  farming, but also set up a distribution in a way.  I would diversify also, I would probably also invest in other countries.  That part of it also be educational, and then definitely also some like some startup in  terms of technology.  
**[0:27:22-0:27:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:27:22):**  I think there's right now there's such an amazing amount of possibility in terms of  startup companies, blockchain technology and things like that with sensors where we're  really in terms of farming, it could be a really good intersection.  I don't think you can farm only by satellites or something like that, because I think it's  really important to have like the hands on and the feel for the soil that you're working  
**[0:27:51-0:27:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:27:51):**  for the place where you're at.  But I think there's some really great tools that are being developed.  And definitely also some money into renewable energies, because I think there's still a  lot to be done.  And in terms of technologies, something maybe you haven't seen yet being developed, what  
**[0:28:08-0:28:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:28:08):**  would be the highest on your list?  Like what would you wish to be there tomorrow that would be very helpful for La Viala?  Is it the nutrient density meter?  Or is it a soil health meter?  Or is it an electric tractor?  
**[0:28:24-0:28:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:28:24):**  Electric tractor would be great.  We're actually waiting on that one.  And some really being able to measure the nutritional density, the amount of nutrients,  in terms of watersheds.  Technologies like these that actually help us.  
**[0:28:40-0:28:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:28:40):**  I mean, we already invested a lot.  We now have really weather stations in all of the vineyards, because we found the weather  is so unpredictable that it's really helpful to be able to read all the data, even though  maybe they're just 500 meters apart.  It can go so quick that especially when we're right before harvest, if you see there's a  
**[0:29:00-0:29:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:29:00):**  big thunderstorm with possible hail, that you can actually go into the vineyard and  harvest it and say, okay, at least this one we saved.  So it's a lot of that observing which would help us make better decisions.  Because of course, if you manage a hectare, you can observe everything relatively easily,  even though a hectare is still quite large.  
**[0:29:19-0:29:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:29:19):**  But if you're managing 1,600, it becomes a whole different...  There are too many variables to start, but it never takes away from the actual observing  of the land and the feeling and touching because sensors go wrong very often.  But to be able to observe that.  And then a contrary question we always like to ask, definitely inspired by John Kemp.  
**[0:29:39-0:29:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:29:39):**  Where do you think differently in this sector when you talk to other biodynamic farmers  or when you go to conferences and events?  And where do you see that you're actually quite contrarian?  Well, I can't say that I'm quite contrarian.  What I find actually is there's so much information and there's so much new projects in terms  
**[0:29:58-0:30:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:29:58):**  of regenerative agriculture.  There's so many funds that are looking for projects.  And then a lot of times these streams don't go together because especially the pioneers  and for me, Fatoria La Viala is definitely a pioneering farm.  It's hard to bring people together at the table because sometimes I feel like, okay,  
**[0:30:17-0:30:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:30:17):**  I mean, there's so much information, there's so many incredible projects, but we still  haven't reached that critical mass.  If only we managed to bring it all together and be more cooperative and not so much because  people don't want to be cooperative, but because farming in itself takes away so much time  that it, as I mentioned before, there's so many projects we would love to do, but there's  
**[0:30:41-0:30:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:30:41):**  only 24 hours in a day.  At a certain point you have to simply say, okay, let's focus on this one and focus on  that one.  So yes, to bring it all together, to have an easier way to connecting and working together.  And do you see or do you think that the pioneers in the space, the original organic players  
**[0:31:02-0:31:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:31:02):**  and biodynamic players that in many cases have been there for 30, 40 years, do they  get enough attention in the regenerative movement and hype that we're going up now?  Actually, yeah, it's a funny, yeah.  I was thinking about that earlier, actually.  That, yeah, I mean, biodynamic farmers right now, because they don't call themselves in  
**[0:31:20-0:31:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:31:20):**  terms of doing regenerative agriculture, it almost seems that they don't play a role.  Yeah.  And I think that's kind of strange actually, because it is absolutely regenerative agriculture  and they kind of laid the groundwork.  So yeah, it would be good to integrate it more and also have an exchange of ideas and  
**[0:31:38-0:31:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:31:38):**  more collaboration.  And what could the biodynamic movement learn from the regenerative movement?  I mean, they're in the same movement.  You see, is it the communication or what is next for biodynamic?  What do you see?  
**[0:31:51-0:31:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:31:51):**  Well, I can't speak for the biodynamic association, but for me, yeah, no, I mean, in terms of  the biodynamic association, sometimes I think they do not communicate.  I mean, it's still, there's a certain amount of wording that maybe could be different and  still say the same thing and maybe make it more accessible to a broader audience.  But I also understand, I mean, if you've been working in this niche for so long, I think  
**[0:32:18-0:32:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:32:18):**  it also becomes a little bit more difficult to kind of branch out.  And in a way, Patria La Viola has shown that you can do that.  I mean, the way we do the communication and for that also, it's incredibly valuable to  have this value chain of being able to communicate directly with the end consumer and not have  like a distributor in between us.  
**[0:32:39-0:32:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:32:39):**  Because we always know when something is great, people will let us know.  But when we do something where they don't agree with, they will let us know as well.  And it's such an amazing, I mean, we really look at our clients as friends.  It's more an interchange of ideas and appreciation in a way.  I think that's just to underline you are selling everything directly.  
**[0:33:02-0:33:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:33:02):**  There's no distributor, no restaurants, nothing.  Everything goes straight to the end consumer at a scale that I don't think there's anything  else or at least I don't have anything else that is so pure and at that scale too and  in the biodynamic world.  And what is next for La Viola in terms of agriculture?  
**[0:33:20-0:33:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:33:20):**  What are you excited about?  Are you experimenting apart from the year waiting for an electric tractor?  But apart from that?  Yeah, we're also waiting on some sensors.  And just in a way, just continuing with what we're doing and really being able to continue  
**[0:33:35-0:33:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:33:35):**  to do what we love to do.  Do you do a lot of experiments in terms of agriculture practice?  Yes, we do.  We actually, I mean, in terms of the vineyards, we did a project where we actually took all  the different autochthon varieties out of the different vineyards and we put them, we  
**[0:33:50-0:33:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:33:50):**  cloned them in another vineyard and then actually vinified each one to kind of see in what way  we could integrate them into the winemaking.  Then obviously we have the whole, with our olive fruit water, there's a lot of research  being done there because it has 20 times more polyphenols than the actual olive oil.  And furthermore, I thought there's so many things we were doing.  
**[0:34:16-0:34:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:34:16):**  We are obviously always interested in, you know, in biodynamic agriculture, you're allowed  to use certain, for example, sulfite in the vineyards and obviously in a much, much, much  lower concentration than in organic or conventional agriculture.  But we are trying to reduce that even more.  So we've done some trials, again, with the olive fruit water that are very promising.  
**[0:34:41-0:34:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:34:41):**  But it's kind of hard.  I mean, we've been doing it for the past seven years and slowly also expanding the experimental  vineyard.  But because each year is slightly different in terms of the conditions, it's not so easy  to say, oh, this is the thing that's going to be the answer to it all.  
**[0:34:59-0:35:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:34:59):**  So yeah.  Like all agriculture research, the variables are so large that it's extremely difficult  to do.  And as a final question, if you could change one thing in agriculture and food, the whole  food system, if you want to, you have a magic wand, you have the power to change one thing  
**[0:35:14-0:35:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:35:14):**  and then ask for more like Aladdin, as some people did.  What would that be?  What would that one thing be?  Then all pesticides and synthetic chemicals overnight, overnight gone.  And I think, well, maybe that's a little harsh because I think I would cause havoc.  
**[0:35:30-0:35:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:35:30):**  But yeah, I mean, to convert really to regenerative agriculture in whatever shape and form.  Maybe by dynamic agriculture, maybe permaculture, maybe integrational, but yes, absolutely.  I think the world and the earth would benefit so much from that.  I think then there's a need for a lot of transition, which is very interesting because it will  be a massive.  
**[0:35:52-0:35:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:35:52):**  But the thing is, I mean, if we don't start now, if we continue to push it into the future,  I mean, I don't know.  I mean, I sometimes wonder, I mean, you know, I have children and I don't want my children  and children's children to live in a world where there is only desert around them.  And also in terms of the climate change, I mean, we're so close to not being able to  
**[0:36:11-0:36:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:36:11):**  even two degrees of rise in temperature are becoming more and more unlikely if we continue  to pass there on right now and we don't take some really drastic measures.  And so I think, you know, all time is now.  Getting diesel cars, burning all chemical inputs and get through the transition as soon  as possible.  
**[0:36:35-0:36:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:36:35):**  It will be rough, but maybe it's a necessary thing because the cost after will be only  bigger.  Like every day we wait, the bill just goes.  I mean, if you think about it, I mean, all the changes that are happening currently in  terms of the climate, I mean, that was predicted 20 years ago and nothing or very, very little  
**[0:36:51-0:36:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:36:51):**  changed next to nothing changed.  And so if we're going to wait another 20 years, I don't think we have a planet that you will  really want to live on.  It's the next 10, 15 years.  That are so decisive.  
**[0:37:04-0:37:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:37:04):**  I want to thank you so much for this interview.  I definitely will be checking in.  I think it's a very interesting moment in La Viala's history and the next 10, 15 years  will be also here.  It decides if Tuscany will recuperate a lot of the greater land and the rest of Italy  
**[0:37:19-0:37:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:37:19):**  as well because climate change is hitting hard or not and we'll be at the driver's  seat of that.  I'd love to.  If you found the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  
**[0:37:33-0:37:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:37:33):**  1.  Rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few seconds.  2.  Share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  
**[0:37:45-0:37:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:37:45):**  3.  If this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please join my membership  community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on cambrot.com slash investingregenegg or in the description  below.  
**[0:38:01-0:38:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:38:01):**  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food.  How to put money to work in regenerating soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while  doing it.  
**[0:38:23-0:38:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:38:23):**  So why are we doing this course?  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to put money  to work in regenerating soils and have been following this space since 2011 and recording  this podcast since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in this space over the last years?  
**[0:38:41-0:38:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:38:41):**  How have we built our decision making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  What questions should you ask?  What is happening in this space?  
**[0:38:51-0:38:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:38:51):**  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  
**[0:38:59-0:39:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:38:59):**  You, the soil builders and investors in this space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management consultants, etc.  People that are building soil at scale.  
**[0:39:19-0:39:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:39:19):**  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office or as private  individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through foundations,  institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  No.  
**[0:39:33-0:39:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:39:33):**  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  that among the listeners of this podcast we have people with very different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  
**[0:39:53-0:39:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:39:53):**  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes, plus PDF slides  so you don't have to ride along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  
**[0:40:09-0:40:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:40:09):**  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  
**[0:40:29-0:40:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:40:29):**  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  
**[0:40:43-0:40:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/annette-muller#t=0:40:43):**  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  