### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2021-00-12)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com slash course or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  With so many resources going into the plant-based meat replacements, the past decades we've  made very little progress to reduce the animal protein consumption.  
**[0:00:22-0:00:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:00:22):**  In Germany, meat replacements in 2020 were at 0.9%.  We have to reduce animal protein drastically, especially coming from non-region farms, which  are the vast majority.  To transition, we need to reduce the pressure by reducing factory farmed animals' protein  yesterday, not in 10 years with cultured meat or other super-processed soy burgers.  
**[0:00:42-0:00:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:00:42):**  So what do we do?  Meet the Blenditarian movement and why it could kickstart the transition to a much more  regenerative food system.  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture, investing as if  the planet mattered.  
**[0:00:56-0:01:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:00:56):**  A podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  
**[0:01:17-0:01:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:01:17):**  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small and consumers, start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  In March last year, we launched our membership community to make it easy for fans to support  our work.  
**[0:01:34-0:01:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:01:34):**  And so many of you have joined as a member.  We've launched different types of benefits, exclusive content, Q&A webinars with former  guests, Ask Me Anything sessions plus so much more to come in the future.  For more information on the different tiers, benefits and how to become a member, check  gumroad.com slash investing region egg or find the link below.  
**[0:01:53-0:01:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:01:53):**  Thank you.  Welcome to another episode today.  Rebel meat more than meat.  People want to eat less meat, but folks, meat is not for everyone and they have the ambition  to become the market maker for region beef and cultured fat.  
**[0:02:06-0:02:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:02:06):**  So welcome, Philippe.  Thank you very much for having us.  And start with a personal question.  How did you end up on meat on rebel meat, but also talking about regeneration and soil?  Yeah, that's a very funny question because I asked that myself a lot, especially given  
**[0:02:21-0:02:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:02:21):**  that I actually started a company in the food space before back in 2011.  I started the recipe box and nowadays well-known concept and yeah, it was a very tough business  of course, because the food industry is a tough industry.  And so when we actually sold that business to a competitor, I promised myself to never  go back into the food space.  
**[0:02:44-0:02:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:02:44):**  I was then for a couple of years in the digital world working for a venture capital firm,  but somehow the whole alternative protein space really managed to attract my attention  again and really fascinated me.  Do you remember that there was something, if there was something specific or was it  the headlines or was it the issues of the factory farm, the meat industry?  
**[0:03:05-0:03:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:03:05):**  Was there anything that triggered it specifically or was it a process over time?  Well, I think on the one hand it's because it touches so many different aspects.  Everything you mentioned, right?  The whole problem with factory farming, but also of course the huge ecological impacts,  the health impacts, et cetera.  
**[0:03:21-0:03:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:03:21):**  But what I think is fascinating actually about the food industry is that we can take decisions  three times a day and we can have so much impact very fast.  Like compare it to our energy system, like power generators, they run for a long time,  right?  You change maybe once every five or 10 years.  
**[0:03:43-0:03:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:03:43):**  Exactly right.  So the timelines are so long and decisions we make now may have an impact in 10, 15 years.  Whereas with the food system, actually the timelines are much, much shorter.  So if consumer demand changes, the food system will follow very fast actually.  And that is what is so fascinating about food.  
**[0:04:04-0:04:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:04:04):**  And also that as a startup, I think the food industry is actually a very good entry point  because you can actually make a dent, right?  You don't need very capital heavy assets.  You don't need years and years of R and D. So you can basically go very fast into the  market.  
**[0:04:24-0:04:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:04:24):**  And if you have the right timing, do your homework, then you can have an impact quite  fast actually.  But I mean, that's all true and well, but you were there at the VC and you could have  also just participated as a consumer and did different things, but where did it trigger  you and step over your old vow of never getting back into the food industry?  
**[0:04:43-0:04:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:04:43):**  What triggered you there to get into it as an entrepreneur again?  Because that's a very different mindset and role as maybe an activist or in your free  time leading less meat campaigns or getting involved as a consumer three times a day,  but getting involved again full time or your time and energy and your work life.  That's a different step, especially as you have the experience in the food space.  
**[0:05:04-0:05:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:05:04):**  Yeah, it's a very different step.  And I think on the one hand, it was just really this deep inner demand to be an entrepreneur,  to actually build something up and to really see your products in the world.  And I think that's something that it comes up and you just want to do it again.  And then I couldn't wait doing it again actually.  
**[0:05:27-0:05:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:05:27):**  And I think the second thing was I met my co-founder Cornelia.  She's a scientist and she actually looked also at the whole topic of alternative proteins  and we just challenged each other with different ideas.  And we looked at so many different things from plant-based meat replacements all the  way to cultivated meat.  
**[0:05:46-0:05:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:05:46):**  And we looked at many different angles, talked to a lot of people.  When we finally found this concept of blended meat or hybrid meat and we saw that there  is demand, for example, in the US there is the so-called blenditarian movement where  people gather around this idea.  That's the first time I heard that.  
**[0:06:04-0:06:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:06:04):**  Yeah.  That's an interesting one.  Yeah, definitely.  And I mean, that's kind of a movement, right?  And which basically is nonprofit and people gather around the idea.  
**[0:06:13-0:06:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:06:13):**  And we saw, okay, so there is something there, but nobody's actually building a product out  of it.  And what we think is also super important, a brand, because a brand is what tells the  story is what explains the concept to people in a time where everyone has very short attention  spans.  
**[0:06:32-0:06:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:06:32):**  That's why you need a brand for it.  And we just saw an opportunity on the one hand, the business opportunity, and on the  other hand, great opportunity to make impact now, especially given that we cannot wait  for cultivated meat to solve the problem because it's still years off.  And on the other hand, we have had plant-based replacements for many years already, and the  
**[0:06:57-0:07:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:06:57):**  problem is not solved.  So there's got to be another way to solve the problem of excessive meat production and  consumption.  And so we said, okay, you know, why not try this third way and give it a shot.  And so now everybody's very interested in what this movement and the blended Terrien  
**[0:07:15-0:07:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:07:15):**  is and of course, rebel meat.  So how would you explain to somebody that completely new to that way of thinking and  those products, et cetera, what you are doing at the moment?  So what rebel meat is doing is helping people to eat less, but better meat.  So we're building products with roughly 50% meat with the rest being wholesome, fully  
**[0:07:39-0:07:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:07:39):**  natural vegetables, mushrooms, et cetera.  And we built that into products like sausages, burger patties, or minced meat to basically  yeah give you the full meat experience with just half the meat.  And of course, the meat that goes into those products is the most sustainable available.  So in our case nowadays, it's organic meat from the region, but in the future, it might  
**[0:08:04-0:08:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:08:04):**  as well be that for some products, it will come from cultivated meat.  So basically our promise is to offer the customer the most sustainable meat available.  And obviously here regenerative meat comes into play and we're hoping to be the market  maker as in help build up the supply chain.  And once it's available, buy it of course, and use it in our products by only using half  
**[0:08:32-0:08:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:08:32):**  of it also make the final products more affordable to the final customer, right?  Because blending it with vegetables makes the per kilo price of course, more affordable  in the end.  And so why blended?  I mean, I understand for the price part.  
**[0:08:46-0:08:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:08:46):**  Why not just go for a hundred percent vegetable where there are many and then eat your regenerative  meat on the side.  What's the logic behind blending?  So there's many arguments for blending.  One is simply look at the numbers.  
**[0:09:00-0:09:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:09:00):**  There have been plant-based meat replacements for so many years.  So people nowadays have a very good selection available, but still the numbers of market  share of meat replacement products are so small that whereas the numbers of people saying  I want to eat less meat are actually quite high.  So people recognize the problems we have with meat overconsumption, but they're just not  
**[0:09:27-0:09:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:09:27):**  ready or at least a big proportion of people is just not ready to eat meat replacement  products on a regular basis.  They may be willing to try it.  They may be willing to eat it every now and then, but for the big part, they're not willing  to actually reduce their meat consumption.  
**[0:09:44-0:09:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:09:44):**  So that's why we think offering them a choice where they can actually have meat for their  lunch or dinner, but just a little bit less is a very good idea.  Plus what we can do because we don't have to imitate the taste of meat because there's  actually meat inside.  The flavor is just much better.  
**[0:10:02-0:10:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:10:02):**  Exactly.  Flavor is much closer to actual meat and without any artificial ingredients.  So we don't use any structured proteins.  We don't use any artificial flavors, anything like this.  We can just use wholesome.  
**[0:10:14-0:10:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:10:14):**  Are you suggesting that many of the other burgers, let's say the fully plant-based ones,  they don't have the easiest labels to read in many cases?  You know, everyone can have their own opinion about this, but clearly that is actually I  think a big point why plant-based meat replacement products are not seeing the market shares  they could have because some of them have just a very long ingredient lists.  
**[0:10:44-0:10:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:10:44):**  And do you see this as a transition?  You mentioned Market Maker for regenerative meat.  We'll talk about it in a second as well, but do you see that you're starting at 50% meat  and then slowly you're going down as people get used to it and you get better at using  40% meat and still have the bratwurst flavor?  
**[0:10:59-0:11:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:10:59):**  Or is that a goal as well to lead that transition to 10% or whatever the final number is?  Yeah, so I think going down in the ratio is definitely something that we're looking at  and we're doing projects actually to get there.  And that is also because when we look at, for example, cultivated meat also coming up,  we know that there's got to be a very low ratios in the final products if we want to  
**[0:11:25-0:11:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:11:25):**  make them affordable for the mass markets.  Where do you see the cultivated meat?  Like, do you see it on the horizon already?  I mean, I see a lot of headlines, but then when I talk to people deep into space, it's  always X years away and big production is, I don't know how many years away.  
**[0:11:41-0:11:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:11:41):**  Well, what do you see as you're much deeper in it, obviously, than I am?  Well, clearly it's, I would say closer than most people on the street would think, but  much further away than the headlines of the insiders would suggest.  So I think that's kind of the middle ground here.  We're talking five years.  
**[0:12:00-0:12:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:12:00):**  I mean, you mentioned culture at FET, like when are you even thinking or expecting to  have that in any kind of supermarket ready product?  It's really very hard to suggest because there's so many question marks.  I mean, we're here in Europe, so we don't even know what the regulators think about  this, how long the process is going to take here.  
**[0:12:21-0:12:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:12:21):**  And I think also what we don't have any clue about is consumer perception, right?  So I think clearly here in the bubble of alternative protein enthusiasts, there is a lot of obviously  enthusiasm about the whole concept, but I think if we have no idea how the actual consumer  perception is going to look like.  I know there are many studies, but studies is the one thing.  
**[0:12:44-0:12:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:12:44):**  And then once the products are out there on the shelves, this is going to be very different  thing.  But nevertheless, we want to prepare ourselves and we actually have a cooperation agreement  with a player in the industry and we're working on prototypes of using cultured fat in our  products, because yeah, we want to be able to fulfill that promise to our customers of  
**[0:13:07-0:13:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:13:07):**  the most sustainable meat products available.  Why would you go down that route where, I mean, you're doing two routes.  You're also doing the regenerative part.  Let's say there is a price competitive, regenerative or fat grown in a regenerative way with regenerative  practices available relatively soon, plus all the LCAs showing negative carbon, so positive  
**[0:13:29-0:13:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:13:29):**  environmental impact.  Would you then still go the cultured fat route or is that maybe even a different line of  products?  How are you thinking there?  Let's say in 10 years that the market, both market have developed a lot and it's much  
**[0:13:40-0:13:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:13:40):**  easier in Australia to get your hands on certified carbon negative beef products or meat products  in general.  And also the cultured fat has finally arrived.  What do you see there?  That's a very good question and to be honest, it's going to be a very hard question because  
**[0:13:56-0:13:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:13:56):**  how do you define most sustainable, right?  Is it only going to be CO2 emissions or do you also take animal suffering into account,  for example?  So I think we really have to take a decision based on the kind of meat.  So for example, it might be that we will decide for ourselves, okay, in beef, for example,  
**[0:14:15-0:14:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:14:15):**  we will go with the actual regenerative beef, but for example, with chicken, it's so much  more costly to raise them in a very humane way and that it might just be better to actually  go with cultured chicken fat.  So that's the kind of decisions we will have to take once we see what is available.  And yeah, then we will have to evaluate on many different levels, not just CO2 emissions.  
**[0:14:43-0:14:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:14:43):**  Yeah.  I understand you used to look at biodiversity, methane, water, animal welfare, obviously.  Exactly.  Those are quite complex LCAs.  Definitely.  
**[0:14:53-0:14:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:14:53):**  And so let's talk about the market maker role you potentially see yourself or you want to  be for the regenerative space.  How do you see that playing out and what needs to happen now?  You're buying organic meat at the moment in Austria.  You want to go beyond that.  
**[0:15:06-0:15:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:15:06):**  What is needed from the sector for you to be able to do that?  I understand price, but also in general, what do you need?  What kind of role would you like to play there?  Well, I mean, first of all, it's about availability, right?  So we couldn't buy regenerative beef today if we wanted and we want to, but there is  
**[0:15:26-0:15:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:15:26):**  no certification system available.  And even if there was a certification system available, I don't think the supply chain  would be there already.  So we would like to see that industry growing up and we are available basically to help,  for example, with basically just agreeing beforehand to buy certain amounts.  
**[0:15:48-0:15:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:15:48):**  And that's the kind of role we want to play, right?  And by also helping and to tell the story because regenerative agriculture is not a  concept that is well known to the masses.  And once we're building up our consumer brand and we also see our role to communicate how  the meat is produced, how the cattle is grown, etcetera, that's what we want to do.  
**[0:16:12-0:16:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:16:12):**  And so we can also basically command a higher price and also pay that higher price then  to the supply chain.  That's what we see as our role basically.  And as a brand developer and a brand person, what do you see in regenerative?  I'm asking because we see some signs and signals in the US where there's a bit more research  
**[0:16:30-0:16:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:16:30):**  around this and actual people are buying.  There seems to be a stronger interest to actually buy.  I mean, research, like you said before, is always tricky, but until people actually are  paying at some kind of casa, it's not worth anything.  But people seem to be going for, even if the story is quite complex around soil and regeneration  
**[0:16:47-0:16:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:16:47):**  and water and methane and all of that, but there seems to be an interest at least in  that story.  But of course we need the brands like you guys to explain and to share and to educate  and to inform and to nudge, etcetera.  What attracts you in that regeneration piece?  
**[0:17:01-0:17:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:17:01):**  And do you see that it's going to be very difficult or you actually say that actually  it's something that could relatively easily between brackets being connected to end consumers  in a supermarket that have in the frozen piece, maybe 10 seconds to choose, maybe even less.  How do you see that challenge or is it not such a challenge?  It's a big challenge.  
**[0:17:20-0:17:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:17:20):**  And the big challenge is that actually the advertisement of the meat industry work with  the pictures that we want to see in regenerative farming.  The problem is that they're not true.  The happy cow and happy farmer.  Exactly, exactly.  
**[0:17:35-0:17:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:17:35):**  So we have all those pictures out there right now and the consumers happily accept them  because it gives them inner peace somehow knowing of course that they're not true, but  just not asking too many questions.  So what we somehow have to get to is more transparency, more truthfulness, also in the  communication.  
**[0:18:01-0:18:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:18:01):**  We then can basically be in a better position to communicate the advantages of regenerative  agriculture and without too much finger pointing towards the problems.  Because you don't want to be the shady.  Exactly, exactly.  They are wrong.  
**[0:18:16-0:18:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:18:16):**  They are lying on their packaging.  We are not.  That's getting you into a lot of, I mean, probably some media.  So I think that's the tricky part.  In a sea of rosy messages, having probably even less rosy ones, but more truthful ones.  
**[0:18:34-0:18:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:18:34):**  So that's going to be the tricky part.  And the fact that you're making blended or hybrid products, probably you don't want to  call them hybrid products.  But is that also interesting because you're, I'm just completely guessing here, because  you're using potentially less interesting pieces of the animal or interesting pieces  
**[0:18:49-0:18:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:18:49):**  of that are maybe in the supply chain, not as wanted that you can actually use in sausages,  et cetera, or is that not the case and you'll be competing with the rest of the, competing  with the butcher that also wants to sell some regenerative raised beef?  No, that's actually a very important issue here because especially in regenerative beef,  I think generally in the more premium meat industry, we have the problem that only the  
**[0:19:16-0:19:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:19:16):**  premium parts are sold or most of the premium parts are sold.  So we have a problem with the not so premium parts.  And using them basically is a very important thing here.  And getting a premium for the non-premium parts.  Exactly.  
**[0:19:32-0:19:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:19:32):**  Exactly.  That's definitely something we're looking at with the whole nose to tail approach, et  cetera.  That's something we even in product development already think about and which is going to  be even more important in the future.  
**[0:19:48-0:19:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:19:48):**  And I think what you shouldn't say is, you know, you're basically trying to use a parts  that you can't sell in any other case.  Except dog food.  Yeah, yeah, exactly.  That's not a very good branding strategy.  
**[0:20:00-0:20:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:20:00):**  No, no, definitely not.  But what you definitely want to do is increase also the opportunities for the farmers and  for the butchers to, you know, basically earn more because that will also go towards, you  know, more sustainable supply chains in the end.  And so what's the current status of Rebel Meat?  
**[0:20:17-0:20:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:20:17):**  What kind of products do you have available for people in Austria at the moment and probably  beyond to buy?  And is it sold in restaurants?  And what's the current?  We're talking now summer 2021.  
**[0:20:28-0:20:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:20:28):**  Yeah.  So we basically have had a burger patty.  I think that's the number one use case, I guess, for alternative protein startups available  for a couple of months already, which is sold in select restaurants and in supermarkets  nationwide here in Austria.  
**[0:20:46-0:20:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:20:46):**  And we have just a couple of weeks ago, launched new products in the fresh aisle of the supermarkets,  which of course adds certain layers of complexity and planning.  But since the fresh aisle has much more sales velocity, it was a super important step for  us.  And we now, as mentioned, available with fresh products like sausages, mincemeat, and also  
**[0:21:10-0:21:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:21:10):**  the burger patty in a second version.  And they're all 100% organic from Austria.  And now the next step for us is really expanding to other European countries.  And the ultimate goal is really to have a European network also of producers to really  always make sure we're locally available with local meat, because we believe that's a very  
**[0:21:39-0:21:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:21:39):**  important aspect of a more sustainable and regenerative food system.  We are also 100% transparent.  So with the tracking code on our packaging, you can, on our website, see down to the farm  level where your meat comes from.  So these are all aspects that play into a more sustainable food system.  
**[0:22:00-0:22:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:22:00):**  And how has been the response?  Because at the end of the day, if consumers don't choose it in that fresh aisle or the  frozen one, compared to the one on the left or the right.  Yeah, it's all nice, but they should make a choice.  So how has been the response so far?  
**[0:22:13-0:22:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:22:13):**  Definitely.  And I'll be honest, the first response we get is in many times skepticism, right?  People say, well, that's not meat and it's not vegetables either.  You're in between two chairs.  Which means on the floor.  
**[0:22:27-0:22:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:22:27):**  Yeah, yeah, exactly.  The good thing though is that many times people think about it later on and then they think  about their own consumption patterns.  Actually once they try it, they usually say, well, you know what, after all, that's actually  pretty good idea.  
**[0:22:43-0:22:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:22:43):**  And I could actually see myself trying that and eating that more often.  And we actually have, it's still a small customer base because yeah, we're still beginning,  but many of the customers we have are very enthusiastic customers and they tell, you  know, I buy this every week.  And I think that's actually the good part that once we can get people to try it, in  
**[0:23:09-0:23:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:23:09):**  many cases we can make them enthusiastic consumers and repeat buyers.  And do you see that as a danger that people, as they see it's less impactful on the climate  that they will increase the quantity of times they eat it per week or something?  Have you seen any of that?  Like a rebound effect basically?  
**[0:23:28-0:23:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:23:28):**  Yeah, yeah, exactly.  We discussed that rebound effect more in terms of people that would have otherwise bought  a fully plant-based product.  So that was a concern we had in the beginning, but we don't have that concern anymore nowadays  because we think, yes, that might happen one or the other time, but we believe in much  
**[0:23:49-0:23:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:23:49):**  more of the cases.  We get people from the 100% beef to our product.  And you know, it's not only about quantities, it's also about, as you know, obviously how  the supply chain looks like.  And both if we get people away from beef that has eaten soy from the Amazonas region here  
**[0:24:09-0:24:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:24:09):**  in Austria, but also to be frank, in some cases, if we get people away from plant-based  meat replacement products that use protein powder that was shipped all over the world,  it's probably also better to have local beef, local organic beef.  So yeah, I think we don't ask ourselves that question anymore because we strongly believe  that in general, we decrease meat consumption.  
**[0:24:35-0:24:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:24:35):**  That's actually our mission to get meat consumption of the average European from 1.2 kilograms  a week down to 300 grams a week.  And we see our product as one tool, but we do many other things as well.  We have lots of fully veggie recipes on our website.  We have a lot of content on how to reduce your meat consumption in general, also without  
**[0:24:57-0:24:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:24:57):**  our products.  So we see it as a bigger movement and our products are one instrument to achieve that  goal.  And then the other part of the ingredient list, you've already mentioned some, let's  say colleagues or competitors have a very complex labels and are highly processed.  
**[0:25:12-0:25:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:25:12):**  And I think that's also what you'd mentioned, one of the issues or one of the things holding  back a lot of these products.  I didn't get the market share yet because worries about health, worries about processed  food, et cetera.  What are you, as you mentioned beef, I would like to do that locally as much as possible.  
**[0:25:27-0:25:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:25:27):**  What are your thoughts on the vegetable side?  You're buying organic obviously, but are you also making steps there in terms of farming  practices in terms of figuring out, okay, how are these vegetables grown instead of  only looking for the label?  Yeah, to be honest, not yet because just a lack of resources and it's a very complex  
**[0:25:47-0:25:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:25:47):**  issue of course.  So we're trusting the organic certification at this point and we will probably also focus  on the meat supply side because it probably has the bigger impact for the foreseeable  future.  But surely that's something that we also cannot forget and we have to at some point look more  
**[0:26:07-0:26:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:26:07):**  closely into this.  If only for availability, because if we grow the way we want to grow, we will have to work  more closely with the farmers and with distributors, et cetera, to make sure we have the quantities  we need.  And of course then we will also be in a position to bring forward what we would like to see  
**[0:26:27-0:26:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:26:27):**  in terms of farming practices.  Great.  And so to shift gears a bit, what would you, obviously without giving investment advice,  what would you tell smart investors that are listening?  Like there's a whole room of investors listening to this podcast that are very interested in  
**[0:26:41-0:26:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:26:41):**  bringing down global meat production and obviously making it much more sustainable and regenerative,  but also seeing all the headlines of all the money and attention and resources going into  a very small niche at the moment in the market.  What would you tell them if this is the first time they've heard about blended, et cetera?  Where should you, or would you advise them to look or to start looking, to start tasting,  
**[0:27:01-0:27:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:27:01):**  to start exploring more where maybe not so many others are going?  Yeah, I think, I mean, as you already mentioned, there's a lot of attention being given right  now to making meat go away.  And I think that's probably a little bit too much attention given that there is very little  attention given to making meat sustainable itself, because there are so many different  
**[0:27:25-0:27:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:27:25):**  angles on how to actually do that.  And the opportunity is so big given the market share of actual meat in the meat market, which  is over 99%.  Just to have an idea, like in Austria, what is the current, with all the attention we've  had about meat replacement, what is the current balance between plant-based versus maybe in  
**[0:27:46-0:27:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:27:46):**  burgers and mincemeat or whatever, if you want to pick something specific, but what's  the current ratio?  Yes, I can give you the number for Germany because I have the latest number for 2020  and it's 0.9% meat replacement market share in the meat market.  So that leaves 99% for, or more than 99% for actual meat.  
**[0:28:07-0:28:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:28:07):**  And I think trying to make that 99% more sustainable is such a big opportunity.  Because most of that is going to be factory farmed, like of that 99%.  Most of that is going to be factory farmed with a feed that is imported from mostly South  America.  And just reducing, I've read a study, just reducing meat consumption by 20% in the European  
**[0:28:31-0:28:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:28:31):**  Union could help us to completely abandon feed imports, which is crazy, right?  Because this has such a big impact on deforestation in the Amazon, et cetera, that this is really  a big issue.  And the European Union is still promoting meat consumption.  You still see the ads very well lobbied by the factory farmed beef industry or the meat  
**[0:28:53-0:28:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:28:53):**  industry.  You still see European Union paid for ads to push meat and it's quite staggering.  It's crazy and it's really hard to understand why this would be because actually everyone  could win if we could just transition the system to a more sustainable supply chain,  then that would mean that their business models are not basically endangered of going out  
**[0:29:16-0:29:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:29:16):**  of business, but they could actually probably earn more money in the long term if they manage  to shift the markets to less but better meat.  Because in this system of cheap meat, nobody wins.  And that's a really important message.  The input companies wins.  
**[0:29:35-0:29:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:29:35):**  Yeah, maybe, but it's not a very good industry to be in at whatever point in the value chain  you are, to be honest.  And so I think if we could transition the whole system towards more quality and less  quantity, everyone could win.  And that's such an important message.  
**[0:29:52-0:29:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:29:52):**  So you would definitely focus the attention of investors, but also entrepreneurs.  I think that we need a lot more people building things in the space, in general, in the regeneration  space and a lot more people thinking about transitions of different pieces of the value  chain.  If it's grain, if it's meat, which potentially has the highest upside in terms of environmental  
**[0:30:12-0:30:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:30:12):**  impact and the highest downside at the moment.  But we have to think about those transitions and getting there in 10, 15 years max.  So we need a lot more attention for that.  And if you could change one thing in the agriculture space, in the food space in general, you had  a magic wand and tomorrow morning, Filip had changed one thing.  
**[0:30:28-0:30:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:30:28):**  What would that be?  It's probably the same as in any other industry.  To make any industry more sustainable, you need to have externalities included into costs  and therefore ultimately into prices.  And that is true for any industry, but of course, in agriculture and food, it's the  
**[0:30:49-0:30:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:30:49):**  most burning issue probably.  And what we need to achieve that is transparency.  And I think if we had 100% transparency about where our feed is grown, how the animals are  held that are being turned into meat, then the food system would change tomorrow.  And that is the thing I would change with the magic wand.  
**[0:31:13-0:31:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:31:13):**  Because you think information and transparency is enough to get the consumer moving.  Because as you said before, most people know somewhere in the back or even in the front  of their mind what is happening.  They drive past these anonymous buildings with a big silo on the side and know that  pigs are being tortured in there.  
**[0:31:30-0:31:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:31:30):**  It's not that they see the videos, the shock videos coming from butchers, etc.  Is that enough or it needs to be much more in your face?  We also know smoking is bad.  Is that enough or does it need to be, okay, we include the externalities in the price  and it just shoots up or transitions over time to make a much fairer price for everyone?  
**[0:31:50-0:31:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:31:50):**  I mean, ultimately, of course, you're right, the prices need to reflect the realities because  otherwise it's just unfair for the unsustainable practices.  And there will always be people who don't care and who just go for the cheapest prices.  But I think there could also be a lot done if we just make the connection from knowing  something abstract to basically actually making the relationship to the actual product that  
**[0:32:16-0:32:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:32:16):**  is on the shelf that I'm buying right now.  And I think that is actually quite a thing because there are these stories of people  when they are in a restaurant and they can pick their own fish, for example, in a little  aquarium or they need to pick it themselves, they don't like to eat the fish anymore.  Whereas if they had just chosen it on the menu without seeing the actual fish, they  
**[0:32:38-0:32:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:32:38):**  would have just enjoyed it.  I think making that connection is probably already a big step, but I agree that ultimately  it needs to be reflected in the prices.  Yeah, we just saw a study coming out or put it in the show notes of the Rockefeller Foundation  in the US of the price they pay or the price of food in the US, which what people spend  
**[0:32:58-0:33:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:32:58):**  is about 1.1 trillion, I think a year.  And actually the price of the food system and agriculture system, which is three times  as much looking at health, looking at the environment.  And so basically the price tag is 3x compared to the actual price people pay and doesn't  reflect it at all.  
**[0:33:13-0:33:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:33:13):**  And of course we can ask a lot of questions about the methodology and the true price accounting  and true price foundation, but it really, if it's three times or two and a half or four  and a half, it doesn't really matter.  It's just way more than anybody ever imagined.  What is the cost we pay for the food we have, for the cheap quantity, as you said, over  
**[0:33:29-0:33:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:33:29):**  quality.  And that could actually go down though, because once people see that or would have to pay  the actual prices, then they would shift to cheaper options.  And that's exactly the shift we want to see.  And that is actually something that I would also urge people in the regenerative industry  
**[0:33:47-0:33:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:33:47):**  to not forget that just shifting to regenerative practices is super important, but it's probably  not enough.  We also still need to change consumption patterns.  We need to eat less meat in order to be able to produce all our meat in a regenerative  way.  
**[0:34:05-0:34:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:34:05):**  Similar to, you know, e-mobility, for example.  We cannot just keep on driving the way we drive and just do it with e-cars.  We also need to change our mobility patterns.  And that's something that needs to happen in the food industry as well.  Yeah.  
**[0:34:20-0:34:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:34:20):**  Otherwise we'll be stuck in the same traffic jam, but just with electric cars.  Exactly.  We need to leave the car for most of the trips we do and go to an e-bike or whatever other  smaller that's not moving a lot of aluminium and a lot of air around for no reason.  And the same with animal protein.  
**[0:34:37-0:34:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:34:37):**  It has to be reduced drastically, even though there are a lot of people, and I'm going to  get emails for sure, saying that the carrying capacity of a lot of land is a lot higher  and most of animal farmers and livestock farmers are understocked and overgrazed.  But there's a lot of meat that we need to replace first before we can start thinking  about, okay, what's the optimum level?  
**[0:34:54-0:34:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:34:54):**  And probably for health, we're eating too much anyway to begin with.  So there's a big discussion to have there.  What's the actual carrying capacity of the planet when you look at animal protein and  vegetables and all of that and nuts and obviously grain, which are a few of the biggest crops  there.  
**[0:35:11-0:35:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:35:11):**  And as you have a background in both entrepreneurship and investors, I always like to ask this question,  but I'm very curious about this one as well.  What would happen if you'd be in charge of a large investment fund, let's say a billion  euros?  So you start tomorrow investing, you no longer have your magic power as you can change one  
**[0:35:26-0:35:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:35:26):**  thing in the food system, but you can invest quite a lot of money and resources into it.  What would be your priorities?  What would you focus on as you have to invest and not grant?  Yeah, it's of course a very, very tricky question.  There's one thing that I'm thinking about actually, because I exchange notes of a lot  
**[0:35:43-0:35:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:35:43):**  of entrepreneurs that work on sustainable food products.  And we all have such a hard life because we're all so small.  And our lives would be much easier if we were in bigger organizations, of course, that brings  other problems, but it also brings scale and negotiation power, etc.  So I think there might be a case for sustainable food brands to be consolidated once they reach  
**[0:36:10-0:36:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:36:10):**  a certain level and have proven certain things and don't need the entrepreneurial power as  much anymore.  And basically, you know, in the buy and build case, build kind of a sustainable FMCG company  and therefore achieve economies of scale and negotiation power, etc.  Because I think the case of the Noni has shown how hard it is to change such a company from  
**[0:36:37-0:36:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:36:37):**  the inside.  So it might be worth a shot building such a big company from the outside by consolidating  sustainable food startups.  A bit like LiveKindly is doing on the vegan space.  Exactly.  
**[0:36:52-0:36:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:36:52):**  Raised a lot of money, huge media piece and keep buying basically beyond startups that  are getting to a certain scale.  And it's, I mean, we have to see the case is definitely not done yet, but it's an interesting  approach to see because yeah, you're in a space where you have to sell to supermarkets  which have a lot of buying power.  
**[0:37:10-0:37:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:37:10):**  So if you are able to move together, you're in a space where you work with processors  that have a lot of buying power and if you make a few burgers compared to a lot, of course,  there's a difference and with the suppliers, etc.  And has it been difficult for you and the others you've been sharing notes with to raise  capital in the space or there is a tension for say the more sustainable approaches instead  
**[0:37:31-0:37:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:37:31):**  of the vegan ones, we don't seem to have any issues raising, but has it been tricky for  you to raise capital or has it been relatively okay?  I think it depends on what's your reference point, right?  So you did it before.  Yeah.  
**[0:37:46-0:37:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:37:46):**  So I mean, of course I can reference it to the digital world and I think it's definitely  harder than in the digital world, which I can probably relate to because obviously in  terms of scalability and capital efficiency, there might be models in the digital world  that are easier to do, but I think the price or the reward you get is ultimately potentially  bigger than other models.  
**[0:38:11-0:38:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:38:11):**  So I think especially in the beginning, it's probably harder to raise pre-seed, etc. money,  but once you have shown some proof points that I think it's actually just as easy probably  with less multiples just given the gross margins of food businesses compared to digital businesses.  But yeah, I think it's just as good a business as any other business and probably even better  given the sustainable and regenerative thoughts behind it.  
**[0:38:41-0:38:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:38:41):**  And as a final question, where do you think, I mean, there are many points where we touch  on, but where do you think different compared to the space?  What do you believe to be true about regenerative ag and food that others don't?  This is definitely inspired by John Kempf.  So where are you contrarian in this movement beyond the points?  
**[0:38:56-0:39:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:38:56):**  Maybe it's one of the points you already mentioned, but where do you really see yourself different?  Yeah, I think that's actually the point discussed earlier.  It's probably the biggest one, right, that we cannot just transition everything to regenerative  and don't deal, but we really have to reduce and change our consumption patterns.  And that's why I actually believe that our product is not just a transition product.  
**[0:39:20-0:39:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:39:20):**  And once we are regenerative, then we can again eat just 100% beef hamburgers.  But that actually having these kind of blended meat products in one or the other form definitely  has a long term future because also in a regenerative setting, the vegetables will always have the  lower footprint compared to meat.  So probably, of course, in a regenerative sense, you would have to see this as a systemic  
**[0:39:46-0:39:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:39:46):**  system.  So it's probably hard again to divide one by the other.  But in any case, seed, not only CO2, but seed and in a total LCA point of view, yeah, we  will just have to reduce and get into a balanced system of animal based and plant based.  And therefore, the blended meat products will always be required.  
**[0:40:07-0:40:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:40:07):**  I want to thank you so much for your time today in a very, very busy period as you're  scaling and getting products into supermarkets and into places for taking out some time to  share about the blended area movement, which is going to go into the dictionary I hope  soon.  So thank you so much for your time today and good luck.  
**[0:40:25-0:40:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:40:25):**  Thank you very much.  It's been a pleasure and thank you for your important work in this field.  If you found the investing in regenerative agriculture and food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  
**[0:40:40-0:40:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:40:40):**  It's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you, and if you have the means, please  join my membership community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on cambro.com slash investing region egg or in the description  
**[0:41:04-0:41:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:41:04):**  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  
**[0:41:27-0:41:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:41:27):**  Why are we doing this course after a hundred interviews and more than a hundred hours of  audio asking the question how to put money to work in regenerating soils and I've been  following the space since 2011 and recording these podcasts since 2016 we thought it was  time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  
**[0:41:45-0:41:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:41:45):**  How have we built our decision making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees and what questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  
**[0:41:56-0:41:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:41:56):**  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space for whom is this course you the soil builders and investors  in the space, the soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund  managers, vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, act tech companies, farm  
**[0:42:14-0:42:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:42:14):**  to gut food companies, permaculture key line designers, holistic management consultants,  et cetera, et cetera.  People that are building soil at scale and the investors who are putting their own money  to work through their family office or as private individuals or people who are putting  other people's money to work through foundations, institutional capital banks, insurance companies,  
**[0:42:34-0:42:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:42:34):**  et cetera.  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  
**[0:42:45-0:42:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:42:45):**  that among the listeners of this podcast and we have people with very different means,  so I'm inviting you if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  
**[0:42:59-0:43:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:42:59):**  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides.  So you don't have to ride along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  
**[0:43:23-0:43:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:43:23):**  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  
**[0:43:39-0:43:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:43:39):**  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  
**[0:43:54-0:43:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/philipp-stangl#t=0:43:54):**  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  