### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2021-00-02)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com slash course or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  Provenance is absolutely key and time kills food.  Plus soil amendments are the off-ramps from extractive agriculture and why we need to  
**[0:00:22-0:00:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:00:22):**  be able to go long on investments.  And we talk a lot about carbon, but water is actually everything.  And why we don't focus enough on regenerative agriculture.  This and so much more we cover in this interview with a co-founder of Trailhead Capital, Tripp.  So get a cup of tea.  
**[0:00:37-0:00:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:00:37):**  It's over an hour, but I think very enjoyable.  And so enjoy.  Welcome to another episode of investing in regenerative agriculture, investing as if  the planet mattered.  Podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  
**[0:00:54-0:01:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:00:54):**  to learn more on how to put our money to work, to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  
**[0:01:13-0:01:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:01:13):**  And it's time that we as investors, big and small and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  In March last year, we launched our membership community to make it easy for fans to support  our work.  And so many of you have joined as a member.  
**[0:01:29-0:01:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:01:29):**  We've launched different types of benefits, exclusive content, Q and A webinars with former  guests, ask me anything sessions plus so much more to come in the future.  For more information on the different tiers, benefits and how to become a member, check  gumroad.com slash investing region egg or find the link below.  Thank you.  
**[0:01:49-0:01:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:01:49):**  Welcome to another interview today with the co-founder of Trailhead Capital, Trip Wohl.  Welcome Trip.  Hi Koon, really a pleasure to be here.  Thank you.  To start with a personal question, which I always love to ask, how did you end up building  
**[0:02:02-0:02:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:02:02):**  soil, regenerating soil, focusing your professional and probably also your private time pretty  much on regeneration?  Yeah, you know, it's been a circuitous journey, but I really,  What does circuitous mean?  I think of wandering, a long wandering one, but I don't know the word.  
**[0:02:16-0:02:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:02:16):**  A long wandering journey with lots of tangents.  And so I come from a timber and cattle lineage and a host of entrepreneurs.  And so I've really always,  That makes a lot of sense what you're doing.  It all came back, but it's like I said, it hopefully it'll be coherent by the end, but  
**[0:02:36-0:02:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:02:36):**  so I've always loved, I've always loved being outside, outdoors and had a real place in  my heart for animals and, and just really wanted that to be a part of my world.  So I've always been involved in clubs and nonprofits that were in and around that.  And I, for the last 15 years have been chairman and president of the Colorado, Colorado wildlife  foundation.  
**[0:02:57-0:03:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:02:57):**  And then I am on the, the governor's Western States water conservation partnership.  So I have long tried to make a difference in flora, fauna, and the way that they interacted  from a philanthropic perspective and really decided that that wasn't catalytic enough.  And so in my professional life, I was at a large asset manager called Alliance Bernstein,  where I worked on alternative assets, private wealth and ESG.  
**[0:03:27-0:03:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:03:27):**  And I really wanted to be able to bring those financial chops, if you will, of, of investing  in and across private and public platforms to bear in what I saw was a really sort of  glacial and slow path to regeneration through the nonprofits.  I still champion that work and I'm still involved deeply in water really as a focus in animals.  But I really wanted to bring my capital capabilities into a space where I thought it needed additional  
**[0:03:58-0:03:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:03:58):**  resources.  And so that was really the genesis of Trailhead was pulling that together and seeing a piece  of the spectrum where entrepreneurs and science were really at the vanguard.  And we wanted to be catalytic and be able to put capital with those innovations, with  those ideas and steward them to build this asset class.  
**[0:04:19-0:04:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:04:19):**  And so really that's with my partners, Mark Lewis and Bobby Pelz and Pete Oberle, what  we've endeavored to do.  Do you remember if there was a specific point or when you were bitten by the regeneration  bug, or because some people can point at a very specific, I don't know, movie they saw  or a book they read or just because they grew up on a farm and they saw what was possible  
**[0:04:39-0:04:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:04:39):**  or was it a slow process in your case?  Was it something, was it a meeting, a coffee with somebody?  What was the trigger when you couldn't let go anywhere?  Because you could have focused on sustainable ag and food, you could have focused on renewable  energy, you could have focused on mobility.  
**[0:04:54-0:04:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:04:54):**  I mean, there are a lot of Catholic places where you could have spent your time and your  knowledge in terms of the financial world.  But you decided to focus it on a very specific part of the food sector.  So I think I'll go back a little bit to my, what was a philosophy degree at CU.  And I did my graduate work also in axiology and phenomenology.  
**[0:05:16-0:05:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:05:16):**  And so I really, you know, like my partners began reading and really being influenced  by you know, the Herman Daly's, the David Montgomery's, the Paul Greenberg's and then  the Rudolf Steiner's for me.  So as a philosophy major, I really sort of, you know, delve deep into Steinerian philosophy,  anthroposophic medicine, certainly biodynamics.  
**[0:05:39-0:05:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:05:39):**  And then, you know, the pedagogical format that he put together called Waldorf schools,  which all my children went to.  And so it really began to be ingratiated and thinking about how, you know, I wanted to  really sort of deconstruct the industrial food complex as we knew it.  And so actually my straight path there Coon was that when I left Alliance Bernstein, I  
**[0:06:04-0:06:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:06:04):**  bought an independent grocery chain, organic grocery chain.  That was one of the first movers in the space in the early seventies.  And because of the whole foods IPO, they had to divest some of their brands and we bought  this brand and reopened it.  And so I really started there by trying to procure locally, know all of my suppliers.  
**[0:06:27-0:06:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:06:27):**  You know, I really was getting out of trying to have an intermediary, like a UNFI or a  Cisco.  I wanted to have a community and a tapestry that was with our local water, with our local  producers, with our local ranchers.  And so we opened up the back of the store and let anybody who had the provenance and  
**[0:06:49-0:06:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:06:49):**  was doing the right things and their organic papers, or if we knew what they were doing,  we would go to their farm and if they were doing biodynamic practices, but not certified,  we put it on the shelf.  And so that was really my first foray into understanding how we needed to have a supply  chain deconstruction and really where the value and the margin expansion of being able  
**[0:07:12-0:07:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:07:12):**  to take out those middlemen could be incredibly accretive to two groups.  One were the stewards of the land who, and I told you from my history, I had seen, you  know, take 50 cents out of every dollar to be able to have a living wage to do this work  on the land in the 1950s to what is, you know, under 10 cents today and a very hard slogged  business of which no second and third generation wants to be a part of.  
**[0:07:38-0:07:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:07:38):**  And so, you know, for me, we really want to champion those folks, men and women who stay  on the land and steward the land and the right methodologies.  And so let's let there be a living wage and premiums on that side, cost reductions and  new income streams.  On the other side, let's let nutrient dense, fresh local food be accessible for everybody,  
**[0:08:00-0:08:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:08:00):**  right?  Not just the affluent or the 1%.  And I think for me, the sort of epiphany of regeneration was thinking about that circularity  and thinking about how the interconnectivity of our food supply, of our planetary and human  health really all focused right around this medium called soil.  
**[0:08:20-0:08:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:08:20):**  And so for me, that became incredibly profound.  And we started looking at how can we create vertical farms, regenerative farms that we  could then supply the grocery chains so that we could be using our bio photonic principles  of sun and soil to create biodiverse local supply chain, you know, that really started  to solve for the human maladies and the environmental maladies that we know persist.  
**[0:08:49-0:08:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:08:49):**  So that was sort of this part of the circle.  Just to unpack that piece a bit, I'm super curious.  Why did you choose to buy a food chain after you left at that company?  Because you could have gotten into any other direction.  And yes, you care deeply about the water and deeply about the animals, but that not necessarily  
**[0:09:06-0:09:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:09:06):**  leads always to buying a food chain out of whole foods.  Like what was that trigger into that focus on food and ag instead of land, which could  have been, you could set up an NGO, you could join an NGO.  You could have, I don't know, set up a national park, do a lot of other things to protect  water and animals.  
**[0:09:22-0:09:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:09:22):**  What led you into that very active role of matching demand and supply through the backend  of a supermarket and the front end and the shelves?  No, it's a great connecting question because I had a baseline of naturalist sort of environmentalist  or you could have gone into education with Waldorf and rolled that out over the US.  And I mean, there was a lot of work to do in that intro you mentioned.  
**[0:09:46-0:09:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:09:46):**  So I really what it was in it, my entry point is very similar to some other people's.  I was an athlete and so I care deeply.  I was a cyclist, still am and a skier and care deeply about my performance.  And that then coincided with the birth of my children.  And those two things were really pretty instrumental in the way I decided to think about the food  
**[0:10:07-0:10:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:10:07):**  system and what I was putting in my body.  And once I started thinking about that, I couldn't stop thinking about the full provenance  and where it came from.  And so that path is, you know, it's fairly circular.  And so that's why I said where I can actually make a difference is in the consumer demand  
**[0:10:27-0:10:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:10:27):**  side and by offering products and helping educate the consumer through the food about,  you know, what they're doing to the land and what they're doing to the stewards of the  land.  And really for me, it's about the ethics and the axiology of your dollars, your spending  and your investment, which we can talk about a little bit later.  
**[0:10:45-0:10:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:10:45):**  And so how is that chain?  Is it still around?  I haven't picked up the, I should have done my homework on this.  How has that process been since like, when was the IPO of Whole Foods Xtremor?  When did you buy that asset and how long have you been involved in that before or even still  
**[0:10:58-0:11:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:10:58):**  when you were setting up Trailhead?  Yes, so sadly went the way of the dodo during the COVID crisis.  I had left as CEO previously and so sort of the next management team wound it down.  But it was an amazing journey that I was involved with because this was a brand that was actually  in Boulder and that I grew up eating from.  
**[0:11:22-0:11:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:11:22):**  My parents took me in Denver and Boulder in the late 70s and 80s to these stores.  And it was a very unique experience.  And so it was super differentiated from anything else.  And that's really what I wanted to try to bring back because everything had been so  processed packaged and just truncated from a diversity standpoint.  
**[0:11:42-0:11:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:11:42):**  It's a theme you're going to hear everywhere, but I wanted to give consumers more choice  with good stuff and allow them to understand the nutrient density and then the provenance  of where this stuff came from.  And unfortunately COVID, even with slightly bigger margins and with more space didn't,  even though supermarkets went, I mean, the sales went through the roof, right?  
**[0:12:02-0:12:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:12:02):**  I mean, people started lining up, et cetera.  What triggered then simply they just didn't make it?  Well, it was a really, it was a couple of things.  So we were really based in a college town.  And so CU is a huge demographic base for us.  
**[0:12:17-0:12:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:12:17):**  And obviously all of the schools went dark.  So that was very difficult for us.  And then we didn't have sort of the omni-channel strategy that I was trying to build.  We just hadn't gotten there yet.  So we weren't able to deliver and meet people where they were.  
**[0:12:32-0:12:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:12:32):**  And we had been running on procuring regenerative and beyond organic products sort of exclusively.  And so our margins and our volumes were very different than the Kroger's of the world that  just do large, large numbers.  And so it was just, it was a hard place to be.  I still hold out that there is a lot of great retail like Erewhon that is out there making  
**[0:12:57-0:13:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:12:57):**  a real difference in differentiating that food supply, because I think the consumers  are starting to demand it with their education.  So let's switch gears a bit to Trailhead.  What we obviously, and I will link it in the description below, interviewed Mark Lewis,  your co-founder, one of your co-founders.  
**[0:13:13-0:13:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:13:13):**  How would you describe for anybody that didn't listen to that interview, how would you describe  Trailhead and your role specifically?  Yeah.  So I mean, Trailhead is a venture capital firm that is really trying to break the mold  of venture capital by being a B Corp, by impact reporting, both socially and environmentally,  
**[0:13:35-0:13:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:13:35):**  and by changing the horizon of patient capital with which we can wrap our entrepreneurs with  a continuum that's on their timeframe, not an artificial market timeframe.  So those are three pretty different pillars in VC.  And so we really started Trailhead to be in a place in the early spectrum where the ideas  and the innovations, the institutions and academia are on the forefront of science,  
**[0:14:03-0:14:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:14:03):**  of supply chain, of waste reduction, of transparency and traceability.  And there's just no institutional capital really from a large asset class perspective  moving into those regenerative companies.  And so we really want to build that path and that architecture to make this an institutionally  investable class.  
**[0:14:25-0:14:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:14:25):**  And when you talk about that third pillar of time, does that mean you run on a different  schedule, like not the 10 plus two or the 10 plus one in terms of VC funds, because  that's often one of the critiques is they have a few years to invest, then they don't  do anything for a while.  And of course they add a lot of other companies and then they need to divest quite forcefully  
**[0:14:48-0:14:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:14:48):**  at some point, usually not at the time that makes sense for the company or I mean, you  need a lot of luck to, for the, an exit that makes sense both for the company and the VC  fund, which creates a lot of tension.  Have you figured out a way to get around that, that time horizon, which comes back in and  back again in the podcast as being too short or not enough, although we might have 10 years  
**[0:15:07-0:15:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:15:07):**  to fix a lot of these things, which is a counter argument, like let's get going as soon as  possible.  What has happened there in terms in Trailhead Capital?  I mean, for sure you had a lot of discussions on that.  Well, and we, you know, we're very attuned to the natural cycles, you know, which aren't  
**[0:15:22-0:15:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:15:22):**  artificially in decade blocks.  And so I think, you know, what we've built is yes, our LPs understand that we have extension  capabilities to the fund.  So it is a typical 10 year life cycle to the fund, but we've built in extensions and then  the ability to roll into what will be fun too, so that we're not forced into making  
**[0:15:42-0:15:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:15:42):**  those decisions.  The interesting thing I will tell you about this particular time and place Coon is that  we're actually fighting the opposite.  We actually have an offer in a portfolio company that we've been invested in for less than  a year that's on the table that we're a little bit hesitant to.  
**[0:15:58-0:16:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:15:58):**  We're not the majority party, but it's a little quick for us.  We really would like to mentor and steward and be more active in bringing value to that  ecosystem.  And it looks like because of sort of the froth, because of the transaction, you know, velocity  in the space all of a sudden that we may have to exit.  
**[0:16:15-0:16:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:16:15):**  And that's a positive thing for the LPs and is a fiduciary, but we don't just think about  financial returns.  Yeah, that's an interesting issue and a luxury problem obviously to have.  And I think we're going to have exactly the same discussion with a few investors and a  few funds over the last weeks.  
**[0:16:32-0:16:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:16:32):**  Like, yes, we need to innovate on the time horizon and maybe might be a holding company,  might be an evergreen fund, et cetera.  Many investors might not be ready for that.  I don't know what's your experience there.  You might raise a lot less with a lot more trouble.  
**[0:16:46-0:16:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:16:46):**  And at the same time, which might be a good battle to have, like spend two, three years  on the road, teaching everybody about evergreen capital and raising 15 million or 10 million  and put that to work or raise significantly more now and spend the next 10 years or next  few years investing, which is what we need to kick start a lot of these companies and  then figure out after, okay, what does the second fund look like and how does that continuum  
**[0:17:09-0:17:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:17:09):**  will grow?  And it's a bit like planting a lot of trees in an agro grocery system and hoping that  somebody will figure out and like a harvesting machine along the way as they are growing.  So it's a bit of a risky bet, but at the same time, I really understand the approach because  you cannot innovate on too many things at the same time for, especially for hesitant  
**[0:17:27-0:17:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:17:27):**  investors to get on board.  Well and I think you've heard my partner, Mark talk about, you know, the way that we  would like to innovate in the structure again, to be founder friendly.  I mean, we really want to be able to wrap the entrepreneurial verve and support that  all the way through the continuum.  
**[0:17:46-0:17:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:17:46):**  And that doesn't just mean, you know, our investable piece at that time, it means supporting  them with the ecosystem and all of our network.  And so I think we will continue to, you know, we're building a set of thematic funds and,  you know, we see this as our life's work going forward, but we will, I think, begin to iterate  on the format and the structure to your point, as we get to a point where we have the architecture  
**[0:18:12-0:18:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:18:12):**  to fill out.  I think first we need to get money in the space, into the ideas and grow these seeds  into A's and B's and C's to where we have an ecosystem.  And then we can get creative once we have the institutions involved in the space, we  can start to think about what those structures look like.  
**[0:18:29-0:18:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:18:29):**  And to your point, because playing the advocate, the devil's advocate here, everybody says  they're founder friendly.  How does that show in this case with you and specifically, as you mentioned, the space  is getting crowdier and hotter in certain places.  And you might need to compete with other funds that are not specifically focused on Regen  
**[0:18:47-0:18:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:18:47):**  but are starting to get interested for instance.  So how do you make sure you get a seat at the table, not only in the round, but then  probably one of the things you can bring is not only the money, but that founder friendliness,  the ecosystem, et cetera, what is your edge there than more than just money, because it's  getting hotter in this space and it is getting hotter, which is great.  
**[0:19:05-0:19:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:19:05):**  But also challenging for groups like yourself.  Well, and you know, I think we feel actually incredibly collaborative.  I mean, coming from the asset management world, there's a lot of sharp elbows and this is  really a sort of rising tide lifts all boats.  So we love collaborating with all of the sort of luminaries that are out there.  
**[0:19:21-0:19:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:19:21):**  And the lowering tide shows that who's been swimming naked, right?  That's the buffet quote.  And to your point, I would say, you know, we think we do have some differentiated edge  in sort of our deep regenerative knowledge.  And we've been students of this movement for a very long time on the front end, and we've  
**[0:19:39-0:19:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:19:39):**  been investing in and thinking about it.  And so we have pretty deep networks.  So one of the things that we bring is the ability to bring our network and we can articulate  that in terms of customers.  So you know, you've heard about one of our investments called Telesense.  
**[0:19:56-0:20:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:19:56):**  It's a hardware orb, predictive analytics for perishability, and it reduces waste about  30% in barges and grain silos.  It also reduces workers comp because there's an HSE component.  You don't have humans having to take core samples, which they get hurt frequently.  But when we went into that deal, we were able to bring their three top customers now into  
**[0:20:19-0:20:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:20:19):**  that equation and, you know, receive a step up in the next round.  And so, you know, there's a very articulatable way of how we bring value from our network.  Beyond the cash.  Beyond the cash, I would say also we're all founders.  So you know, Mark Lewis has founded and run.  
**[0:20:36-0:20:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:20:36):**  Pete has founded and run.  I have founded and run and we've all exited.  And so, you know, we've been operators and entrepreneurs as well as investors.  And so I think we have a unique lens.  I would really implore people to talk to our portfolio CEOs like a Megan Rowe at Whiteleaf  
**[0:20:51-0:20:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:20:51):**  to say, this is what Trailhead has been able to do for us because I don't like patting  ourselves on the back, but I do think we have an arsenal of tools to really be supportive.  And we try to be active in a really positive way.  And sometimes we'll have some, an entrepreneur tell us, hang on, we're just not there yet.  Right.  
**[0:21:10-0:21:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:21:10):**  As we try to push, push, push for growth and new ideas.  And so we try to be really collaborative.  And I have my CEOs that they have my cell phone number, they'll call me on a weekend  and I'll take the call and, you know, we'll talk something out.  And that's still possible, obviously, as you're relatively small in a good way.  
**[0:21:25-0:21:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:21:25):**  I mean, that might change.  And if you're at 50 companies with all your cell phone number, it becomes a bit more tricky.  But for the time being, that's a non-scalable thing to do, which makes a lot of sense.  So what has happened since we talked with Mark in June, what has happened over the summer  that Whiteleaf deal you just mentioned, Wishweed, by the way, also in interview just happened,  
**[0:21:44-0:21:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:21:44):**  I think at that time was just announced.  So how has been the summer and what has kept you busy?  We're now talking in October, by the way, just for people keeping track.  It's been a great summer.  It's been incredibly frenetic.  
**[0:21:54-0:22:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:21:54):**  Again, you know, it's been unique for us in the sense that we've made now seven investments.  We have about five more we're close to that are in the sort of investment committee track.  So I think we'll end the year somewhere around 12 to 15 investments, which is a really good  clip.  And what we set out to do, a deal, a partner per quarter was a pace we thought we could  
**[0:22:19-0:22:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:22:19):**  maintain with the sort of rigor of our underwriting and due diligence that we want to have as  fiduciaries.  So we've made some incredible commitments.  We're looking in new and exciting areas that really add on to the portfolio construction  and the thematic that we've talked about in and around soil and our sort of three verticals,  
**[0:22:40-0:22:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:22:40):**  which we can talk about a little bit.  But certainly, you know, beyond organic CPG is continues to be in our wheelhouse.  So Whiteleaf is a great example.  CPG just for anybody.  What does it stand for?  
**[0:22:53-0:22:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:22:53):**  Consumer packaged goods.  Forgive me.  And so we think of Whiteleaf as a, you know, it's a biodynamic demeter certified, you know,  Megan and team just won a next award at Expo East as they've launched some new skews in  there.  
**[0:23:07-0:23:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:23:07):**  Those new skews are outside of just baby food.  So it really is a true provisions brand.  And that's really exciting because it really kicks into a deeper soil thesis, which I'd  like to go back to.  And it really talks about the heavy metal contaminants, the nano particulate plastic  
**[0:23:24-0:23:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:23:24):**  matter, obviously all of the agrochemical stuff.  You know, it's not in Whiteleaf.  It's in every other baby food because we in the U.S. don't test our food for heavy metals.  So we'll get back to that.  It's a big theme for us in soil and for education in the consumer packaged goods.  
**[0:23:41-0:23:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:23:41):**  So you'll see some beyond organic regenerative CPG in our future.  We're excited about that.  And do you see there the consumer demand being there?  That often talked about people are starting to choose different things in the supermarket.  I had a discussion with Nestle over that, I think just before the summer, they started  
**[0:23:59-0:24:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:23:59):**  to be very interested in the space because they see people switch or at least they see  that in there.  They see people checking ingredients, etc.  Do you see that as well?  Do you see this finally the consumer getting out of that few percent that really go to  
**[0:24:12-0:24:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:24:12):**  that organic shop and really read the labels?  Like, does it get to that?  I don't know, early adopters, maybe like the next phase, like this is the group that is  slightly bigger, but very fundamental for this movement.  Exactly.  
**[0:24:23-0:24:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:24:23):**  And I was on this train so long before COVID and I knew that this was a growing segment.  I was passionate about it.  But to your point, early adopters.  I think COVID really exposed a lot of what was going on in the food system and gave people  a chance to educate themselves a little bit more about that supply chain.  
**[0:24:42-0:24:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:24:42):**  So I really now think you're seeing the demand not only from subscription, online subscription  for food, that category has gone through the roof.  I look at then things like what Whole Foods is doing, you know, and I really championed  the way that they're thinking about regenerative shelf placement because they're taking real  data, turn reports, you know, spends turn reports, and they're making planagrams in  
**[0:25:07-0:25:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:25:07):**  a regenerative sense and telling their suppliers.  And we have a large LP that's a big supplier to Whole Foods that just showed us their supplier  deck or presentation for 2022.  And they're making room for up to 30 percent of their shelf space for regenerative products.  Wow.  
**[0:25:25-0:25:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:25:25):**  Like certified or it's going to be them checking the outcomes?  Like what do they mean by regenerative products?  Oh, now this.  So they would say justify a regenerative claim.  OK.  
**[0:25:37-0:25:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:25:37):**  Is how they would talk about it.  So we can go down the certification path, which I think, you know, with our partnership  with Rodale and the deep reverence with what the institute does, you know, we really like  the ROC.  That's the regenerative organic certification that Dr. Bronner's and Patagonia and Rodale  
**[0:25:54-0:25:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:25:54):**  have put together and where, you know, we found Whiteleaf.  So again, one of our kind of proprietary deal origination sources is the Rodale Institute.  And so, you know, I think that that certification is a very high bar.  But I will tell you that I end on the path of supporting the Dan Kittredge of the world  and trying to say, let's figure out an outcomes based result, because as much as I appreciate  
**[0:26:23-0:26:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:26:23):**  the methodologies and the certification that get me a demeter certification, it doesn't  necessarily one to one correlate to what is in this apple that I'm about to eat.  And so we really would like to know from a phytonutrient active compound, what's actually  in that apple.  And you know, Dan and his team, Holly, and there's a whole host of people working towards  
**[0:26:48-0:26:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:26:48):**  that transparency on the molecular nutrition side.  And I think that's the panacea that we're all so excited about.  But until then, I think we need to be better than organic, but organics a great start.  And I think the regenerative organic certification is a good way there.  So what are the deals?  
**[0:27:05-0:27:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:27:05):**  I mean, you mentioned Whiteleaf, which we discussed previously as well, and I will link  the interview we did with them below.  What are these?  Can you talk about, obviously, if there's something you can talk about that has happened  over the summer, either specifically or very vaguely, something we didn't hear from Mark  
**[0:27:20-0:27:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:27:20):**  yet that you might be able to point us to what you're excited about?  I mean, you mentioned other regenerative or beyond organic CPG brands.  So we can imagine there might be other things we can buy in a supermarket.  Okay.  I imagine you don't want to mention any names, but anything else you can mention in terms  
**[0:27:34-0:27:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:27:34):**  of deals you have done so far?  Or should we check in like end of year for that or early next year?  Yeah, absolutely.  So I'll give you sort of the categories of which we've done because I think waste mitigation  is huge.  
**[0:27:48-0:27:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:27:48):**  Okay.  So we have that as a theme and we're looking at a few things in that vertical.  Like waste on the farm, waste between farm and consumer, waste in the kitchen, what waste?  Really supply chain waste.  So it's really, you know, that most of the waste, and you heard Mark talk about this  
**[0:28:05-0:28:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:28:05):**  a little bit in his podcast, is really in that supply chain.  And so there are simple technical solutions to reduce that waste that we want to invest  in.  So that's a big category we're excited about.  Organic waste or I mean like in the organic, because that's always then the question, okay,  
**[0:28:22-0:28:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:28:22):**  you're helping food waste be reduced fundamentally in a conventional extractive system, or are  you focusing then on the organic part of the system or even the regenerative, which is  much smaller part, obviously of the value chain or anything food waste is a huge issue.  Let's invest and let's get it fixed.  I think you'll see the way we think about this is all these things is on a spectrum.  
**[0:28:43-0:28:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:28:43):**  And so, you know, whether it's black soldier fly and reducing CAFO waste, whether it is  supply chain transparency and just reduction of time, which time kills food, you know,  these, all of these across these two on farm, as Mark would tell you about biomass and all  aspects I would say of waste, you know, we're thinking about how we can move the needle  with our capital.  
**[0:29:09-0:29:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:29:09):**  So waste is definitely something we're going to hear announcement about and anything else.  It is.  And I would say a two other very exciting categories for me are obviously the biological,  let's call them amendments.  I think there is a host of really exciting things that we're looking at.  
**[0:29:25-0:29:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:29:25):**  And we've got two very exciting announcements that are coming up in that particular space.  How do you screen them?  Because I find obviously you go way deeper than we do for inviting somebody on the podcast.  I find it very difficult to separate the noise from the interesting space and the amendments  or inputs because there's a lot happening for sure.  
**[0:29:47-0:29:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:29:47):**  A lot of interesting things.  I just am not a soil biologist and not a farmer at any large scale, except for some plants  here and there.  Like how do you understand which ones are actually helping, let's say a transition towards  a more regenerative system, except not just getting the farmer to replace one input for  
**[0:30:07-0:30:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:30:07):**  another one and getting them hooked for that basically forever, which is a more sustainable,  better input, I believe all of that, but it doesn't get you off the drug afterwards in  terms of any transition.  Like how do you put them on a spectrum of, Ooh, this is super interesting from a regenerative  perspective or this is just helping an extractive system to come just a bit cleaner?  
**[0:30:26-0:30:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:30:26):**  Great question.  So we think about it in sort of a vector or directional sense.  And so, you know, what we would tell you is that in the perfect poly culture, animal integrated  biodiverse plots, the plants really take care of their own immunology.  You really don't need all of the synthetic inputs and even the organic or biological  
**[0:30:48-0:30:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:30:48):**  inputs that we're talking about.  If you have the perfect homeostasis with the water cycle, the carbon cycle, the diversity,  the perennialization that we, that we talk about.  So that's the aspirational end point.  But I think to get there, we've got to prime the pump.  
**[0:31:04-0:31:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:31:04):**  And so coming from this large extractive chemical based agricultural system, you know, we believe  that there are some off ramps and we think of these amendments as off ramps to get to  the perfect spot.  And that's when you get interested.  Yeah.  
**[0:31:23-0:31:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:31:23):**  And that's when we get interested.  But really to answer your question, I mean, I'm not a biologist, I'm not a chemist.  I'm a philosopher and a businessman.  I'm an investor.  And so, you know, what we did is partner with the most respected minds and the best advisory  
**[0:31:39-0:31:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:31:39):**  staff that we could put together that would help us de-risk the tech on a tech side.  So you know, we've got guys like Seth Levine that can help us think through one of the  best tech investors in the world.  What a SAS roadmap needs to look like for a given technology.  We then have, you know, the Rodale Institute with Jeff Moyer and his incredible staff of  
**[0:32:01-0:32:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:32:01):**  scientists, which we run all of our scientific ideas to ground with.  We have Dr. Doug Cameron, who is the ex Cargill chief scientist who had a regen apostasy and  who is an incredibly valuable team member.  I can't say enough.  Tell me more about that.  
**[0:32:19-0:32:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:32:19):**  What happened with that?  Cargill isn't known to be the most regenerative company in the planet.  And wasn't certainly when he was there in the 90s.  Right.  And so he just as a thinker, as an outdoorsman, you know, he thought there was more and he  
**[0:32:33-0:32:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:32:33):**  went to go seek out a more holistic idea of what food and ag can be.  And left Cargill.  And left Cargill and has done an amazing amount of things since.  And really, we're honored to have him as our one of our scientific leads.  And then we have the Mad Ag crew.  
**[0:32:48-0:32:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:32:48):**  So you know, Dr. Phil Taylor is an advisor.  So everything we look at, whether it's dandelions for rubber or whether it's some kind of a  metabologenomic input that we're going to put in the farm, we run it through, you know,  our scientific advisory so that we can feel good about the probability of that science.  And so that's the second pillar, let's say the second stream of few potential announcements,  
**[0:33:14-0:33:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:33:14):**  let's say by the end of this year.  And then you mentioned the third.  What's the third?  And that's really the metabologenomics piece.  So what is that in plain English?  
**[0:33:24-0:33:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:33:24):**  So for me, this is one of the most exciting things within the food and ag system, mainly  because we know so little.  You know, I was thinking about your podcast with Dan Barber and we just know so little  about the food.  You know, we know 80% of the compounds in the given food are unknown to us.  
**[0:33:46-0:33:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:33:46):**  Right.  And so as we start thinking about aeroponics and hydroponics and cell-based things, you  know, I think the answer to all of that is, is it good or is it bad?  I don't have an ethical position on any of it.  What I think is the outcome is, is it comparable from a nutrient density standpoint for people?  
**[0:34:07-0:34:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:34:07):**  And we don't know that, but we're going to know that in the next, you know, five to seven  years, you know, with the likes of the bright seeds of the world and all of this investigation,  you know, to the molecular level, obviously what the Bio Nutrient Institute and the in  Kittredge are doing.  So that next frontier for us is incredibly exciting.  
**[0:34:27-0:34:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:34:27):**  And basically, metabologenomics are crop protection derived from signaling molecules in the soil  biome.  And there is a vast amount of work that can be done there of molecules, of molecules and  of compounds of which we just need massive amounts of discovery.  And so we really were partnered with some academic institutions.  
**[0:34:51-0:34:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:34:51):**  So what would it do?  Would that be how to trigger some of these to repel certain pests or weeds or what would  it do, let's say for a farmer that isn't at that perfect state of a polyculture with integrated  animals, et cetera, et cetera.  Like I'm a farmer and I want to go off the off-ramp, but, and this is a potential exit.  
**[0:35:10-0:35:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:35:10):**  What would that look like for me?  Would it be something I spray, something I inject, something I give to the animals that  I might have running on my cover crops or something?  What would it actionable look like as a farmer for the soil?  Great point.  
**[0:35:24-0:35:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:35:24):**  So actionably for the farmer, it will be, you know, a cost reduction of the input with  the same outcomes of orders of magnitude, 5x cost reductions.  And then the application can be seed inoculants.  It can be drip irrigated.  It can be sprayed, broadly sprayed.  
**[0:35:44-0:35:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:35:44):**  So there's a multitude of ways of getting it to the crops and then into the animals,  into their water supply or into the, on the grasses for the rotational grazing set.  So it's very cost effective and using basically the same hardware infrastructure that you're  using now.  So it's very compatible for the steward.  
**[0:36:03-0:36:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:36:03):**  And how is it then fundamentally different from let's say the soil amendment space you  mentioned before, why do you put it in a separate category?  Is it like, because the process is so fundamentally different, what it does, how it attacks the  problem of I have pests and I have weeds or what does it, why does it deserve a separate  category for you?  
**[0:36:20-0:36:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:36:20):**  Because this is an entirely new scientific endeavor into small molecules, which are very  different than their large molecule brethren.  And it's a space of which we have very, very little understanding.  And so I think, you know, we know a lot about the chemical lens of what the biological input  should look like.  
**[0:36:41-0:36:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:36:41):**  We know a little bit about the biological lens of what those can look like.  And you know, I think about John Kemp and folks like that who I think are doing such  great work on, you know, the biological side, but there's a whole new frontier that these  scientists and these institutes are learning, you know, can really help with a variety of  self-regulation that are all naturally occurring.  
**[0:37:06-0:37:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:37:06):**  So it's a really exciting field.  And is there a danger there because we understand so little about the molecules in general and  the molecules in the soil in particular, is there a danger we start playing with fire?  Like what's the, or it simply doesn't, maybe the danger is it doesn't work, which is okay.  But is there a danger of what's the potential for side effects, weird waking up a super  
**[0:37:29-0:37:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:37:29):**  week that was there sleeping and we didn't know it was there and like, what's the tricky  part here?  Yeah, the tricky part is, and you nailed it.  I think about it in this old Greek adage from my philosophy, koros, hubris, ate.  Okay.  
**[0:37:44-0:37:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:37:44):**  You have a great victory.  From that comes incredible hubris to which comes ultimate demise.  And so, you know, I think about the power of what we're playing with and we talk about  this a lot.  And you know, we want to be supporting nature.  
**[0:38:02-0:38:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:38:02):**  We want to be listening and supporting the natural processes, not trying to over engineer,  right?  We've seen what that hubris has done.  You know, if you look at what we created with the fertilizer early on, we had a great victory,  but then we believe that we could do better.  
**[0:38:19-0:38:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:38:19):**  And we're really students of nature.  The biomimicry is where we reside and that's our sort of true North.  And so as we think about any of these things, we have a very nuanced take to really support  the natural processes, not to override or over engineer because we're thinking in short  term cycles and nature's thinking in millennia.  
**[0:38:38-0:38:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:38:38):**  Yeah, I'm very curious about it.  I'm thinking that further when there are concrete examples to discuss.  So let's spark that for now.  I'm excited about that.  Let's switch gears a bit with, you mentioned before we have to prime the pump.  
**[0:38:50-0:38:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:38:50):**  Like we're moving back to the financial side of things.  Let's say the pump has been primed.  So you are actually in charge of a $1 billion investment fund or 10 billion or like a large,  like a significant large amount.  I asked this question because I'm curious about what people would focus on, not because  
**[0:39:05-0:39:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:39:05):**  I want to know the exact breakdown of, I would put 150 to 50 into this.  I'm curious, what would you focus on if you had basically wouldn't say unlimited, but  almost unlimited resources in terms of financial to invest, obviously to invest the grand part  of things, you can do it with the returns if you want to, but I'm interested as an investor  what would you focus on if you had a considerable investment fund and the pump has been primed  
**[0:39:29-0:39:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:39:29):**  or maybe there's not a lot of deal flow could also be like, I would put it in priming the  pump further because the money is not the issue, but the deal flow is what would be  your take on that?  And I think I would say to you, you know, first we believe that we're going to build,  you know, a series of funds and hopefully be deploying billions of dollars into this  
**[0:39:47-0:39:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:39:47):**  space, you know, across multiple asset classes, infrastructure, ag tech, all the things that  we care deeply about, farmland, agroforestry.  But I think if you asked me what I would do with a billion dollars, because, you know,  it's a huge amount of money, don't get me wrong, but when you think about the investing  landscape and I think about, you know, aquaculture, which I don't think you can leave out of the  
**[0:40:13-0:40:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:40:13):**  regenerative equation because the interconnectivity of our planet is such that, you know, it's  deeply involved.  oceans and forests are connected.  oceans and forests are connected.  That's a hundred trillion dollar opportunity.  
**[0:40:26-0:40:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:40:26):**  So when you ask me about a billion dollars, you know, it begins to pale in comparison.  So my answer, I guess first would be, I would do exactly what we're doing, you know, because  we came to this thesis and understanding because we have to build the first set of companies,  you know, to build this asset class.  It's still nascent and has, you know, 10 years of growth to get to its sort of complimentary  
**[0:40:50-0:40:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:40:50):**  asset classes.  Do you see it as a separate asset class or, or a lens that you can like the regeneration  lens or something you can put over potentially all asset classes, looking at infrastructure,  looking at farmland, looking at your mobility, potentially looking at housing, looking at  education or would it be all bundled into, okay, this is the regenerative asset class.  
**[0:41:11-0:41:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:41:11):**  What do you see there?  I think you articulated it well, Coon.  I think it's more of, right.  It's a well articulated thesis that moves as an umbrella across all asset classes.  Yeah, because now you're applying it to VC, but in X years, when this fund is invested,  
**[0:41:27-0:41:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:41:27):**  you'll be applying it hopefully to XYZ.  And then you'll be applying it to with obviously different parameters, parameters, because  it's different than you invest in farmland, but probably different amounts as well.  So it's, I got triggered because it's a bit the same saying impact investing is an asset  class.  
**[0:41:44-0:41:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:41:44):**  So you're applying a lens to all your investments and potentially your philanthropy and also  your life.  What, how can I maximize, minimize negative impact and maximize, how can I net positive  as much as possible?  And that's the trigger part because it, when the impact investing space was born, it was  
**[0:41:58-0:42:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:41:58):**  an asset class or it was mentioned like these people in the corner, let's keep them there.  Let's grow that a bit.  And then that's okay.  No, it needs to be applied to everything also to education.  Well and for me, it's like ESG and the nomenclature in investing.  
**[0:42:10-0:42:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:42:10):**  I mean, you know, to choose ESG feels a little bit contrived.  I mean, everything should be looked at through an environmental social lens in my opinion.  And so, and it is looked at, it's just very negative in most cases, like everything is  impact investing is just very often, very negative.  Like the impact is negative or if you like it or not, it's just, you cannot really escape  
**[0:42:31-0:42:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:42:31):**  that.  Like everything is on a regenerative spectrum, probably on the darker side, the degenerative  side, but it is on the spectrum.  Any farm is.  Well, and that's why we're working with, you know, the Iroquois valleys of the world, because  
**[0:42:43-0:42:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:42:43):**  I think that there's a lot of complementarity with our fund one portfolio, you know, what  they, how they think about stewarding the land, but don't really have all of the sort  of sub components dialed in.  And how are you working with them?  How does that look like in practice?  
**[0:42:58-0:43:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:42:58):**  Well, so we're in talks right now, but we're, you know, really wanting to put vents collars  on, as you can imagine, a lot of the Iroquois valley lands because of so many reasons, as  you well know, because it makes sense because it makes sense.  And because we then think there's an income stream associated with that from the carbon  markets, which then makes financial sense on top of the environmental sense.  
**[0:43:20-0:43:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:43:20):**  Of course, there's your portfolio companies, especially the more ag tech focused ones need  a lot of lead, a lot of farmers to, to work with.  And if you are working with a lot of farmers that are on a, that have taken the off ramp  already and are in an interesting transition becomes, it becomes very interesting.  When I think about, you know, how good, which obviously we're huge proponents of how good  
**[0:43:42-0:43:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:43:42):**  and how good is able to use those data points, new acreage or hectares with rotational grazing,  you know, to put into their lattice matrix so they can understand a larger idea of regenerative  sourcing to all of their database and clients.  So it makes a lot of sense to start a farmland fund at some point.  And they're very curious how you would structure that.  
**[0:44:06-0:44:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:44:06):**  Two, so with the one billion, you would do pretty much the same as you've been doing,  but let's take it away and give you one wish like one with you have a magic wand and you  can change one thing in the food and ag sector.  What would that be?  Could be anything from transparency to soil probes everywhere to data being accessible  
**[0:44:26-0:44:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:44:26):**  to all farm land being managed in the commons, like anything you can imagine.  What would that one wish be?  Sort of.  So three things immediately popped in my mind.  One is it's not just about carbon, it's about water.  
**[0:44:40-0:44:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:44:40):**  Okay.  Coming back to what we started.  Yeah.  Water, water, water.  Water is the key fundament for all of this without it.  
**[0:44:47-0:44:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:44:47):**  None of it happens.  And so, you know, we focus on carbon a lot, our water resources through the acid rain,  through the pH increase in our streams, through what we're doing to the oceans.  It's critical, but it's kind of, you know, off in a corner.  So I want to like wake up.  
**[0:45:05-0:45:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:45:05):**  Okay.  The world about that.  I think, you know, I don't know if you've read the Dan or Paul Greenberg book, the Omega  Principle.  I think it's a great one to think about that.  
**[0:45:15-0:45:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:45:15):**  And then Patagonia has a documentary out, Artificial, which is a good one to watch also.  I think my second one, and we talked about it a little bit, is provenance is the transparency  in our food system.  And that's understanding, unfortunately, the plastic particulate matter, the heavy metals,  it's everything.  
**[0:45:37-0:45:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:45:37):**  And it's then the good stuff, the active compounds, the phytonutrients, the minerals, the good  stuff.  We just know so little.  And so I'm really excited about the epiphanies that are happening in the food space, which  I think are really going to validate premium pricing, a variety of things that really make  
**[0:45:54-0:45:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:45:54):**  this flywheel work.  And then the third, and then I'm going to make you choose because I said one.  And then the third is, we've talked about it a little bit, is the long duration patient  thinking.  So it's the myth of liquidity.  
**[0:46:08-0:46:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:46:08):**  What is the myth of liquidity?  There's sort of a historical precedent in financial management that is what I would  say is over conservative to the liquidity side of the scale.  I always want to get out, be able to get out.  Being able to get out quickly or have it available at any time, which is really a disservice  
**[0:46:27-0:46:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:46:27):**  to the investor over a long duration because patient capital, if you ask Jeremy Grantham,  patient capital and venture capital is the greatest returning asset class of all times.  And so I really think people can do better by thinking about really what their real liquidity  needs are.  It's a real analytic process to get there, but then being able to go long with the rest  
**[0:46:49-0:46:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:46:49):**  of those assets.  That's a big piece of it.  The other side of that coin is every investment you make and every dollar you spend, there's  an ethic attached to that.  How conscientious are we every time we're spending the dollar, whether it's on the food  
**[0:47:03-0:47:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:47:03):**  at a restaurant, on a piece of clothing, how much do you think about the entire supply  line, right?  The dignity of the wages of the people in the supply line, the diversity and inclusion  that we don't think about this sort of conscious capitalism as much as we should.  And I think it's really important for people to understand where they put their dollars.  
**[0:47:23-0:47:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:47:23):**  And now you have to choose one thing.  What would be the key?  I'm thinking it's got to be water, but tell me, what would you choose?  I think it's, you know, I said it's the alpha and the omega, but I really think for me,  for what we're doing in regenerative, for the expeditious need to get the soils, to  
**[0:47:41-0:47:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:47:41):**  get the methodologies on a grand scale, I think solving the nutrient transparency and  understanding that differentiation in our food supply is imperative.  Okay.  So you go for understand.  This is a question that definitely inspired by John Kempf.  
**[0:47:57-0:47:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:47:57):**  What do you believe to be true?  We heard a few things, but where are you contrarian?  Like, what do you believe to be true about the region, egg space or region egg and food  space, even the regeneration space, if you want to make it a bit wider that others don't  like, where do you, when you were having a drink after the Oakland conference a few weeks  
**[0:48:15-0:48:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:48:15):**  ago and you were discussing something and suddenly somebody said, but you really believe  like that, where are you contrarian in your beliefs within this movement that often very  things very similar, or at least it seems to be on the outset, which is a bit disturbing  sometimes.  Well, I'm going to go back to the water thing because everybody thinks terrestrially in  
**[0:48:33-0:48:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:48:33):**  regards to regenerative food and ag.  Right.  And so all when I hear and what I understand is going on is a real proxy for what we've  done on the land.  Right.  
**[0:48:46-0:48:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:48:46):**  So, you know, we talk about proteins a lot and think about them a lot and invest in them  a lot.  We have another conversation about that at some point, but it's very important that along  that spectrum, we consider fish, which is the most efficient protein in the entire channel.  And as we think about aspirationally, Coon, what, how do you acquire your beef?  
**[0:49:09-0:49:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:49:09):**  If you're a meat eater, you know, we would say, ideally you're bow hunting your own pronghorn.  Okay.  But, but that's sort of anachronistic and it's not really realistic anymore.  And okay.  So we're in the down line, you know, what's better and we end all the way over here at  
**[0:49:22-0:49:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:49:22):**  the worst sort of animal husbandry, CAFO operations.  And there's a lot in between the same exact thing is happening now to our oceans.  You know, my kids, kids aren't going to be able to go line, catch wild salmon in Bristol  Bay.  It's not going to be available anymore.  
**[0:49:40-0:49:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:49:40):**  So we're moving all of our aquaculture to land and we're creating fish CAFOs, you know,  CAFOs, it's the exact same thing that we did on the land.  And so, you know, I think what people aren't thinking about or where I'm a little bit contrarian  is we have to focus on this too.  And I think there's a time right now where there's tons of capital being spent on aquaculture  
**[0:50:01-0:50:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:50:01):**  facilities, which are again, monoculture over stocked facilities where sometimes they're  even creating genetics so that you have, you know, a color, a size, just like we did in  chicken and beef.  So I really think there's an interesting time right now for the regenerative community to  focus on how can we move the needle away from sort of those CAFOs for fishing and think  
**[0:50:24-0:50:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:50:24):**  about rewilding and hybridizing the estuaries where we have the ability to both assist nature,  but not over engineer and then rebuild what, you know, she had originally made as our fisheries  of the world.  I think that's my position.  Yeah, we're small teaser, nothing is finalized yet, but we're thinking about a series on  
**[0:50:47-0:50:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:50:47):**  region aquaculture as it's been.  I think we talked about it two or three times and that's it, which is a shame for 70% of  the earth surface actually should be called water surface and our history in sustainable  aquaculture.  And I'm very passionate to come back to the immense opportunities there and not the complete  
**[0:51:04-0:51:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:51:04):**  lack, but the lack of the region space to look at it, but also the rest of the food  and egg space.  So we're sort of this forgotten gigantic corner, which is most of the room actually, but we're  sort of not looking at it because we're so focused in words on the land piece at the  moment, which don't get me wrong, needs a lot of work.  
**[0:51:20-0:51:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:51:20):**  Needs a lot of work, but just getting to the final point, just like we grow all this corn  and we zap all these resources of our terrestrial, you know, for ethanol, for high fructose corn  syrup and for animal food, you know, we're basically mining the oceans for the same thing.  We're mining all of the oceans for fish meal.  Fish meal, fish oil, and then yeah, it's, and the potential there is enormous because  
**[0:51:43-0:51:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:51:43):**  of size, but it's also enormous because of the regeneration capacity.  If you look at some fisheries that were closed off or even hopefully with some transition  finance for the fishermen and women, but firstly, mostly men, the rebound of these systems has  been very well documented and is astonishing compared to land banks.  I mean, you have to go to the tropics to see that kind of growth that fast, that kind of  
**[0:52:07-0:52:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:52:07):**  life coming back if you just let it and assisted and manage that transition.  So there's a space there that is pretty untapped and we're looking forward to getting deeper  into that.  So thank you for that nod, nudge in that direction.  And to ask a final question, what would you, without advising, but would you investors  
**[0:52:25-0:52:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:52:25):**  that are listening to this, it might be a room full of investors, smart impact investors,  obviously all looking for the deepest net positive.  Would you push them toward or nudge them towards aquaculture?  Would you nudge them towards other forgotten or not sometimes overlooked sectors?  What would you tell them if they want to get active?  
**[0:52:44-0:52:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:52:44):**  Should they buy a farm?  Should they get at their hands dirty?  Should they buy a supermarket like you did?  What's the best off-ramp from the extractive investment world into the regenerative one?  Look, I think anybody who will be a land steward and take it upon themselves to rehabilitate  
**[0:53:00-0:53:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:53:00):**  or sustain a piece of land in the right way.  I think that personally and societally is a great thing.  I would like less corporate ownership of the land and more individualized, democratized  land holdings.  I think that benefits.  
**[0:53:14-0:53:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:53:14):**  I'm already curious how you're going to set up a farm land fund, but we keep that for  an excellent.  So, yes, but I would say then from an investing standpoint, I really think, and we talked  to a lot of institutions like this, I think indexing across region venture with a fund  like Trailhead, there's others out there that I respect deeply.  
**[0:53:34-0:53:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:53:34):**  I think that's the way that you get exposure to a broad base of these assets and you de-risk  them by that diversity, quantity and portfolio construction.  I think if you're a direct investor, I would say make sure that you're taking all of your  philanthropic dollars.  Maybe it's your Roth, maybe it's your IRA, maybe it's your DAF, and making sure those  
**[0:53:59-0:54:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:53:59):**  are directed.  Which are all very much US terms just for the rest of the world.  US financial terms, yes.  If you don't know what they mean, you're probably not in the US.  But make sure it goes back to my conscious spending and investment.  
**[0:54:13-0:54:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:54:13):**  Think about it.  The biggest thing I would implore investors to do is be more conscious about the power  of their investment and where they're putting those dollars.  It really is the catalyst for change.  And I always say final question and then it never happens, to round off this conversation  
**[0:54:29-0:54:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:54:29):**  in terms of Trailhead, you're hoping to finalise a number of investments over the next weeks.  In terms of fundraising, what can you share there?  We're now talking the middle of October.  Obviously this is going on full speed at the moment.  What's your target and when more or less in terms of closing the fund and investing that  
**[0:54:46-0:54:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:54:46):**  amount or will it be a slightly longer ongoing process?  What's the current on that?  Yeah, thanks for asking.  So I think we'll have 12 to 15 investments by the end of the year.  Final close for the fund will be at year end.  
**[0:54:59-0:55:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:54:59):**  And we're really excited about the LPs that have been supporting us, who have also really  said that they're going to be in our next fund.  And so we think we've got our fund one set that will then be sort of our fund two anchors.  And we're just really grateful for the support of our LP base and their open minded mission  thinking.  
**[0:55:18-0:55:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:55:18):**  And so we are closing in on our final close for the fund.  And so we would welcome conversations of interested parties, but look forward to really moving  on.  Which will be around what kind of number?  So 50 million, sorry, 5050.  
**[0:55:33-0:55:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:55:33):**  50 is the closing target for the end.  And we're really probably irrespective of hitting that exact number.  Going to close the fund at year end so we can continue to deploy another 12 to 15 in  2022.  Okay.  
**[0:55:47-0:55:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:55:47):**  Which will be the majority of the portfolio.  Okay, super.  So looking forward to checking on that and see how it goes and good luck because it can  be extremely stressful months I've seen from the inside.  And I can imagine at this period, both on the fundraising and the investing side to  
**[0:56:01-0:56:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:56:01):**  get this over the line by year end, which is always a crazy period.  So I wish you a lot of luck with that.  Well thank you, Koen.  It's really a pleasure to wake up every day with my partners and do this to feel like  we're doing the right work and just excited to be with thought leaders like you in this  
**[0:56:18-0:56:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:56:18):**  space.  It's really a great time to be in this space.  Thank you so much for that.  If you found the investing in regenerative agriculture and food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  
**[0:56:29-0:56:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:56:29):**  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast.  And it only takes a few seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you, and if you have the means, please  
**[0:56:46-0:56:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:56:46):**  join my membership community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on cambro.com slash investing region egg or in the description  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  
**[0:57:11-0:57:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:57:11):**  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course after 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the  question how to put money to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since  2011 and recording these podcasts since 2016 we thought it was time to share our lessons  
**[0:57:34-0:57:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:57:34):**  learned.  What have we seen in this space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees and what questions should you ask?  
**[0:57:46-0:57:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:57:46):**  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space for whom is this course you the soil builders and investors  
**[0:57:57-0:58:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:57:57):**  in this space, the soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund  managers, vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, act tech companies, farm  to gut food companies, permaculture key line designers, holistic management consultants,  et cetera, et cetera, people that are building soil at scale and the investors who are putting  their own money to work through their family office or as private individuals or people  
**[0:58:20-0:58:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:58:20):**  who are putting other people's money to work through foundations, institutional capital  banks, insurance companies, et cetera.  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  
**[0:58:32-0:58:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:58:32):**  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you.  And I'm very aware that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very  different means.  So I'm inviting you if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  
**[0:58:49-0:58:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:58:49):**  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides.  So you don't have to ride along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  
**[0:59:05-0:59:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:59:05):**  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in and what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could  find if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  
**[0:59:26-0:59:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:59:26):**  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately, that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  
**[0:59:39-0:59:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/tripp-wall#t=0:59:39):**  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  