### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2021-00-30)
**[0:00:00-0:00:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:00:00):**  We often talk about scale in regeneration, but there are very few projects that I know  of that operate at this scale.  What if we could re-green the Sinai desert, and not only bring back an ecosystem full  of abundance, think a lot of fish, plants, trees and thousands of people living healthily  and happily, but by restoring the local water cycle we can influence the weather patterns  
**[0:00:22-0:00:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:00:22):**  in most of the Middle East and the Mediterranean.  Sounds like science fiction, listen and learn why and how we need to think and act at scale.  Tempering climate change, bringing back rivers, preventing floods and obviously lots and lots  of nutrient-dense food.  The promises of REGEN-AC often sound straight out of a science fiction book.  
**[0:00:44-0:00:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:00:44):**  And for these promises to be met, we need to significantly scale regeneration to a landscape  scale within this decade.  Welcome to a new series where we look into the technologies needed to bring regeneration  to a landscape scale.  In this series we'll look at already existing technologies, digital tech, ag tech, new financing  
**[0:01:03-0:01:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:01:03):**  mechanisms etc. that can scale fast enough during the next 10 years.  Technologies which put significantly more money into the pockets of farmers, landowners  and land stewards who are regenerating their and our soils so they can go faster.  And we'll ask the question, what is missing?  What needs to be urgently developed over the next years?  
**[0:01:22-0:01:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:01:22):**  We're very happy with the support for this series by the Grantham Environmental Trust,  which supports strategic communications and collaboration in solving the world's most  pressing environmental problems.  You can find out more at granthamfoundation.org.  In March last year we launched our membership community, make it easy for fans to support  
**[0:01:40-0:01:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:01:40):**  our work and so many of you have joined as a member.  We've launched different types of benefits, exclusive content, Q&A webinars with former  guests.  Ask me anything sessions plus so much more to come in the future.  For more information on the different tiers, benefits and how to become a member check  
**[0:01:56-0:02:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:01:56):**  gumroad.com slash investingregenag or find the link below.  Thank you.  Welcome to another episode today with Maddie Ackermans, the co-founder of The Weathermakers.  The weathermakers strive to develop watershed-wide ecosystem regeneration by influencing the  vegetation to increase freshwater availability through land atmospheric processes.  
**[0:02:18-0:02:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:02:18):**  Welcome Maddie.  Thank you Koen for having me.  To start with a personal question, I have a lot to ask obviously on The Weathermakers,  but what brings you to The Weathermakers and to take on such an ambitious soil, but actually  way beyond soil regeneration process?  
**[0:02:32-0:02:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:02:32):**  What led you to joining The Weathermakers, co-founding The Weathermakers and going very  deep in this topic?  The friendship with Thies, I would say.  Thies was requested to think about Barleyville Lake and the location that we will discuss  a little bit more on later regarding is it possible to regenerate the lake and create  
**[0:02:48-0:02:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:02:48):**  more fish for the people around the lake also to feed and have an economy, etc.  And during that time, he spent a lot of time at my dining table as we had a family with  children and a scheme each day and he was by himself.  So he tended to sit at my table and discuss.  And I was able in that time to bring a little bit the testaments to the story.  
**[0:03:11-0:03:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:03:11):**  So we're talking about the Sinai where many of our religious books are situated partly.  So I was able to bring that kind of knowledge to the table and it triggered me a lot to  reread a lot of the texts.  And by the time that he needed to start his own company because it was too ambitious and  too green for the company that he worked at that time, he asked me to take up the management  
**[0:03:35-0:03:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:03:35):**  of the company.  And of course, this is such an amazing vision, so I was very happy to say yes.  And I didn't think about it a lot.  So really knowing why it just resonated with me.  So here I am.  
**[0:03:50-0:03:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:03:50):**  Because it's not that you've been in the Sinai.  We're talking about the Sinai, which is currently part of Egypt.  But just go to Google Maps and envision it's a massive place.  Mostly seems desert at the moment, but there's a lot of opportunity.  But we'll get to that later.  
**[0:04:03-0:04:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:04:03):**  It's not that you've been there very often that the place resonated with you.  Apart from the religious connection, obviously, but it's not that you were a very frequent  Egypt visitor or something like that.  It was more than that, but it wasn't specifically the place, I think, or at least you haven't  you weren't visiting there very often before you joined and co-founded the weathermakers.  
**[0:04:22-0:04:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:04:22):**  I have no ecology background.  I have no biology background, no technical background.  So for me, it's a far fetched choice, let's say.  I do have good connection with deers, I would say.  So a lot of my choices I make by that energy.  
**[0:04:39-0:04:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:04:39):**  And since we started this, I did visit the Sinai.  And I can say that the earth energy at that location is very high frequency.  So I do think that probably assisted in me coming to this path.  But no, it is a far fetched choice, but very willingly taken.  And just for people, I will link a great Guardian article on what you're trying to achieve,  
**[0:05:04-0:05:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:05:04):**  but in a few sentences, which is very difficult, but for the people that didn't read that yet,  or haven't ever heard of the weathermakers, what are you trying to achieve in your first  project?  I'm imagining there will be others following.  You're very ambitious in that sense.  
**[0:05:18-0:05:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:05:18):**  But what are in a few sentences, what is the central theme of the project in the Sinai?  Our central theme is water.  So you started in the introduction about soil, few sentences, so I won't say too much.  But water is the central point of view for us, and we want to heal the water cycle.  So we're really talking about creating such natural systems that the water cycle itself  
**[0:05:42-0:05:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:05:42):**  will take over and create enough moist for the whole system to heal and become abundant.  And to have us that not needed in the system anymore.  Well, as the weathermakers, but people, of course, are part of the system.  We are part of nature.  Yeah, and this is a place where I'm imagining many people envisioned or they see desert  
**[0:06:06-0:06:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:06:06):**  when they see the place.  There's a very shallow lake that used to be a lot deeper.  And that's one of the central places where you are planning an intervention or already  doing actually a smaller intervention.  But I think many people and that's actually the title of the that article as well.  
**[0:06:20-0:06:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:06:20):**  Our biggest challenge is the lack of imagination.  Many people see a desert or see a landscape as well.  We talk about regeneration in other places, Australia, but also here in Europe and the  US and sort of assume it always was like that, even though it's degrading in front of our  eyes.  
**[0:06:34-0:06:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:06:34):**  How do you is a very big question.  How do you trigger people on that imagination?  How do you make people join you on the journey?  You joined this and you were triggered enough by that imagination to see more than the sand  and more than the desert and more than a shallow lake that is pretty basically dead.  
**[0:06:49-0:06:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:06:49):**  And you actually see the potential of a lot more life, fish, restoring water cycles, vegetation,  very lush, etc.  How do you trigger that imagination in other people?  Because you must have done it a few times because you have quite a large team now, a  lot of other people supporting you.  
**[0:07:03-0:07:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:07:03):**  How do you trigger that imagination in people to see more than a degraded landscape?  I think it's the connection to nature.  We connect towards nature and imagine what is or what has been there.  And that is such intrinsic value for each and every person.  Everybody resonates with that.  
**[0:07:21-0:07:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:07:21):**  So I think we are carrying that energy with us.  So when we are talking to a group or to a person, we light up, you could say.  So I think that energy really, really helps.  We did also create a green Sinai by using computers and drawings, etc.  So we visualize it actually to share with people as well.  
**[0:07:44-0:07:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:07:44):**  But we don't need it for people to actually connect to it.  Just a short talk of three minutes most of the time is enough for people to be triggered  enough to bring their values.  So let's because this is much bigger and that's why I'm very interested in it then just just  between brackets, a simple regeneration project that we see very often, like we do some waterworks,  
**[0:08:05-0:08:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:08:05):**  we restore some vegetation.  This is and that's in your name, the weather makers.  This is a scheme to influence the local weather patterns.  Was that there from the beginning that the ambitious was so high that you actually want  to influence quite a large weather system.  
**[0:08:19-0:08:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:08:19):**  It's part of the Mediterranean.  It's part of the other side as well.  To see like this is not this is almost geoengineering with nature at its core.  Was it part of the plan from the beginning or did it really start with, OK, let's see  if we can restore this lake.  
**[0:08:32-0:08:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:08:32):**  And then suddenly you found out like, wow, this is part of such big system and we can  influence that as well.  Well, the initial question was about the lake.  But at that time it was still with the dredging company.  For them, it was regenerating the lake.  
**[0:08:45-0:08:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:08:45):**  Just for people, what is a dredging company?  If you have no idea, if you have to describe it in what to do a child, how would you describe  a dredging company?  Well, dredging is one of the biggest industries we have.  It's deepening canals.  
**[0:09:01-0:09:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:09:01):**  It's creating ports.  It's deep sea mining.  It's also they're a big part of placing windmills in the oceans.  Underwater infrastructure.  Well, it's being able to scrape away the bottom of the ocean to create infrastructure there.  
**[0:09:16-0:09:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:09:16):**  So if it's rock or is it mud or it doesn't matter, they can they can take it out.  It's quite an intensive, I would say, negative footprint or extractive industry.  Even if you do it with the best intentions, it's quite an industry with a lot of impact.  Well, very much related also to the oil industry and in infrastructure, of course, we need  it.  
**[0:09:39-0:09:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:09:39):**  And it also created land, as we know, in the Netherlands.  So the Netherlands is created by placing sand at spots, which also the dredging industry  will do.  But yes, it has a very negative footprint, you could say.  But they have the potential to have huge impact.  
**[0:09:57-0:10:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:09:57):**  They can change the Earth's view that you can actually view from satellites.  So you could use that kind of potential to do good.  So that's why we have a large scale impact.  And we dream large scale.  And so it was first the lake.  
**[0:10:14-0:10:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:10:14):**  And then how did it become influencing a weather system?  Well, it started with the lake, and then it was still comprehensive enough for the dredging  company to keep it within their scope.  At the moment that we started to think, hey, we can change the winds, we can actually heal  the water cycle for the full northern part of the Sinai.  
**[0:10:33-0:10:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:10:33):**  And that will influence the wind pattern.  So in that sense, it will influence also the weather system of the Indian Ocean and the  full of the Mediterranean.  So it's not just the Sinai water cycle, but we're talking very much bigger than that.  When that became part of our vision, that was the moment we needed to step away from  
**[0:10:52-0:10:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:10:52):**  the dredging company and do it ourselves.  So that large impact is the reason that we founded the company.  Without that, we would never have done it.  And one of the first things we did when we started the company is create a conference  with all the institutes of the Netherlands.  
**[0:11:08-0:11:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:11:08):**  We have a lot of smart people in the Netherlands regarding water, regarding weather systems  like Canemie, Deltares, Wageningen.  So we're very well placed in the world for water engineering, you could say.  So the first thing we did was have a conference to have the question, can we not do this?  So what is the reason we cannot?  
**[0:11:32-0:11:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:11:32):**  So that was the scientific question, like, please tackle us.  Please let us know why this is an insane plan, why we cannot do this.  And they were not able to do so.  So then it was full force.  And weren't they critical at all?  
**[0:11:47-0:11:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:11:47):**  Or were they just saying, you're crazy, but we don't have really good arguments?  What was the response?  Or please go ahead, somebody has to do this.  What was the general, let's say, energy in the room or mix?  Well, the energy was very positive, although there was also very critical.  
**[0:12:02-0:12:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:12:02):**  Can we do this?  Are we allowed to do this?  What will be the consequences?  We don't know, so we shouldn't.  That kind of energy was there.  
**[0:12:11-0:12:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:12:11):**  But also, we do know that we're in a hotspot together.  And we do need to do something.  And we're talking about a region where it's the political tension, the people are not  able to take care of their own livelihood.  So there's so much gain at that location, that it's also a vision that we, you know,  
**[0:12:31-0:12:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:12:31):**  even if it's 1% chance that we can do this, we should.  And we were at that moment already very much assisted by what we call our Jedis.  We have a group of scientists, biologists that have spent their whole life creating  visions, creating solutions, creating data and theories at a high level that are now  like 80 year olds that really assist us and stand with us.  
**[0:12:59-0:13:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:12:59):**  And they all came to the Netherlands also during that convention.  So that gave it this, whoa, these people are actually telling us also that, you know, the  weathermakers are correct in saying, let's do this.  So it was a very hopeful gathering.  And then what were the first steps after that?  
**[0:13:17-0:13:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:13:17):**  Like what, you come out of this conference energy that we all know, in this case, you  organized it yourself.  So maybe it was even higher, the energy people didn't shoot it down.  When was this and then what was the next step?  Well, this was November, 2017.  
**[0:13:32-0:13:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:13:32):**  And just so you know, we started April 1st, 2017.  So at the time people said, what, you're going to do a conference in November?  Are you crazy?  And who are you hiring to do so?  No, we're just, we'll do that.  
**[0:13:45-0:13:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:13:45):**  And, you know, we organized it in two months and everybody came and we had a location in  the Raadszaal.  So that's like of the municipality, like the beautiful room they have.  And it was a two day.  So we had everybody staying at hotels.  
**[0:13:59-0:14:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:13:59):**  And I don't know, there was this magical energy that we just, we organized and it was done.  And we had the first night we had a dinner at the parents of Thys and they cooked themselves  and it was amazing.  And actually afterwards it was like, wow, did we actually do this?  And there was no moment of doubt while creating.  
**[0:14:21-0:14:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:14:21):**  So we had very high energy coming out and there was nothing keeping us in moving forward.  And I think it assisted a lot in getting it back on the agenda of the dredging company.  Because as I said, when it started to be that big, we had to do it by ourselves.  And they supported us a lot with creating work for us as engineers.  So in that sense, they bring us the revenue that we need to stand.  
**[0:14:51-0:14:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:14:51):**  And of course, for us, it's how much of that energy can we bring to actually regenerative  projects or to Bardeville and the Sinai.  And at the moment of the convention, the interest of the dredging company started to be a little  bit down.  Like this is too big.  
**[0:15:07-0:15:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:15:07):**  How much are we going to invest in this actually?  You know, maybe we need to leave it a little bit behind.  And after the convention, they were like, whoa, did you see all these people that said  that we can actually do this?  So it assisted a lot in the belief within the dredging company and having their board  
**[0:15:24-0:15:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:15:24):**  also discussed this on high level and making the SDGs, but also the regenerative way, a  very big part of their future focus, which of course is already like huge impact if they  actually do that.  Yeah, if that would be the only thing.  But just to take one step back, you mentioned us as a company a few times, you very deliberately  
**[0:15:47-0:15:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:15:47):**  set up a company and not a non for profit.  I think many investors in the room saying the virtual room will be very happy to hear  that.  But can you explain why you chose to do that?  Very deliberately?  
**[0:15:59-0:16:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:15:59):**  If you're an NGO, you have to ask for money.  And it doesn't go well with me, my energy goes down, my light tends to slimmer down  and I need to send in my light if I want to have this happen together with all of us.  So for me, it's already that.  It's already taking care of yourself part.  
**[0:16:20-0:16:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:16:20):**  But what is very important is we believe that this will be the biggest industry out there.  So it will be bigger than regenerative energy, if you would ask me.  And we can't do that with one company.  And we can't do that with giving money.  We need to have people copy paste us and start being part of this.  
**[0:16:40-0:16:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:16:40):**  And we can only do that if we show that you can make money with it.  So we need to show that we can take care of our own families, have a healthy business  with a healthy business opportunity so that others will join and make it happen.  And so what is the business model currently in the project in the CNI?  I mean, there's a huge dredging part that needs to happen.  
**[0:17:03-0:17:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:17:03):**  There are a lot of other moving parts.  How would you describe to an investor the business opportunity there, apart from that  regreening the desert and influencing weather systems is a very significant goal to you  and very significant outcome, obviously.  But what is the business opportunity if you have your meeting with investors as you regularly  
**[0:17:22-0:17:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:17:22):**  have?  Well, how do you describe that unique opportunity and the why now, which people always like  to know?  Well, A, I think it's important to add that at this moment, we don't have external investors.  So as you mentioned, when you talk to your investors, we tend to tell ourselves, let's  
**[0:17:40-0:17:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:17:40):**  imagine we are having investors because we do need to have that focus to show that we  are worthwhile.  So when you are talking to not your investors yet, but potential investors, what do you  say?  Well, I think that's very important to potential investors.  
**[0:17:55-0:18:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:17:55):**  Yes, I think A, it's very important to split up the project in phases and then each track  even in more phases, because there are many different complex systems that we need to  use and they will not all have the same kind of business scheme or opportunity.  Phase one, track one is regenerating the coastal zone.  And I think that's also the one that is most intertwined with the dredging company.  
**[0:18:25-0:18:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:18:25):**  And also it's like it's in the sense of it's an infrastructural project and we're used  to talk about millions if we talk about infrastructural projects.  So that really assists.  Probably hundreds of millions.  Yes, no problem.  
**[0:18:39-0:18:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:18:39):**  That's like still a small project.  So that really helps in this sense.  How is the business case at this moment set?  If you look at the quality of the aquatic systems and fish stocks out there, we are  having a problem.  
**[0:18:55-0:18:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:18:55):**  It's almost like don't eat fish because there's not enough out there.  But if you look at regenerative time schedules, your aquatic system regenerates much quicker  than your land system.  So we should first have our attention on the coastal zone, create more fish stocks so that  people can eat from it, have livelihood about it and then move forward.  
**[0:19:19-0:19:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:19:19):**  And the investment of the lake will be earned back by the government via the VAT out of  the economy that is created with the fish stock.  So we're really talking about a fish engine within the lake and creating an abundant system  of which people can eat, have export economy, pay taxes.  And that's the first step to restore the fish stocks, to restore the lake that it can carry  
**[0:19:46-0:19:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:19:46):**  an abundance of fish.  And in this case, you mentioned the return model is through simple or simple, it's not  simple, but increased economic activity and does VAT.  And so you're envisioning that the Egyptian government will pay for this and see it as  an investment in regional development as they do all the time in many other places.  
**[0:20:07-0:20:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:20:07):**  Could be sewage systems, could be roads, could be anything.  Would it already be enough to start to like, let's get a bit into the fish system.  Would that be enough to start restoring a significant amount of vegetation also around  the lake?  Is that the first trigger there?  
**[0:20:23-0:20:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:20:23):**  Definitely.  You need wetlands, you need mudslides, you need that part to have an abundant aquatic  system.  So that's all part.  And I think you're right, it is a simple business case, you could say.  
**[0:20:37-0:20:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:20:37):**  The only thing is you need someone to own the land and the VAT system around it, which  makes it complex because you need to have a go ahead on very high level in a political  sense.  So that is, you have a long road.  It's not like you have one person saying, Hey, I've got a plot of land, let's do this.  
**[0:20:55-0:20:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:20:55):**  Let's go.  So that makes it complex.  Yeah.  You need to convince the right parts of the Egyptian government all the way up to the  top that this is all the way up to the top.  
**[0:21:05-0:21:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:21:05):**  Yes.  That this is very doable and looking very good for him or for them whenever this is  successful and not a risk that could taint any political careers, etc, etc.  Of course, you get into a lot of political interesting discussions.  Well, you know, we're talking business case, we most of the time only talk about money,  
**[0:21:24-0:21:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:21:24):**  like first grade money.  So that's why I'm saying the VAT and the fish.  But actually, as a government, of course, they have a huge problem that it's a location  where there's a lot of disputes, an unsafe location, not always easy for them to go to  terrorist activities.  
**[0:21:45-0:21:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:21:45):**  And they want to have it part of Egypt, but it's the Sinai.  So you know, there tends to be sometimes a little bit of discussion.  So just creating a balanced situation is already of a huge value to the government.  But we cannot easily say that value is, you know, accumulated towards this and this amount.  And of course, the same goes for if you have a system where people can take care of themselves,  
**[0:22:14-0:22:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:22:14):**  they won't run off to Europe to have a life for their children and themselves.  So also, there is a lot of value.  So the value I think the value added will be enormous, but it's very different when  you calculate because we like calculation.  So we you know, we tend to say like, oh, it's a very beneficial project.  
**[0:22:39-0:22:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:22:39):**  But when you mention that kind of amount, people tend to say, oh, that's too much.  So it takes away all the credibility.  And it's far fetched for people because they tend to say, oh, but I'm too little a person  to have such big impacts.  And the weathermakers is a too small a company to have that kind of impact.  
**[0:23:02-0:23:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:23:02):**  But we actually believe that as humanity, that's why we are also called the weathermakers,  because everybody can call themselves a weathermaker.  Because as humanity, we have always been already weathermakers.  We actually can create such big impact if we want to take care of ourselves and be part  of nature.  
**[0:23:21-0:23:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:23:21):**  But it's a system change.  It's a huge switch.  And for the current the first phase, I imagine the right people say yes, tomorrow, how long  do you envision that first phase to take before you can start saying or speaking about abundance  of fish and abundance of life, let's say in the lake and around the lake?  
**[0:23:41-0:23:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:23:41):**  Is that months, years, generations?  What is the timeline we're looking at here for this specific very large area?  It's not just a small lake.  It's not just for people to understand this is massive.  But what are you seeing in terms of, let's say the money comes, the approval comes, probably  
**[0:23:58-0:24:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:23:58):**  the approval comes first, then the money.  You start tomorrow, day after tomorrow, what are the timelines we're looking at before  we see significant, significant impact, and maybe even before the weather starts adapting  to it or starts being influenced and being made, quote unquote.  For the weather, we need three tracks.  
**[0:24:15-0:24:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:24:15):**  So we're talking now about phase one, track one.  So the weather will come later.  That impact is a longer term.  However, the aquatic system, when you start dredging, as I said, you know, they can do  huge amounts in very short time.  
**[0:24:28-0:24:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:24:28):**  So our biggest challenge is going to be the management systems to have them have a clear  view on the impact they're having while dredging, because they have a different outcome request  now.  Normally, yeah.  Normally, it's like dig as much as possible.  
**[0:24:44-0:24:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:24:44):**  So they need to dredge the lake.  So they need to make the lake a lot deeper and all that sediment from like two or four  meters, but it goes down a lot more that sediment.  In this case, you need it and you need it probably in a certain state.  So what is so different from a normal assignment they do when they have to dredge a port and  
**[0:25:00-0:25:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:25:00):**  make it deeper or have to do some work like that?  What is the challenge for them?  Let's start first with your previous question, because I need to answer that first.  The first results you're already going to see in like three months time.  So that's really quick.  
**[0:25:16-0:25:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:25:16):**  At this moment, there are like 2000 families living from the lake, and it used to be way  more.  Everybody living around the lake used to live from the lake, but there's not enough there  yet.  So for those first families, those first three months is going to be huge impact because  
**[0:25:32-0:25:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:25:32):**  they're going to have enough food on their tables and they're going to have all that  hope coming.  And, you know, that's enormous already.  That impact is done because you dredge inlets towards the ocean.  So it's not deepening the lake yet.  
**[0:25:46-0:25:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:25:46):**  It's creating flushing of fresh water from the ocean, which is less saline, cooler, and  you create more oxygen, so you create more life in the lake itself.  So that's part one.  And that's going to have a huge impact in a very short time.  If you're talking about the full lake, we think it's going to take us five years.  
**[0:26:10-0:26:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:26:10):**  And as you said, yes, you're going to use what you dredge and use that to create the  wetlands surrounding the lake.  So you're going to create nature there where juvenile fish and all the trophic levels of  life can start to regenerate and also plants, you know, plants, trees and have their root  systems revive those soils.  
**[0:26:33-0:26:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:26:33):**  And that's going to have a huge impact.  And that's a timeline which is sensible for everybody straight away.  And it will get to that abundant point in those five years time.  And it continues after, obviously, but it's going to hit like a significant tipping point  in abundance relatively quickly.  
**[0:26:52-0:26:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:26:52):**  Like five years is not a lot.  It's a lot, but it's not a lot at the same time.  Well, and of course, the Egyptian government wants us to do the three years.  So let's see, you know, how much time we take for it.  But yes, the lake is going to regenerate very quickly.  
**[0:27:04-0:27:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:27:04):**  Is it possible to do it faster?  Or is this timeline really based on, let's say, growth curves in nature?  Like you cannot pull a piece of grass, it's not going to grow faster because of that,  or a tree or make fish grow faster?  Or is this also limited by resources and things like that?  
**[0:27:21-0:27:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:27:21):**  Well, it actually links also to the question that you already asked when I didn't answer  the other one yet.  If you have a normal dredging project, it's like how much cubic meter of substance you  can dredge within a day?  And just let go.  
**[0:27:38-0:27:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:27:38):**  And now you really have to look at yes, but if you go slower, you keep more intact, then  you have less, you know, it's a settlement, it needs to have time.  You don't want to over stir the whole system, which will have negative impact on the fish,  etc, etc.  So you need to take more time to do the work that could be done faster.  
**[0:28:01-0:28:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:28:01):**  And the game is going to be with monitoring also, like where can we move faster?  And what time do we need?  We will learn while doing.  And it mainly depends on also the waves, the currents, tidal energy.  So the most important thing is to have the people that are doing their work have all  
**[0:28:23-0:28:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:28:23):**  these different data inputs, so that they can have easy access towards decision making.  Can I move forward?  Do I need to go slower?  Can I go faster?  So that will actually optimize the productivity and also the timeline of the project and the  
**[0:28:40-0:28:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:28:40):**  outcome.  So you're building like, on technology wise, like these monitoring, measuring and management  systems to work with the dredging company because you're not dredging yourself, but  to make sure that the outcome is the best possible and still at the least possible time,  because you have the attention there, obviously.  
**[0:28:59-0:29:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:28:59):**  Is that where you spend a lot of the time of the company on?  It's a very important part, definitely.  And I think in the long term, it will be one of our main passes.  So at this moment, we put a lot of time and effort in engineering design itself.  What is needed?  
**[0:29:15-0:29:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:29:15):**  How much is needed?  What are the volumes?  What kind of regenerative aquatic ecosystems do we need?  What are the habitats, etc.  So there's a lot of energy going in that part and also in the development of new technologies  
**[0:29:28-0:29:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:29:28):**  that we need to transfer the aquatic towards the land system.  But in the long term, I see for us as a strategy and also for creating the impact that we need  the actual management systems to have every party within this complex transferal of energy,  have the data available to make their own decisions.  So yes, I think that is our main goal to create that and also to put that in a contractual  
**[0:29:56-0:30:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:29:56):**  setting so that we can also have KPIs on top of that and understand if we actually hit  our goals and have value systems connected to that.  And what is still missing there?  I mean, apart from that, that overview is probably not there, etc.  But is there are there pieces of technology you would love to have or systems you would  
**[0:30:19-0:30:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:30:19):**  love to have?  Like if that would exist, that would be amazing.  Certain sensors, monitoring or completely different decentralized autonomous organizations.  Like what if you had a wishlist, what would be on top to be able to get off the shelf  tomorrow and use?  
**[0:30:34-0:30:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:30:34):**  My wishlist is actually to create the minimum viable products.  So I need a location to do so.  I have the team ready.  We have the competences in house.  We know in which language we want to create it.  
**[0:30:47-0:30:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:30:47):**  We want to create a digital twin of the of the environmental data of the earth.  We know how to do so.  But we need time and investment to do it and a location to trial it on.  So I would say a coastal zone.  And how many other areas like the project you're working on now are there?  
**[0:31:07-0:31:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:31:07):**  Like let's say this doesn't happen or doesn't happen anytime soon or does happen and the  company is looking, OK, what's next?  Are there many other coastal zones with lakes like that or many other places where you could  apply this at this scale and have weather impact?  Have you looked at that?  
**[0:31:22-0:31:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:31:22):**  I can't imagine you didn't.  But what's the zone beyond this specific project?  How many other projects could you be working on?  I think there is a there's a divide in the question for me.  We have the goal to have watershed wide impact and a watershed definitely if you look in  
**[0:31:42-0:31:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:31:42):**  the Netherlands, for instance, when are we hitting a mountain range two thousand meter  high?  That's pretty far away from us as a coastal zone.  It's the Alps basically.  And sometimes it's a very widespread area.  
**[0:31:56-0:32:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:31:56):**  I mean, you could say that as a Dutch, we are part of the Brazilian watershed.  I mean, there's just ocean between us.  So then it's such a huge area that it's almost impossible to get to that point immediately  or to have a project in sync to have that done.  The Sinai is, I think, the most perfect, beautiful small watershed out there to do this.  
**[0:32:21-0:32:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:32:21):**  So if you look at our actual goal, watershed wide ecosystem regeneration, the Sinai is  the ideal location.  However, there are very many small watersheds available.  So coastline with a mountain top not that far away.  And it could be that it's just a very small wadi, but each and every wadi would be fantastic  
**[0:32:44-0:32:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:32:44):**  to do this.  So the world is our stage, you could say.  So there's a lot of possibility to have projects.  And we're not only talking about coastal zones, we're also talking about rivers, lakes and  having them be abundant again.  
**[0:32:59-0:33:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:32:59):**  And in the rivers, in the Netherlands, for instance, we talk a lot about pollution because  of too high level of nutrients.  But nutrients are not a pollutant.  They're just in an imbalanced state within the water system.  And life, living biomass, can actually balance that out.  
**[0:33:21-0:33:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:33:21):**  So it's not only salt, it's also freshwater systems.  So where there's water, we can do stuff, we can do our work, or we can, you know, have  other people be intrigued and bring their energy.  And because you very specifically mentioned we would love others to do this as well.  We love competitors, competition.  
**[0:33:45-0:33:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:33:45):**  Let's imagine we're listening or there's a group of investors listening to this.  What would you tell them if they are getting interested and they should in, let's say,  the water cycle restoration or regeneration?  Let's not just focus on soil.  The water cycle is what drives it.  
**[0:34:00-0:34:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:34:00):**  Where would you point them?  What would you tell them?  Obviously without giving investment advice, but what would you tell them if they're getting  excited about this to start investigating, to start talking, to diving deep into it?  Because there are not so many, let's say, holistic engineers like yourself.  
**[0:34:14-0:34:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:34:14):**  What would be your advice to a room full of investors that are getting interested in their  areas, their zones in this water cycle regeneration theme?  Well, the biggest obstacle here is that we don't have a project yet to place the money.  And a lot of investors are interested in placing their money in projects.  And not only investors, but also United Nations, the World Bank, European Commission, et cetera,  
**[0:34:37-0:34:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:34:37):**  et cetera.  They all have these pots of gold, you could say.  And they have them ready to place in regenerative projects, but they don't have any projects  to put it in.  Or not sustainable projects, because it's projects that will need money forever and  
**[0:34:52-0:34:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:34:52):**  are actually depleting the aquifers at those locations.  So we're talking about creating projects that have a sustainable future in the sense that  you need to invest in it, but after a while the system will keep itself in balance.  So then it is a system where services could come out.  So it's a very good investment if you look at the hedge against system crash that we're  
**[0:35:18-0:35:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:35:18):**  talking about these days.  But we first need those projects.  And to get there, we have the issue that because we are working from intrinsic value, we're  creating consultancy work so that we can pay our livelihood while investing all our other  hours in creating solutions to get this done.  
**[0:35:39-0:35:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:35:39):**  But if we keep on doing it with our own revenue, which we've done for four years already, so  I'm actually very proud of that.  And we're now a team of 11.  But it takes a long time if we keep doing it like that.  And I would say after four years, we showed that we are a viable company.  
**[0:35:56-0:36:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:35:56):**  And we need, let's say, two and a half million to get the stress out of the money system  and get all the energy and inspiration into the development.  And then we'll have those projects.  Well, all those billions and millions can flow into and regenerate our earth because  we're creating systems that can be copy-paste wherever we want to do it open source.  
**[0:36:18-0:36:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:36:18):**  We're very keen on that also, because as an opt-in, of course, we want to have all the  data and that will make us smarter and make us more effective and make us able to calibrate  all our solutions towards even more efficient settings.  So you're saying at the moment we are a bit distracted because of the consultancy work  we have to do to keep the company going.  
**[0:36:40-0:36:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:36:40):**  But yeah, which means we're not focusing all of our time and energy and resources and  vision into these projects that we would love to do, which is many, I think, consultants  that also are building projects and products have that constant tension.  So that's something that needs to be resolved in order for you to be able to focus fully  on these kinds of projects.  
**[0:37:02-0:37:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:37:02):**  Would also projects be interesting in a sense that if somebody comes, yeah, but I have an  aquatic system.  I have I'm in control partly of a watershed, partly of enough land to potentially have  an impact in Australia in somewhere else where, let's say, the water system and the mountains  and the watershed is slightly smaller, maybe than the one we're describing in the Netherlands.  
**[0:37:22-0:37:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:37:22):**  You're obviously interested as an engineer and as a you're also interested in projects  and working on them.  So that might be another route to apply it on a much smaller scale, but you still will  influence the weather.  And if there's one landowner, it tends to go a bit faster if he or she is on board,  
**[0:37:38-0:37:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:37:38):**  I'm imagining.  Definitely.  And I think just to add to your comment, what have we done in these four, four and a half  years is most of the projects that we did were projects that assisted us in building  up our competencies and our team to be able to do what we want to do.  
**[0:37:58-0:38:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:37:58):**  So we created workability tools for ships for the company, the dredging company, which  improved their productivity with average five percent.  Well, if you know how much these ships cost per day, then you know that that is a huge.  Yeah, there was a good investment of them to have us build that.  But that building of that system has a lot of competencies needed that we also need to  
**[0:38:24-0:38:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:38:24):**  build the system of steering them during dredging of ecology work.  So in all these kind of projects, I think 80 percent of our time was actually spent  in projects that assisted us in the build of.  But we're now at that moment that I say, like, we're really ready for the track one.  So the regeneration of the coastal zone, we're ready.  
**[0:38:47-0:38:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:38:47):**  And we needed this four and a half years to really start shimmering where we needed and  shining and being able to do so.  We're ready.  We're now investing much of our time in a solution of having the aquatic system go to  the land system.  
**[0:39:03-0:39:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:39:03):**  And if we have a project which is large scale, then a small pilot to also assist that part  will be very tangible or credible.  Just what is that connection between the aquatic and the land system?  We're going to get technical, but I'm very curious.  Just describe it visually, because we're obviously in audio.  
**[0:39:21-0:39:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:39:21):**  And how does that system, what are you building there?  What do you mention there, basically, for us newbies to understand?  Well, we need methods to reuse the sediments.  And I'm talking about the sediments that once were part of an ecosystem, let's say a lush  garden of Eden with everything there, with rivers flowing, with fishes going upstream  
**[0:39:41-0:39:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:39:41):**  and coming down and, you know, the whole setting.  And that was used for agriculture, for, you know, we cut the trees and we sow plants and,  you know, we have animals graze the land, et cetera.  In the end, it was degraded enough to be flushed away with rain, eroded, and it came into the  lake.  
**[0:40:07-0:40:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:40:07):**  As you said, the lake was much deeper.  I mean, we're talking about tens of meters deeper, and now it's one and a half meters  deep on average.  So what is in that lake is that eroded sediment out of your lush system.  So what we want to do is take that sediment with its indigenous seed memory, with its  
**[0:40:25-0:40:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:40:25):**  indigenous nutrients and everything that is needed for that specific location on the earth,  because it is indigenous and you want to place it back.  But it's saline today, so we need to desalinate those sediments.  And we have a prototype on the construction to do so.  Basically, what's interesting is that we talk a lot about soil erosion with water, obviously,  
**[0:40:46-0:40:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:40:46):**  in larger watershed systems where it usually goes down a river and then it ends up in sea  and it's sort of lost.  I mean, it depends because also there it needs to be dredged if the end of the river gets  too shallow.  But in this case, it's very close.  
**[0:40:58-0:40:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:40:58):**  Like it's in the lake.  Like you could you could touch it and see it.  And of course, it's saline, but there is a possibility to reactivate, to bring it back  and to have all that seed memory, to have all that back because it's relatively close  in terms of I think many other watershed systems cannot or it's very tricky to do it because  
**[0:41:16-0:41:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:41:16):**  it's runoff and it ends up in an ocean somewhere and it goes very deep.  But in many other places where it's so shallow, maybe it is possible to with not too much  energy to bring it back on shore and to use it again.  So that's where there's prototype and work being done now.  And it is also very important in a timeline because there is a natural line that is keeping  
**[0:41:38-0:41:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:41:38):**  the lagoon in place.  So there's a land strip between the lake and the ocean, which makes it a lagoon.  But that is constantly under attack of all the elements.  So winds, ocean, weather, waves, tidal energy.  And you see it already diminishing.  
**[0:41:58-0:42:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:41:58):**  So the moment that that breaks, then you lose that what we're talking about, because then  it's flushed into the deeper parts of the ocean.  So at this moment it's contained, but time is of the essence.  And we're talking about that part being in place for, let's say, 10,000 years, probably  longer because before that it was a very luscious lagoon.  
**[0:42:20-0:42:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:42:20):**  But it kept the eroded sediment in place for thousands of years.  But if that breaks down and we're talking about not, I think within 20 years it could  be very much quicker than that.  But you see it already deteriorating as we speak.  So there is a time limit on this solution, on this location.  
**[0:42:44-0:42:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:42:44):**  And then I like to ask this question, what would you do if you would be in charge of,  let's say, a large investment fund?  And of course you can invest in the weathermakers, but I am always asking this question because  I like to understand priorities.  What would people focus on if they had, I wouldn't say unlimited resources, but let's  
**[0:43:00-0:43:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:43:00):**  say a billion dollars.  What would you, tomorrow morning, you're not, I mean, you are still the co-founder of the  weathermakers, but you have now to put this money to work.  With all the projects you've seen, all the possibilities you've seen, what would you  do with a billion dollars and why?  
**[0:43:15-0:43:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:43:15):**  Regenerate the Sinai.  Would that be enough?  No, it's not enough, but it's a hell of a lot of money to kickstart it.  And would it be enough to get the agreement, like is money the issue there?  Or is it more political, not getting the right signatures and the right okays at the right  
**[0:43:33-0:43:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:43:33):**  places yet?  Or would a billion dollars in your back pocket actually help to kickstart some things?  I'm very happy that the negotiations is between the contractor, so the dredging company and  the Egyptian government that we come after.  But let's say the Egyptian government says they don't need other people's money for this.  
**[0:43:52-0:43:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:43:52):**  They say they can pay for it themselves.  Definitely phase one.  And I think that partly is political because then it's their project and there's no other  influence within their region.  But I think at the moment that we say, I mean, we have contact with them straight as well.  
**[0:44:11-0:44:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:44:11):**  If we would bring to the table to the whole consortium with the dredging company also,  hey guys, we've got a billion dollars.  First loss or something.  Yeah.  I mean, it depends on the conditions coming with that money.  
**[0:44:24-0:44:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:44:24):**  I mean, each and every euro comes with a condition most of the time.  But no, if we have a billion to spend and it doesn't have to be returned in a very quick  note.  It could be, it's your, you're the investor.  It could be 20 years, could be 30 years, 50 years, whatever you prefer.  
**[0:44:42-0:44:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:44:42):**  But it has to come back.  Let's say it's investment money.  It's not grand capital.  But you're saying that could make a significant impact in, would you only spend it there or  invest it there or would you also look at other projects to maybe prove in different  
**[0:44:53-0:44:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:44:53):**  contexts and locations to get more things going?  Well, as I already said to you, Koen, this is the most perfect small watershed out there.  So it has everything we need.  But in not the ideal political place, we might say.  It's not the easiest political sense.  
**[0:45:10-0:45:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:45:10):**  Yeah.  No, but on the other hand, why is it not a political easy location?  Probably connected to the degradation.  Yeah.  There's a lot of talk about what are the reasons to have war.  
**[0:45:21-0:45:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:45:21):**  I believe that water is a very important part of that.  So also to show that impact.  If it can be done there at the perfect place in not ideal circumstances.  Yeah.  So for me, so of course a billion, probably I would say, you know, there are some of the  
**[0:45:38-0:45:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:45:38):**  tracks or parts that we could pilot somewhere else to show, to learn.  I mean, we're building a prototype in our back garden here in Nimbus.  We don't have desert here, but it's very useful also here.  We need to learn.  So there would be a lot of, there would be part of the investment would go to prototypes  
**[0:45:56-0:46:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:45:56):**  and pilots a little bit more close by where we can visit and really feel the whole setting.  But that's why I was saying I need two and a half million.  I don't need a billion to do that.  So the big money would go to the project Sinai, because also there we have the restoring of  the water cycle as an academic research.  
**[0:46:14-0:46:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:46:14):**  So there's a PhD already going on that to have it scientifically proven what the impact  of regreening is on your weather system.  And you need that kind of proof to have the whole world adopt and then do the same in  their region.  So I would love for all the dredging ships to do the full coastline of the Northern Africa  
**[0:46:35-0:46:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:46:35):**  settings.  I mean, there's so much to do there.  So I could use all their additional productivity.  So let's go.  We have, because for me, billion is then not enough.  
**[0:46:47-0:46:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:46:47):**  So if there is no limit on spending, yes, we would do the full coastal zone of the Northern  Africa zone.  And probably there will be a lot of investors that want to do it in Spain because that's  more Western and European.  Easier to digest.  
**[0:47:05-0:47:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:47:05):**  Yeah.  Yes.  So yes, they're spending enough.  And if you could change one thing overnight, so no longer in charge of the one billion,  but you have a magic power, you have a magic wand that can change one thing overnight.  
**[0:47:18-0:47:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:47:18):**  Could be, I mean, people have given all kinds of answers to this question, global consciousness.  I mean, we talk a lot about food and egg taste.  It could be banning all chemical fertilizers and inputs, or it could be, I don't know,  consciousness on the water cycle is the key.  Anything you can imagine, but you have the power to change only one thing.  
**[0:47:36-0:47:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:47:36):**  What would that be?  Awareness of the natural laws.  You call them laws, not principles?  Is it on purpose?  I think they should be laws.  
**[0:47:45-0:47:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:47:45):**  Yeah.  We shouldn't.  For me, everything which is not a natural solution or not a natural answer will in the  end create more problems.  Which is interesting coming from engineers that are using these gigantic machines to  
**[0:48:00-0:48:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:48:00):**  do dredging.  How do you combine that?  How do you see dredging, which is taking pieces of the ocean floor or in this case, a lake  floor, like very deep technology, very invasive technology?  Is that part of nature's laws as dredging happens by nature as well?  
**[0:48:16-0:48:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:48:16):**  Or how do you explain that?  It's using our industrial revolution or our solutions and our technology to large scale  assist nature to get back to her strength and have her back in her light spot and do  what she does best.  So I mean, we mind the world.  
**[0:48:41-0:48:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:48:41):**  So let's mind properly.  We broke a lot of systems and by just having awareness and meditation, we will not have  it return to her natural strength in time.  I mean, the earth will get back in strength in time, but not quick enough for us.  And I think that as people, we have the instruments with our thumbs and our technical abilities  
**[0:49:07-0:49:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:49:07):**  and our data to assist, but I think we need to understand that we are serving and we're  not demanding or controlling.  So yes, I would love to use all technology in the world that is available to us today  to get to that point.  But always with the commons, it needs to bring us to a rebalanced system, which will be able  
**[0:49:37-0:49:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:49:37):**  to be run without those technologies.  So there are time limits.  So that's the condition.  It's time limited self destruction.  No, it's time limited usage.  
**[0:49:48-0:49:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:49:48):**  We should not create dependency on technology or dependency on big machines, but we should  use our abilities to bring it in the position to don't need it anymore.  I think that's a very interesting opinion.  Starting with what's the application of technology as it's becoming bigger and bigger and more  intrusive, etc.  
**[0:50:11-0:50:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:50:11):**  But I think that notion of it should run without technology at some point, then it's much easier  to explain it that way than saying it needs to be nature based biomimicry, etc, etc, because  people get around that all the time.  But it should be able to run at some point relatively quickly, let's hope without the  big diggers or without the software, without the algorithms, without the sensors.  
**[0:50:32-0:50:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:50:32):**  But as you have investors listening to your podcasts, most of the time it's like, hey,  wait, this is a strange thought because many institutions, for instance, run on creating  new problems, new questions, because they want to do new research.  And we tend to create solutions that don't need us anymore.  So we want to be redundant.  
**[0:50:54-0:50:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:50:54):**  Which means you can work on other projects.  There's a world of projects out there to do.  Yes, there's a goal in it itself.  We need to be redundant in the end.  And we are happy to do so as we are also happy to receive a lot of competitors because there's  
**[0:51:08-0:51:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:51:08):**  so much work to do.  But I think you can you can frame it to an investor saying we don't want our limited  resources, which could be software, which could be big machinery, which could be people,  energy, focus, knowledge to be locked in one project, but it needs to be limited in time  because then we can work on another one and another one.  
**[0:51:28-0:51:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:51:28):**  And there's an efficiency that maybe resonates well with with spreadsheet people that say,  I will let's not lock it in there because it will need us forever.  It will break at some point.  It's better to use our limited resources in other places and have more projects.  Final question.  
**[0:51:44-0:51:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:51:44):**  It's never the final one.  But where are you contrarian?  There are many ways.  But in the let's say the region ag and for the regeneration space, the large scale regeneration  space, it's probably not such a busy space.  
**[0:51:54-0:51:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:51:54):**  Unfortunately, we need a lot more people, a lot more resources, a lot more energy and  smart brains thinking about and doing things in the water cycle.  But when you are at these conferences and these events now online, previously offline,  obviously, that's hopefully coming back.  Where do you see this question comes from John Kempf who always asks, it's what do  
**[0:52:11-0:52:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:52:11):**  you believe to be true about regenerative agriculture, in this case, regeneration that  others don't?  So where are you thinking differently?  What do you notice at these coffee tables?  You think, oh, that's weird.  
**[0:52:21-0:52:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:52:21):**  We think very differently about that.  Let's say firstly, we don't go to many of those conferences online or offline, because  I don't think it's where we're going to find the solution.  So it's a lot of energy at this time, I think.  And we're not starting our company to then have like a circus act on stage to tell about  
**[0:52:44-0:52:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:52:44):**  our results.  Although we will have to have a lot of communication and marketing in place when we actually showed  what we can do so that people can start doing it themselves.  So that's a very important thing that we're lacking at this moment.  We need to do better communication and better marketing.  
**[0:53:03-0:53:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:53:03):**  What did trigger me most was to talk about services.  I was at the United Nations UNCCD, a COP in China.  That was the one that I visited.  More than that, we didn't.  And there was a lot of talk about services.  
**[0:53:20-0:53:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:53:20):**  For me, it was like ecosystem services.  Yeah, why are we still talking about what can we take from the land instead of what  can we bring?  Do we really as people still don't understand that our full livelihood is created on a biosphere  which is healthy?  
**[0:53:42-0:53:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:53:42):**  And if the biosphere is not in place, society and economy will not flourish.  So when are we really starting to understand that it's done with just taking and we need  to give the biosphere time to heal and we really need to assist it in that.  So my biggest annoyance was to talk about ecosystem services.  So we talk about ecosystem function because if the system functions well and you understand  
**[0:54:13-0:54:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:54:13):**  how the balance of that system ideally would be to evolve to an abundant system, then you  also understand what you can harvest.  And then you harvest in a sense to have the whole system grow.  So you can take services, but when you understand the function of the system.  So that is, I think that's my main.  
**[0:54:38-0:54:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:54:38):**  I think there's no better way to end this conversation there.  Very well said, the language we use in the space is up for an upgrade and an update,  but it's also the language we inherited from a system that is on its way out.  So we have to deal with it while we're transitioning that.  I want to thank you, Maddy, so much for coming on the podcast and hopefully it's not the  
**[0:54:59-0:55:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:54:59):**  last time.  I'm extremely curious.  I say that very often, but this case it's even more true to follow this over time and  to see where this will lead to.  I mean, there's an ambition here at a scale that we see unfortunately very rarely in this  
**[0:55:12-0:55:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:55:12):**  space.  We often talk about hectares and not about full ecosystems and definitely not about influencing  the weather stabilizing in a region that needs it so desperately.  So thank you so much.  First of all, for the work you do, good luck over the next months to start phase one and  
**[0:55:28-0:55:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:55:28):**  get all the approval you need.  And of course, with all the prototypes and all of that.  Thank you for the time.  And if you find any investors with a plot where we can have some aquatic abundance and  monitor it and create systems around it.  
**[0:55:45-0:55:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:55:45):**  I'm very happy to hear.  If you found the investing in regenerative agriculture and food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  It's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few seconds.  
**[0:56:02-0:56:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:56:02):**  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  join my membership community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on gumroad.com slash investing region egg or in the description  below.  
**[0:56:23-0:56:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/maddie-akkermans#t=0:56:23):**  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  