### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2021-00-21)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  What does regenerative dairy look like and how do you build a lighthouse example for  many industrial dairies in the US?  
**[0:00:21-0:00:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:00:21):**  Plus, can regenerative dairy be a medicine?  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture, Investing as if  the Planet Mattered, a podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative  food and agriculture space to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate  soil, people, local communities and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  
**[0:00:46-0:00:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:00:46):**  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat and it's time that we as investors, big and small,  and consumers start paying much more attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  In March last year we launched our membership community to make it easy for fans to support  
**[0:01:08-0:01:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:01:08):**  our work and so many of you have joined as a member.  We've launched different types of benefits, exclusive content, Q&A webinars with former  guests, ask me anything sessions plus so much more to come in the future.  For more information on the different tiers, benefits and how to become a member check  gumroad.com slash investing region egg or find the link below.  
**[0:01:29-0:01:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:01:29):**  Thank you.  Welcome to another episode today with Stephanie and Blake Alexander, the owners of the Alexandra  family farm, the first regenerative dairy in the world and we're definitely going to  unpack that.  The fourth generation dairy farmers with over 40 years of experience.  
**[0:01:43-0:01:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:01:43):**  Blake and Stephanie founded the Alexandra family farm in Crescent City, California in  1988.  Welcome Blake and Stephanie.  Thank you.  It's great to be here.  
**[0:01:53-0:01:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:01:53):**  Yes, thank you.  And so to start with an obvious question, but are you born on a farm, on a dairy farm?  What is your connection to soil?  Did you move out to that?  Was it a very conscious choice?  
**[0:02:03-0:02:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:02:03):**  Was it, I wouldn't say forced, but what is your story leading to one of the leading regenerative  dairy farms in the world?  Yeah, we're both products of growing up here in California, just on opposite ends of the  state.  I'm from the extreme Northern California where I'm fourth generation on my mom's side of  
**[0:02:21-0:02:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:02:21):**  the family.  And my dad was actually an immigrant from the Portuguese islands, the Azores.  And so I grew up as the only son in our family with two sisters, knowing that I was always  going to be outside working with dad and ultimately growing up to be a dairyman, right?  We lived on a rented and leased facility for my entire life.  
**[0:02:41-0:02:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:02:41):**  And so I didn't know where I was going to be a dairyman and that later evolved, but  absolutely inherited this career.  Just didn't inherit any land with it.  And then I grew up in Southern California, as Blake said, my great grandfather immigrated  from the Netherlands in the LA area and started dairying there.  
**[0:03:01-0:03:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:03:01):**  And then eventually we, I grew up 45 minutes from LA where we contributed to the LA milk  pool and always prayed I'd marry a dairy farmer.  I've been on the dairy, love working the dairy.  So met Blake at Cal Poly San Luis Obispo in college about 38 years ago.  And was there any, for both of you actually, any doubt ever to not be a dairy farmer or  
**[0:03:21-0:03:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:03:21):**  not be a farmer at all?  Never, absolutely never.  I was raised thinking that I could, I as a woman could be a dairy farmer.  I was that involved in our family dairy.  And then you both mentioned, I mean, connections to the land, but not necessarily the land  
**[0:03:36-0:03:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:03:36):**  where you're now.  How did you find this land?  How did your life journey lead to this specific pieces of land, which is quite large and how  deep are the roots now basically?  So we got married and first worked for my father for only about six months, just really  
**[0:03:52-0:03:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:03:52):**  kind of getting our feet on the ground, knowing that we were going to move out onto our own  somewhere.  And a facility down in Southern California, Los Angeles area where Stephanie's from came  available.  And so we went down there and started a partnership with her parents.  
**[0:04:08-0:04:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:04:08):**  And we were in that region for almost four years.  At that time, this land came for sale up here where we currently call home in Crescent City,  which is about a hundred miles north of where I grew up, but it's very similar region.  It was a grass based dairy area.  And so for me, it was like coming home.  
**[0:04:29-0:04:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:04:29):**  And so we made that big move about 30 years ago to come here to this farm.  And it's a very different place.  I mean, very different climate than where you grew up Stephanie.  And because you've mentioned already the far north of California, and this is even a hundred  kilometers further, around the bus north.  
**[0:04:44-0:04:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:04:44):**  So this is just described visually because we're on an audio tour, obviously what the  land looks like when we close our eyes and we're imagining visiting.  Wow.  When we bought this ranch, it was one of those feelings, how beautiful it is here.  And we as farmers realized, oh my goodness, we are the true environmentalist.  
**[0:05:03-0:05:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:05:03):**  We've got to make a difference with this land.  We now have children when we were moving here and need to be mindful of all the things we  need to do right for the land.  And growing up in Southern California, yes, I miss the heat, but it didn't take long.  I think more importantly, I missed family.  
**[0:05:21-0:05:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:05:21):**  And as we grew our own family and the kids started school, then you become friends with  many people who also become family.  Yeah, so for your listeners, I would first describe Southern California and much of the  environment where the majority of the milk in our state is coming from is where you've  got large confinement farms or the cattle are living in a corral and being fed on a  
**[0:05:42-0:05:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:05:42):**  feed manger.  And in Southern California, sometimes the air quality was not so good because we were  so close to the metropolitan area of Los Angeles.  And so I used to say, wow, this is a bad environment for cows and people.  It really was.  
**[0:05:56-0:06:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:05:56):**  And so when we come here, you know, to close our eyes and describe where we are now, it's  just an absolute beautiful setting.  We've got the ocean about two kilometers to the west and we can't see it, but we can hear  it.  And the reason we can't see it is because there's beautiful trees in between and our  
**[0:06:13-0:06:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:06:13):**  land goes right up to the trees.  And some of those trees are our ranch.  And then looking in other all three other directions, you kind of see the same thing  because we're in a bit of a valley, a small valley, but there's hills that are just green  all year long with evergreen trees.  
**[0:06:28-0:06:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:06:28):**  A lot of we're on the northern end of the redwood forest.  And so we've got redwood trees that are really close and even on our ranch.  And then it's a green valley with little creeks and drainage is draining through it.  And so nothing's square and straight.  It's just very natural and beautiful.  
**[0:06:45-0:06:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:06:45):**  And we've done a lot of riparian restoration work to replant trees, to make those waterways  even more scenic and more environmentally friendly and actually just more enjoyable  for even us.  Right.  That's, you know, we're the ones that live here and see it every day.  
**[0:07:00-0:07:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:07:00):**  And the average daily temperature through the year is 11 degrees from winter to summer.  So in the winter it stays pretty mild.  We do get a lot of rain, 80 to 100 inches.  So that allows us to be green.  And when you talk about the whole western United States being in a drought, we're kind  
**[0:07:15-0:07:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:07:15):**  of immune to that so far.  And our summers we get the fog because it gets hot inland.  And we really appreciate that.  So the cows don't need shade when they're out grazing.  Yeah.  
**[0:07:26-0:07:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:07:26):**  And I'm imagining you didn't put, because you mentioned nothing is square and straight.  You didn't put a huge confinement factory there as you've seen in the south.  When you arrived, what was the farm like and what did you change?  Yeah.  Excellent question.  
**[0:07:41-0:07:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:07:41):**  Because there's a, the farm had been built for about a 1000 cow dairy.  And so there are facilities because of that rainfall that Stephanie mentioned, we need  to have shelter for our cows in the winter months.  And that's a period of maybe two to four months depending on the weather and the individual  year.  
**[0:08:00-0:08:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:08:00):**  And so we have what we call free stall barns where the cows have cubicles where they can  lay down and then eat on the manger.  We can bring feed to them.  And typically the feed that we use is grass silage or haylage that we've made on our farm  in the spring and summertime and some alfalfa hay that's grown inland at other ranches where  
**[0:08:21-0:08:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:08:21):**  we have one ranch and we kind of buy about 50% of our hay as well.  So how did it, I mean, there's, there's many parts of to that question.  How did it change in the last 30 years?  Let's say first the farm, apart from all the riparian zones you planted, but like the farming  of the cows changed a lot over the last years.  
**[0:08:37-0:08:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:08:37):**  Yeah.  You know, it's interesting.  So things have changed.  When we purchased this facility, we were basically milking 1000 cows three times a day, kind  of a high yield production agriculture model that we had been trained to do from our college  
**[0:08:51-0:08:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:08:51):**  upbringing and certainly all of our peer group and folks in our generation were reaching  out and doing that larger scale dairy.  It just wasn't comfortable for me because then we've got grass across the road or grass  in the back of the fields that we're going out and harvesting at three or four or five  cuttings grass, haylage, and all we had to do was open the gate and let the cows out.  
**[0:09:12-0:09:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:09:12):**  And so it took us a few years, but in 2001 we had a big fire here on the farm and it  burned down some of our facilities, our shop and our feed barn and our electricity.  And so we had to regroup immediately and it was a very challenging time.  And so from that day forward, we started milking the cows just two times a day.  And then real soon, just a number of weeks after we started grazing again and just really  
**[0:09:39-0:09:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:09:39):**  shifted from that high yield production ag into a, I'd say a more sustainable model,  which is what the way cows have been milked around the world forever.  And so we're just stepped back to doing what our grandparents were doing and really my  dad at some point, and then we've had this evolution of the dairy industry to get bigger  and faster.  
**[0:10:00-0:10:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:10:00):**  And so we just slowed it down a tick and it's been a wonderful move and then that led to  organic, which leads to all kinds of other wonderful advantages.  I would also add to that early on, we befriended an agronomist who was just in town the other  day and he taught us about organic matter in the soil.  So we started testing our organic matters early on and mindful of those concepts in  
**[0:10:23-0:10:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:10:23):**  the soil.  Not a lot yet.  But when in 2001 or 2003, we went to Acres USA and just started learning.  I always say Blake became a soil grass enthusiast after he heard Gary Zimmer, who wrote the  book, The Biological Farmer.  
**[0:10:39-0:10:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:10:39):**  And I became a nutrient dense foodie mom in the kitchen and got involved in Weston A.  Price and things like that, where it's all about nutrition and that's what's going to  heal people.  And what did your peer group think of that?  Or maybe even your parents, like the people that sent you to these colleges where let's  
**[0:10:56-0:10:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:10:56):**  say they taught a different system.  Sure.  Yeah, that's an excellent question because I guess the first answer I want to say is,  well, we didn't ask their opinion, right?  We kind of kept it somewhat quiet.  
**[0:11:11-0:11:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:11:11):**  But I remember years ago when a friend of mine was into selling organic produce and  I know what I thought of him and that route that he took and so here I was five years  later kind of stepping down the same trail.  And so I knew enough not to really ask everyone's opinion.  And so I think one of our mottos is to stay home, work hard and try to prove everybody  
**[0:11:35-0:11:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:11:35):**  wrong if they have a negative opinion and certainly focus on what we can do and make  a change right here in our little world that eventually just grows and snowballs.  And as our products leave, then we're hopefully making a difference in the ultimate world.  And has that changed the opinion of, let's say, the outside world in the last years,  over the last few decades?  
**[0:11:57-0:12:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:11:57):**  Have you seen a shift there or have you maybe also changed your bubble around you obviously  in a sense of more people like you mentioned before?  I would say yes, there definitely has been a shift.  I think the mindfulness of better foods out there and also people are realizing that one,  they don't want processed foods.  
**[0:12:15-0:12:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:12:15):**  That's the first thing.  But also organics, we're starting to see more in the media about the dangers of chemicals  in the health system and what they're doing in the correlation to cancers in different  regions of the country.  And that's important.  
**[0:12:30-0:12:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:12:30):**  And so you can see with the growth in sales of organic products and milk is usually the  first thing, dairy, that people turn to.  Yeah, I would also answer the question.  So certainly what Stephanie says is consumers have changed.  Their awareness is much higher.  
**[0:12:44-0:12:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:12:44):**  And so then that trickles all the way back to the farm through the retailers and the  distributors and the marketers.  But I think your question was really, what is our peer group's opinion changed?  And yeah, I think some have changed.  Our peer group has probably changed the most.  
**[0:13:00-0:13:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:13:00):**  Not their mindset, just different faces.  And we're still friends with the other folks that we knew from 40 years ago and they're  continuing to do what they do in terms of their path of conventional agriculture.  And what we're trying to do is become a model for them as well as the folks that already  embrace what we do.  
**[0:13:20-0:13:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:13:20):**  And the way we become a model is by trying to do this at large scale and showing folks  that it's not just kind of hippy dippy trippy stuff and it's not just glorified gardening.  This is real high yield production agriculture with an old fashioned twist to it is somewhat  making way better nutrient dense food and getting a premium for it.  And so it makes a difference.  
**[0:13:44-0:13:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:13:44):**  You know, it's sustainable and it makes a difference.  I think there's a good moment to describe the farm just for anybody listening and hasn't  seen the website.  Obviously, I will link it below.  But what would you in a few sentences, how would you describe currently the farm size?  
**[0:13:59-0:14:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:13:59):**  What are you actually next to dairy?  What are you doing to the dairy, to the land?  How would you describe your farm in a few in a few sentences?  So it's a family farm made up of Stephanie and I and our five children have grown up  here.  
**[0:14:12-0:14:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:14:12):**  They're all now in their 20s.  Oldest one just turned 31.  The three oldest are married and working for us and with us and part of the farm.  The farm has grown and the rest of that family is now 80, 90 employees that work on the farm.  The farm is located in three counties now and five milk barns.  
**[0:14:33-0:14:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:14:33):**  And so we've just grown a lot.  And so there's a lot of activity every week, every day, and it takes a lot of people and  a lot of coordination.  In general, it's a green grass setting, 365 days a year.  We just have beautiful weather, much like an Ireland or a New Zealand type of setting.  
**[0:14:53-0:14:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:14:53):**  And cows are out on grass probably 320 to 340 days a year.  But we do have to put them in somewhat during the winter.  Depending on the rainfall today, it's like as we get a break, they can go out.  We've got heifers, young stock out grazing today all winter long and even some of our  dry cows.  
**[0:15:17-0:15:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:15:17):**  And so we lean on grass a lot and grow really high quality grass.  And then also in the setting, the pastures are broken into paddocks so that it allows  us to rotational graze the cows when they are grazing.  They always get a new portion of grass so that they're always just grazing the freshest  stuff that's allocated to them daily.  
**[0:15:37-0:15:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:15:37):**  And there's creeks and sloughs that go through our ranch that are all fenced off.  And we plant trees every year still.  We started those tree plantings when the kids were little and they don't even remember it,  but they see big trees now in the creeks.  And so that's a beautiful scenic look.  
**[0:15:53-0:15:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:15:53):**  And as Blake said, you can hear the ocean most of the time.  We get that cool breeze in the summer.  Yeah, and lots of wildlife, 250 species of birds live on our farm.  A large herd of Roosevelt elk, 200 to 300 head.  They're here every day.  
**[0:16:08-0:16:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:16:08):**  Bald eagle nest.  Yeah.  We've had an Aleutian Canada goose that was an endangered species and now it's really  recovered wonderfully to where it's actually hunted now.  And so our farm has been a big part of that recovery over the last 20 years.  
**[0:16:26-0:16:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:16:26):**  And it's brought us a lot of really wonderful attention and we're quite proud of that.  And so we've just tried to create a wonderful place for us to live because we're here every  day and our employees and their families and our, of course, our families and the next  generation.  And we actually have a couple of grandkids now that also live here on the farm and we  
**[0:16:45-0:16:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:16:45):**  just keep trying to do the right thing at every turn.  And do you remember when you started, let's say, the rotational grazing or started to  go beyond organic?  Was it relatively recent?  How did you discover, let's say, this world beyond, let's say, industrial organic that  
**[0:17:01-0:17:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:17:01):**  came in obviously not so long ago?  Yeah, I grew up with my grandfather and my dad rotational grazing somewhat.  And then I would say 50 years ago, we started not rotational grazing, kind of opened up  all the gates and let the cows wander through the pastures.  And there was a movement away from the intenseness of the old fashioned style, if you will.  
**[0:17:25-0:17:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:17:25):**  And then there was a really great awakening, I'd say, in the late 1970s with Alan Savery  and Stan Parsons came to the US and started talking about rotational grazing and electric  fencing was starting to become a practical reality.  And so we started doing some of that.  Anyhow, it's really just evolved from there.  
**[0:17:46-0:17:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:17:46):**  And so that's kind of my general understanding.  And a company Clover's Tornado was recruiting organic milk in the late 90s.  And we learned about it.  And at the same time, friends of ours were starting a big dairy in Kansas, milking 10,000  cows.  
**[0:18:02-0:18:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:18:02):**  And we were getting the same price of milk.  So we decided to go down the organic route.  It was a business decision.  Yeah.  So we were trying to compete in that industrial model realm and realizing that that was silly,  
**[0:18:15-0:18:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:18:15):**  almost stupid, in fact.  And so let's milk these cows twice a day.  Let's put them out on grass twice a day.  Let's let the cow work for a living and go back to nature and growing grass in a simple  model and burning less fuel and less mechanical harvesting of forage.  
**[0:18:33-0:18:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:18:33):**  So the organic market came along and allowed us to do that, giving us a premium.  And so we could take the production hit and financially survive.  And it worked really well for us.  Yeah.  And just slightly before that, and I didn't think about it till we're talking to you now,  
**[0:18:48-0:18:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:18:48):**  is that we had hired a consultant, two people to come into our farm and go through our books  and what we're doing and this and that.  And then we paid him money.  And then his letter to us back was the only thing he could recommend to us was bankruptcy.  That was not an option.  
**[0:19:05-0:19:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:19:05):**  We're fighters.  And we did this big bullet to have this farm.  And it was just Blake and I and the equity on our back.  And we persevered through that.  And we learned stuff from them.  
**[0:19:18-0:19:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:19:18):**  But we moved forward.  Yeah.  So I guess we didn't tell you how big the farm is in terms of acres.  When we first moved here 29, almost 30 years ago, we bought 556 acres.  And then within a few years, we leased another 300 and then another ranch.  
**[0:19:36-0:19:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:19:36):**  And so it seemed like we were the only aggressive game in town.  And so we now have, golly, close to 4000 acres here in this valley.  And we've just become a very significant part of this community and growing.  And so in total, we manage about 9000 acres in the three counties that we're farming in.  So basically, you started to make the switch for economic reasons to cut costs and cut  
**[0:20:00-0:20:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:20:00):**  input costs and don't cut the hayage so much and let the cow actually use her four feet  to actually do it themselves and walk there.  And then how has because you mentioned a shop at the beginning and that burned down, how  has it changed where the milk goes and where what you produce goes?  How is that?  
**[0:20:18-0:20:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:20:18):**  Has that shifted a lot or maybe didn't?  But where does it go now and where did it go before?  Sure.  Like Stephanie mentioned, Clover's Donnetta was our very first organic market.  And we had organic milk waiting and waiting and waiting for someone to buy it.  
**[0:20:33-0:20:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:20:33):**  So it was five months of making organic milk before we sold a load of organic milk.  And so we helped them start with their brand new bottling and label.  And then there was another creamery at the same time, Humboldt Creamery that started  as well, eventually a little later behind that.  And so there was a third one up in Tillamook that abandoned cheese.  
**[0:20:55-0:21:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:20:55):**  And so we were one load of milk would go north and one would go south every other load.  And that whole thing has just evolved.  And those markets have grown.  They've had wonderful times.  Some of them went away, some of them failed, and some of them absolutely succeeded.  
**[0:21:11-0:21:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:21:11):**  We now sell milk to nine different creameries and three and sometimes four of them are processing  milk that is unique to us with our label.  And so we're getting premium prices for that.  And then we're still working with three local creameries that are making cheese and making  some powdered milks and a little bit of fluid and even ice cream.  
**[0:21:36-0:21:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:21:36):**  You mentioned nutrient density, Stephanie, before.  How has the flavor changed of the milk over the last years as you got more enthusiastic  or more focused on grass and maybe on the cows welfare, etc.  Has it changed?  And if so, how?  
**[0:21:49-0:21:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:21:49):**  And what does it say about nutrients?  Absolutely, it's changed.  And I think I'm able to compare because I have siblings in the conventional dairy business  in central California.  And I taste their milk and always would taste our milk after and just know that it just  
**[0:22:05-0:22:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:22:05):**  had a more flavorful taste to it.  And part of it is the genetics we're using.  When we went back to grazing full time, we searched for those grass based genetics.  So we originally went to New Zealand for the Kiwi Cross and brought those genetics into  our herd.  
**[0:22:24-0:22:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:22:24):**  And then more recently, we've been more Fleck-V and we've been crossing that into our herd  and that has increased the protein in our herd in the milk.  And that's the flavor is so flavorful.  Yeah, I would say that the cows have changed, right?  The look of our cows.  
**[0:22:41-0:22:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:22:41):**  So let's go back to the virtual tour for your folks listening.  Our cows are all multiple colors now and most of them have a white face, which is the German  breed that Stephanie just mentioned, Fleck-V. And we really love those cattle because those  are bred for dual purpose, both meat and milk production at the same time.  So our cows are a little shorter and thicker and we have selected for short cows, low small  
**[0:23:06-0:23:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:23:06):**  framed animals that are more immediate and moderate size.  And so literally they're a bit more athletic.  They can walk farther to go get their pasture.  And we do ask them to do that quite often.  And you became the first officially certified regenerative organic dairy in the world through  
**[0:23:23-0:23:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:23:23):**  ROC, which we interviewed Elizabeth on the podcast.  I will definitely link it below.  What was that process like?  Was it like a lot of, I wouldn't say a lot of work, but for everything you were already  doing, was there still a big gap or was it mostly paperwork or how did you get involved  
**[0:23:38-0:23:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:23:38):**  in and why did you want to be certified as it seems like you're selling already everything  relatively local, organic premiums, et cetera?  Why the jump or why the step?  And a lot of work that comes with it with ROC.  Yeah.  
**[0:23:52-0:23:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:23:52):**  So we've been open minded and I guess willing to jump into everything and anything and really  trying to find value for what we do and primarily motivated by the fact that we had five children  and we wanted our farm to evolve into something that was a real viable option for them as  they grew up and met their spouse and made an adult decision on where to work.  We didn't want them coming home to a farm that was painful and less of an opportunity  
**[0:24:21-0:24:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:24:21):**  than they had out there in the big world.  And so that's always motivated us to look and be open minded to anything out there.  So as this regenerative stuff came along, it was in our minds just a new word for explaining  what we had already been doing and understanding through building soil and grazing cows and  managing grass correctly.  
**[0:24:45-0:24:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:24:45):**  So we had our daughter, Vanessa, who's about four years ago, just start getting involved  with both of these groups that wanted to do a regenerative certification.  And that was through the Savory Institute and also the Regenerative Organic Alliance.  And I would also add that we've known Elizabeth since we went organic and she, through the  years I had given her a Weston A. Price cookbook, Sally Fountain's Nourishing Traditions.  
**[0:25:12-0:25:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:25:12):**  So she knew our passion on the kitchen table as well, not just on the farmland.  So when the pilot program started, she asked us to be a part of it because she wanted real  people that cared all the way to the end product.  And we've always had the attitude that we want to be part of the development, part of  the solution, part of the future, and not just sit back and throw darts at the program  
**[0:25:38-0:25:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:25:38):**  and the pieces that we don't like.  And often these programs come and they say, well, you're too big, you're too this, you're  too that, and too many cows.  And so we've been really trying to prove to a lot of folks that we can do organic and  we can do it right, we can do regenerative and we can do it right, and we can do it at  
**[0:25:58-0:25:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:25:58):**  scale.  And I think that's really the biggest contribution that we're going to eventually make to, I'd  say the US agriculture first and hopefully the world next, but we've got to help large  scale farmers understand that there's a path out of this extraction agriculture that they're  currently in and there's consumers that will reward them and retailers that will reward  
**[0:26:21-0:26:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:26:21):**  them for that.  Yeah.  And the end game is better food for more people.  That's important.  And then also saving rural America, our rural towns, you know, giving examples of regenerative  
**[0:26:32-0:26:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:26:32):**  approaches that maybe they're not going to go organic, but maybe they can have longer  grazing seasons or warmer soils or just all those good things that would benefit their  farm.  So beyond the dairy, what else do you grow?  Like how complex is your system?  
**[0:26:48-0:26:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:26:48):**  I mean, you already mentioned the double function cows, obviously on the meat side.  Are there other things you grow, other things you rotate?  What does your system look like beyond the dairy or the double function cows?  So in 2005, we toured Pennsylvania with our children and came home and took an old hay  wagon and built a chicken coop, a portable chicken coop on grass.  
**[0:27:10-0:27:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:27:10):**  And that has evolved now to 40,000 hens for egg production and grazing coops that get  rotated twice a week.  So they always get new green grass.  And so we have a egg business as well.  We named it Alexander Kids because it was really the kids business.  
**[0:27:25-0:27:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:27:25):**  It was about raising kids.  And we are excited with how that kind of took off.  And that also showed us how to be in the marketplace, develop a brand distribution.  We did a lot of self-distribution in that business and those chickens are rotating through  the pastures.  
**[0:27:43-0:27:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:27:43):**  Yeah.  So as far as diversity and what else we do, in cropping, we do very little.  The diversity is all on permanent pastures and we keep adding new seeds and new plant  varieties within the old pasture.  And so we are really not farming.  
**[0:27:58-0:28:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:27:58):**  We're not disking, tilling and doing things like that.  And so, yeah, it's pretty basic.  We've got meat, milk and eggs.  That's what we're producing.  And everything we're doing is growing feed for our cows and our chickens are grazing  
**[0:28:13-0:28:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:28:13):**  on their section of ground.  And we bring in cattle to kind of clean up the grass.  When the grass gets too tall for the chickens, they get uncomfortable when it's a little  too tall.  So that's it.  
**[0:28:25-0:28:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:28:25):**  It's kind of in harmony.  And do you have any plans for the tree side of things, the agroforestry?  I mean, you've been planting a lot of trees, but also on the production side, or that's  really a completely different game.  We have such a wet climate that having trees in the middle of a pasture is...  
**[0:28:42-0:28:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:28:42):**  The cows are going to shelter up under it in the wet, cool situation.  They don't need shelter from sun here.  We are really cool.  And so it's probably not a good fit necessarily.  So our trees are all on the edges and around the riparian areas and the drainages.  
**[0:28:59-0:29:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:28:59):**  And I don't see us harvesting those much, a little bit, but not really.  It's more just providing beauty and habitat.  And of course, there's an ecological effect, I think, even in the fields and windbreak  and things like that.  But as far as silviculture and things that can be done in a dry climate or drier land,  
**[0:29:20-0:29:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:29:20):**  I just don't see that working in our setting.  What are you excited about what's next in terms of the farming or maybe the selling  side as well?  Like what is exciting?  We're now talking the end of 2021.  
**[0:29:33-0:29:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:29:33):**  What are big, big projects coming up or big things coming up that are exciting in your  farming life?  I would say right now we are excited with what we're doing because we launched a dairy  brand and we went national earlier this year and watching those sales grow as we get people  talking about regenerative and our A2 organic milk where it's the digestible protein.  
**[0:29:57-0:30:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:29:57):**  That we're just excited about right now and investing.  We don't want to start anything else because we are trying to make it.  And that's an expensive launch.  I think what she's saying is we need to get refinanced all the time and refinance our  real estate because we keep growing and outgrowing our business model.  
**[0:30:19-0:30:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:30:19):**  I also would add to that exciting part that I think we're getting more involved with regenerative  A2 powdered milks.  We've been able now to segregate our milk through systems and make some really great  powders.  Now, those powders can move around into new products and some of those new products are  
**[0:30:37-0:30:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:30:37):**  in the center of the store for a change that aren't in the refrigerated section.  Infant formulas, toddler formulas, cheese crackers and different things.  Also I think we're going to have powders that can make their way into the world market.  Working with a fellow in Australia and another broker here in the United States and partnering  with them to discover and develop more opportunity.  
**[0:31:03-0:31:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:31:03):**  Right now food companies don't have an ingredient that says we need A2 organic regenerative  milk.  Just for background, what is A2?  It's a specific type of protein.  It's a reference to the protein.  
**[0:31:18-0:31:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:31:18):**  In the cattle industry all over the world, somewhere a thousand years ago there was a  mutation of a gene where a histidine jumped in where a protein was on this amino acid  chain.  For a lot of people they can't digest that milk and so they believe that they're lactose  intolerant.  
**[0:31:36-0:31:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:31:36):**  That's the common term around the world and yet it's probably not the lactose or the milk  sugar that's causing the problem, it's the protein.  With a simple hair follicle DNA test on cattle, we can discover what genes they inherited  from both of their parents.  We're looking for the females that got an A2 gene from both parents and we refer to  
**[0:31:58-0:32:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:31:58):**  those as A2-A2 cows.  Then we know that that milk is more digestible for most folks.  Obviously, it's relatively new.  I think that the DNA testing there was always expensive.  The last 15 years.  
**[0:32:13-0:32:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:32:13):**  All mammal milk is A2.  Breast milk, goat milk, sheep milk is A2.  It was just the modern dairy breeds that had this mutation.  This almost starts touching upon food as medicine.  Definitely the density side of things because you cannot digest it and it causes a lot of  
**[0:32:31-0:32:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:32:31):**  issues.  You're not going to consume it.  I see a lot of talk around it and you, Stephanie, are definitely more in that world.  Do you see it bubbling a lot more the last 18 months or two years?  This whole discussion of food as medicine, is that something you're part of as well?  
**[0:32:49-0:32:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:32:49):**  What do you see happening there?  Absolutely.  We get a lot of anecdotal information from parents of children that are autistic that  when they drink regular milk, their autism is more aspirated.  When they drink our milk, they're very calm.  
**[0:33:03-0:33:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:33:03):**  Also, parents tell us their child with seizures.  We get calls all the time about people who can't drink dairy and they can digest our  dairy.  We've gotten people that have told us that they thought it was raw milk and they could  drink the raw milk because it still had the lactase enzyme for digestion of the lactose,  
**[0:33:20-0:33:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:33:20):**  but they still had autoimmune diseases.  Then they switched to our milk, which is that pasteurized, a mild slow pasteurization or  also ultra-pasteurized for national distribution.  They're able to not only digest our milk, unlike other milk on the shelf, they tell  us, but their autoimmune diseases disappeared.  
**[0:33:39-0:33:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:33:39):**  There's a link to a lot of health issues across America or across the world that have to do  with milk that had the mutation, the A1 milk, and we're bringing people back to dairy.  We're talking about the protein in milk.  In America, there's a lot of sensitivity to gluten, the wheat proteins.  It's the same thing.  
**[0:33:57-0:33:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:33:57):**  It's the sensitivity to a protein.  That protein is not digesting.  It's going through your gut defenses.  Now you have this foreign protein called beta-casein morphine 7 floating around through the body.  There's a lot of autoimmune diseases in America and it's part of the food system.  
**[0:34:14-0:34:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:34:14):**  It shouldn't be.  Food is medicine.  One of the exciting things that we learned and this knowledge came out of New Zealand  in a book called The Devil in the Milk.  In 2007, we read that.  
**[0:34:25-0:34:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:34:25):**  By 2008, we were starting to test our cattle.  We had to send those samples all the way to New Zealand because there weren't any labs  in America that could do that at the time.  It absolutely was cutting edge technology.  There's a conventional version of this milk called the A2 milk company that has been marketing  
**[0:34:45-0:34:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:34:45):**  milk in Australia, New Zealand, and even into Asia, China, and around the world now in different  parts quite successfully.  We simply wanted to be an organic version of that and we couldn't get anybody to do  it.  We had to start our own brand and our own creamery and processing to accomplish that.  
**[0:35:04-0:35:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:35:04):**  One of the really exciting things, the guy that wrote that book got back to us, was our  daughters have studied in New Zealand and at the university that he did his work at.  He sent us the update to the book where they had connected this to SIDS or sudden infant  death syndrome.  These are raised on mama's breast milk for as long as they can and then they switch over  
**[0:35:27-0:35:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:35:27):**  to a baby formula that now might have a one in there, the devil in the milk.  It just causes respiratory system to slow down and it's a sad deal.  Those type of things are yet to be common knowledge and we hope that what we're saying  is the truth and that we can be part of the solution.  Yeah, there's more studies that are needed.  
**[0:35:52-0:35:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:35:52):**  There's definitely a lot.  I think the milk space is interesting because it's often the first organic things people  buy as they're getting children.  Then it's a nice gateway into a lot of other things.  A Greg of Farmland LP called it the great gateway drug into organic is often milk, organic  
**[0:36:10-0:36:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:36:10):**  milk.  What would you tell?  Let's imagine we're in a theater, we're doing this in person, which we hope to do at some  point and the room is full of investors that are interested in the food system that might  have even invested in, let's say milk alternatives as well.  
**[0:36:24-0:36:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:36:24):**  They're very interested in protein.  They're interested in this space and we're having this discussion on stage.  What would you tell them, obviously without giving investment advice, but what would you  tell them to look for, to dive deeper into, to start digging?  Where should investors spend their attention and maybe at some point also make investments  
**[0:36:41-0:36:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:36:41):**  after they've done their DD, obviously, their due diligence.  Where would you point them to learn more about this fascinating space of regenerative therapy?  I think the big picture needs to start with this industrial revolution that we have and  that we've had certainly in the United States and I believe around the world where food  just got cheaper, faster and less nutrient dense.  
**[0:37:05-0:37:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:37:05):**  What did we learn from that experience?  That extraction agriculture where we were using a lot of chemical fertilizers and chemicals,  period.  What investors or what new money should be looking for is an opportunity to change the  food system and an opportunity to help farmers understand first why they should be growing  
**[0:37:26-0:37:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:37:26):**  things regeneratively or organically.  I personally say regenerative first.  I don't care so much about organic as a certification.  I think that treating the ground appropriately and honoring the system that we've been given  and the biology that lives in the soil and then understanding that and not doing things  
**[0:37:48-0:37:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:37:48):**  that harm all that ultimately brings yield efficiency and more sustainable profits to  the farmer and the rancher.  But they have to somehow get weaned off of all the current system that they're addicted  to.  There's a lot of stories and a lot of education that needs to take place first on the ground  
**[0:38:08-0:38:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:38:08):**  at the farmer level.  I think the consumers and the retailers are already getting it like Stephanie was mentioning.  There is a demand for it.  We just now need to somehow show the farmer how to get from here point A to point B.  I think an investor needs to know the farmers and needs to see what's happening at the ground  
**[0:38:29-0:38:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:38:29):**  level to have confidence in the system they're investing in if they truly want better foods  out there for more people.  That's our end game.  I am a core organic person and want that clarity and surety that it's clean food and especially  when it's coming, it's right here.  
**[0:38:50-0:38:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:38:50):**  I like to know my farmers where we're getting our fruits and vegetables, but I know not  everybody can.  An investor who's investing in some consumer product or a farm needs to have an understanding  of the soils and what they're looking for or hire the right people that can give them  the right advice to put their money in the right funnels.  
**[0:39:12-0:39:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:39:12):**  I would also add to that.  I focus on regenerative first because when you focus on the soil and you start to understand  that and farmers become aware, they're going to automatically lean towards organic principles  and they're going to stop doing some of the harmful things.  Ultimately, then organic becomes really simple for them.  
**[0:39:35-0:39:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:39:35):**  Right now, often when we talk to our peer group, we switch churches and we switch religions  from where they're at in a sense.  I think if we could tiptoe into this and start at the soil and not ask them to switch churches,  just a few religious principles in regards to soil, they will evolve at a faster rate  and we can truly affect more people.  
**[0:40:01-0:40:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:40:01):**  That's where I'm coming from with that.  Do you see that in your groups around your neighbors or people that visit the farm?  For sure, you've had many, many people stepping onto the farm and seeing the differences to  their farm that might even be relatively nearby.  Have many made changes as well?  
**[0:40:19-0:40:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:40:19):**  If not, what is keeping them from doing like you do or copying?  We often see that the neighbors are not changing as well and especially the neighbors around  these pioneering farmers.  For some reason, they keep saying this is a different climate or different soils or  all kinds of excuses to come up why it shouldn't work or couldn't work in their farm.  
**[0:40:37-0:40:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:40:37):**  What has been your response when you see or you get those answers from your neighbors  or further away neighbors that somehow see with their own eyes how it could be done but  still not take the plunge?  We could talk all day on this subject.  You're never a prophet in your own land.  
**[0:40:52-0:40:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:40:52):**  Let me just start right here locally.  We've got a handful of other neighbors and one of them often would say, I don't want  any of those weeds growing in my field that you've got, Blake.  He's referring to the chicory and the plantain and then some herbs that we have, brassicas,  all these things that have helped our soils and he doesn't want any.  
**[0:41:12-0:41:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:41:12):**  Bottom line is he's selling his cows.  He's getting out of the dairy business this month and it's sad.  He didn't have interest in a next generation that had interest in the soil or interested  in the long-term sustainability of their farm.  That's what I'm talking about is we have to somehow educate farmers to understand that  
**[0:41:33-0:41:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:41:33):**  there's a better path forward that is truly sustainable and sustainable from a farmer's  point of view means that it needs to be profitable.  We do have a lot of people that come here and admire what we do and some that come and  don't notice.  We had friends over for dinner just this weekend and they're like, man, your ranch is just  
**[0:41:52-0:41:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:41:52):**  beautiful compared to the neighbors.  It's incredible.  This is a fellow that owns a roofing company in town and he can tell.  We also dairy in Blake's hometown, Ferndale, and our son is on that dairy.  It's a dairy community where there are a lot of other dairies and they ship to the local  
**[0:42:10-0:42:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:42:10):**  cheese plant like we do, Romiano cheese.  There's been a little bit more progression on definitely going organic there and we're  seeing them rotational grazing.  We're seeing better seeds come in and the agronomist stopping in that town.  That's great to see, but I think because there was more other dairies that went organic and  
**[0:42:29-0:42:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:42:29):**  started listening as opposed to where we originally start and where we live, it was more of a,  remember we moved into this town and there was nobody who wanted the ranches so we were  able to grow.  Thus, the ones that are in the dairy business still here were just in that same paradigm  where they just always did what they did and the next generation didn't come back.  
**[0:42:50-0:42:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:42:50):**  The other community that Stephanie is referring to, which is my hometown where our son is  fifth generation on the farm that my great grandfather started 100 years ago.  There's a tighter connection to that community in a sense that there's neighbors that have  also been there for a long time.  We've all evolved together at a slower pace there.  
**[0:43:12-0:43:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:43:12):**  It's neat to have that as a contrast to what we were first describing up here, right here  in our backyard.  Yeah, I can imagine and a shout out to Joe Baird of Arruma & Arno Cheese who introduced  us and the reason why we're talking here.  Another thing, I'll put it in the show notes, they just published a piece of research in  
**[0:43:29-0:43:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:43:29):**  the Netherlands on regenerative dairies where they showed actually the economical side of  things.  They're outperforming their conventional extractive neighbors or non-neighbors or let's say somewhere  else in the country.  The economic side of things, I only found the article in Dutch so you have to Google  
**[0:43:44-0:43:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:43:44):**  translate it or deeply, but it's definitely understandable if you find a translator.  It's quite interesting.  I'm very interested always in the profitability side of things as well because it's much easier  to convince people that at least the same level.  People say, yeah, but this is the hippie stuff that you mentioned before and this can never  
**[0:44:00-0:44:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:44:00):**  be profitable and et cetera, et cetera.  The research that Jonathan and the team is doing, we had him on the call on the podcast  once and he's doing some other research in almonds and on the meat side as well.  Very, very interesting.  Unfortunately, very few people do that kind of comparison and taking a nice sample size  
**[0:44:18-0:44:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:44:18):**  of forward thinking farmers compared to the rest and just showing the level of input costs,  showing the level of birds connected to that, showing the level of profitability, et cetera.  I will link those below for whoever's interested in that.  Then a contrarian question, definitely borrowed from John Kemp who we both know, where are  you when you go to, let's say, even to actually to an organic conference like acres, et cetera,  
**[0:44:42-0:44:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:44:42):**  where are you thinking very different from your peers?  What do you believe to be true about this space compared to others?  Sure.  Here in the United States, we have the Farm Bureau, we have state Farm Bureaus and I've  been very active there and even had a chance to speak at our National Farm Bureau Convention,  
**[0:44:59-0:45:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:44:59):**  which is the American Farm Bureau, three different times.  There's like six, 7,000 people there.  The last talk I gave was titled Honor Soil as You Would Your Grandchildren.  Again, we're just trying to plant seeds in their mind that opens them up to a different  possibility.  
**[0:45:17-0:45:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:45:17):**  Buying less fertilizer next year will be a good thing.  Especially this year that we've got this crazy economy blowing up and inflation absolutely  out of control and literally fertilizers in the supply chain, fertilizers might double,  triple or quadruple in cost.  My eyes, I'm saying, there's a great opportunity for these folks to start scaling back because  
**[0:45:41-0:45:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:45:41):**  they've been in a cycle where they have to keep adding nutrients to get a marginally  smaller return of yield.  Maybe we'll get their attention this year.  Do you see that already?  Do you see like this year, do you get more people calling back saying, but you said that  
**[0:45:58-0:46:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:45:58):**  a few years ago on stage somewhere, I read something about your inputs.  Do you see any signs of that?  Absolutely.  I do.  In fact, I'm thinking of a young fellow that, well, we were at college together.  
**[0:46:10-0:46:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:46:10):**  He's not that young.  He's two years younger.  18, let's say.  Yeah.  Yeah.  
**[0:46:15-0:46:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:46:15):**  What you said was phenomenal.  I thought about it later and I went and listened to Alan Savery's TED talk and I learned.  I get what you're talking about.  Then that led to him talking to somebody else.  That led to me being invited to talk to the California State Board of Agriculture.  
**[0:46:31-0:46:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:46:31):**  Apparently, I just got written up in a magazine about that talk.  We're now asked to speak in podcast and different events all the time.  The world's opening up and listening a little bit to what we have to say.  Again, I love your question or John Kemp's approach.  What would we do and what would we say?  
**[0:46:55-0:47:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:46:55):**  It's not an easy answer, but I do know it starts in the soil and it starts with honoring  that system of the ecology and the biology that's happening in the soil and understanding  it.  Most farmers, as we got educated, didn't learn.  That's not what they're teaching at universities.  
**[0:47:12-0:47:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:47:12):**  Right.  I think, as we know, a lot of your listeners probably understand their gut health and that  gut health is so important to your whole being.  It's feeding that healthy gut and making that healthy gut.  The same with the soil is the gut of the plant.  
**[0:47:27-0:47:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:47:27):**  We just always got to be concentrating on that soil and make it healthier and healthier  because that's going to grow healthier plants.  If you could change one thing overnight, so you have a magic wand and you could change  one thing in the food system or even in the general ecosystem where we live in, what would  that be?  
**[0:47:42-0:47:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:47:42):**  Obviously, you can both answer that question very differently if you want to.  Yeah.  I'll start.  I would change the soil management of the farmer and get them off the chemical path  because down this regenerative organic approach, they would ultimately see more sustainable  
**[0:48:00-0:48:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:48:00):**  long-term benefits, yields, and profits.  Mine's probably a far off dream, but when you get investors investing in agriculture  or investing in brands and they multiply it and sell it and multiply it and sell it, at  the end of the day, it's always cheaper priced to the farmer at the farm gate.  It would be nice if there was a system where a brand was maybe sold or maybe not sold,  
**[0:48:27-0:48:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:48:27):**  just invested in so that farmers can sustain and have enough runway to get that regenerative  system implemented and therefore turn their system into profitability.  Then it's held somehow, not resold and resold because eventually that farmer loses again.  Yeah.  We've certainly seen that with large brands and international brands and just absolutely  
**[0:48:52-0:48:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:48:52):**  have seen that.  I think to be more specifically clear here for everybody is in both of what we're talking  about, when I say that we need to detox the normal chemical agriculture, there's a downside  there and somebody has to fund and finance the farm through that down cycle until they  pick up momentum on the other side and it starts snowballing in a positive direction.  
**[0:49:19-0:49:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:49:19):**  Often we need to get paid more for our regenerative products and that's actually not part of the  current system because consumers want faster and cheaper generally.  Then there's this segment that's probably listening to us right now, it is willing to  pay extra.  We just need to get all the institutions involved and get them willing to pay extra as well  
**[0:49:41-0:49:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:49:41):**  and understand that they've got to pass more of that onto the farmer.  For us personally, our starting a brand, buying the additional agriculture has all been on  our own equity, our own backs.  We are searching for refinancing.  We are maybe searching for that right kind of investor that would come in and help us,  
**[0:50:01-0:50:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:50:01):**  but not to sell it.  We didn't build a brand to sell it.  We built a brand to bring health to our farm, health to our community.  We want to better our community, which is where all the families live here around us  and our team.  
**[0:50:15-0:50:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:50:15):**  It's not about building a brand to sell.  What would you, let's say you're not the farmer, tomorrow morning you wake up and you are on  the investor side.  You have a large fund, let's say a billion dollars or 10 billion because a billion lost  a bit of its largeness over the last years.  
**[0:50:29-0:50:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:50:29):**  When I started asking this question, a billion was a lot, but not so much anymore.  Let's say you have almost unlimited resources.  What would you focus on?  I hear transition finance in both of your answers of the question before.  How would you partner with farmers or would you maybe set up something completely different,  
**[0:50:45-0:50:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:50:45):**  investing technology or investing in monitoring?  What would you focus on as an investor if you had those resources to invest or put to  work?  Yeah, that's a great question.  It's a big number and a wonderful opportunity.  
**[0:51:00-0:51:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:51:00):**  I would start from a local perspective here and work from, we need processing.  We need products that can then reach out across the country and across the world.  Like I mentioned, powdered milks and powders and high quality infant formulas.  The world desperately needs that stuff and they need it all over Asia and just everywhere.  That's one step.  
**[0:51:27-0:51:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:51:27):**  We need to add value to the farmer's products.  We sell meat, milk and eggs.  We need value added processing that complements what we do that then makes those foods more  available to more folks.  We need that here, but we need that collectively everywhere.  
**[0:51:44-0:51:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:51:44):**  Yeah, especially meat processing facilities across America.  They shouldn't be centralized.  We need more rural ones and yeah, who's going to all project manage that?  But getting the right investors and the right people in the place, they have the tools.  Last week at Acres USA, we had an opportunity to sit with our good friends, Will and Jenny  
**[0:52:06-0:52:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:52:06):**  and Jody Harris from White Oak Pastures in South Georgia.  Will and I have connected many times and he's about eight years older than I am.  So I look up to him and try to follow his lead.  They invested a lot in processing.  Yeah, exactly.  
**[0:52:25-0:52:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:52:25):**  What he has done in this quiet little community of Lupton, Georgia is just phenomenal.  It was his walk away from conventional agriculture into a different model, which is regenerative  and organic.  It's led him down a really cool path and where he's built processing for poultry as well  as red meats.  
**[0:52:49-0:52:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:52:49):**  Then that led to some visiting stuff and more employees.  So then he had to open a little on-farm restaurant to feed folks and then the community starts  coming and pretty soon.  The little town is waking up and he and they are a big part of that.  So now they have a general store and they do leather processing and so on and so on.  
**[0:53:10-0:53:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:53:10):**  It just keeps snowballing and it's just absolutely wonderful.  Will made the comment in his presentation that every county in the United States needs  a White Oak Pastures or small community development program, if you will.  We came home and we're thinking about that and we need to be that shining star in our  community and then we need to help others do that in every community.  
**[0:53:35-0:53:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:53:35):**  So we've industrialized agriculture in our food system and we need to step back and try  to build smaller processing centers for cattle and slaughterhouses and different things and  localize that again.  I think there's absolutely room for that.  Here in the United States, we've watched beer, drinking beer from three or four brands 50  
**[0:53:59-0:54:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:53:59):**  years ago to now there's hundreds and thousands of them and all these little microbreweries  and the model has worked to reinvent that system in a looking back method.  So I believe there's room in agriculture for that and there's consumers absolutely willing  to support it.  Now we need the big money to support it and help us not build theoretical farms but come  
**[0:54:25-0:54:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:54:25):**  out and finance as real folks and make it happen one acre, one hectare at a time.  Yeah, I think it's fascinating the beer example because it didn't only lead to much better  beers but also to I think a lot of space for farmers to grow barley and other rotational  crops that they normally would feed somewhere and a lot of specialty grains that suddenly  they had a market and they have a market because they were looking for very specific flavor  
**[0:54:51-0:54:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:54:51):**  profiles, very specific origins, etc.  Something we've always seen in wine and now suddenly so in beer.  We see it in coffee as well.  We see it in chocolate.  We see it in these high end places and we slowly start to see it in the rest of the  
**[0:55:04-0:55:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:55:04):**  space.  I will link some links for anybody that doesn't know Will Harris and the work they have been  doing.  It was a great podcast I think with the Sustainable Food Trust and some other.  They were one of the first ones actually that did an LCA on showing the carbon positive  
**[0:55:19-0:55:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:55:19):**  side of meat which of course led to a huge shock.  I will link that one below from Qantas as well which is very interesting.  Some nice infographics there to show what's possible even taking into consideration methane  which was a whole different topic we're not going to get into now.  But it's definitely a leading example and I think they ended up buying and refurbishing  
**[0:55:39-0:55:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:55:39):**  and restoring houses there because his staff couldn't find places to live in the town because  they were all run down.  It's an impact on many levels.  He's truly regenerated or rejuvenated an old community and made it prosper and now it's  got a long term future and it's attracting young people from all over the country, all  
**[0:55:59-0:56:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:55:59):**  over the world and certainly from his own family.  That's really good.  But let's not forget the risk he took and the money they put on the line stepping away  from, I've heard a few podcasts with him where he described how much easier it would have  been to stay in the conventional system and only now I think with COVID and with direct  
**[0:56:18-0:56:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:56:18):**  sales that they started a few years ago that it started to really take off and pay off  this huge processing investments that they've made and finally, it's a miracle they're still  there.  Any consultant would have probably wrote them off on bankruptcy just like you over the last  years and they're still there luckily, but it's a miracle.  
**[0:56:36-0:56:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:56:36):**  They made it work against all odds.  We absolutely all share those same stories and Will and I were talking that we both grew  up absolutely knowing that we were going to run the farm, we're going to be farmers and  yet our kids really did or didn't and we were talking to his daughters about that and they  weighed in and how they wanted to get off the farm but ultimately they came back because  
**[0:56:56-0:57:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:56:56):**  it was a wonderful option and so we're living through that as well with our kids.  I also just wanted to add to this kind of theoretical where would funding go and what  should it do?  So it should develop these farms that are more attached and more intricately connected  to the community and then I think of our cities and so what I'm really saying is we need to  
**[0:57:14-0:57:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:57:14):**  depopulate some of the cities in a sense and COVID has helped us do that.  So everybody's learned that they can now work from home and well, wouldn't it just be cool  if their home was closer to a farm and closer to their food?  Or on a farm.  Yeah.  
**[0:57:28-0:57:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:57:28):**  Or on the farm, exactly.  So it just opens up, I think, all kinds of opportunity for this stepping back in time  and rethinking our entire lifestyle.  I think that's a great rabbit hole to dive into another time but also a great way to  end this conversation.  
**[0:57:44-0:57:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:57:44):**  I want to thank you both so much for opening up, for taking the time in your very busy  schedule and running a small but massive farm at the same time and a lot of different spinning  plates I think to keep up.  So thank you so much for this sharing and of course good luck and I hope to check in  in person at some point when that's possible again.  
**[0:58:03-0:58:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:58:03):**  Yeah, thank you, Kai.  Oh, luck wise.  If you're ever out on the north coast, please visit.  It's beautiful here.  Absolutely.  
**[0:58:09-0:58:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:58:09):**  Yeah, we will run into you somewhere.  So thank you for having us.  It's just wonderful to meet you and get to know you and thanks for the opportunity.  If you found the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  
**[0:58:24-0:58:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:58:24):**  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  join my membership community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  
**[0:58:46-0:58:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:58:46):**  You can find all the details on gumroad.com slash investing region egg or in the description  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food, how to put money to work in regenerating  
**[0:59:10-0:59:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:59:10):**  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to put money  to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011 and recording  this podcast since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  
**[0:59:30-0:59:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:59:30):**  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  What questions should you ask?  
**[0:59:41-0:59:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:59:41):**  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  
**[0:59:48-0:59:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=0:59:48):**  For whom is this course?  You, the soil builders and investors in this space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management consultants, etc.  
**[1:00:07-1:00:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=1:00:07):**  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  
**[1:00:23-1:00:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=1:00:23):**  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  that among the listeners of this podcast we have people with very different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  
**[1:00:41-1:00:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=1:00:41):**  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to ride along.  
**[1:00:55-1:01:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=1:00:55):**  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  
**[1:01:16-1:01:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=1:01:16):**  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  
**[1:01:30-1:01:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/stephanie-blake-alexandre#t=1:01:30):**  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking, click on  the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  