### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2022-00-18)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com slash course, or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  We obviously talk a lot about food on this podcast, but there are other industries that  source from the land and have massive environmental challenges and regenerative opportunities.  
**[0:00:23-0:00:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:00:23):**  For instance, the fashion industry and specifically the luxury fashion industry, and specifically  within that, the luxury leather industry.  Today we'll learn what it takes to make a luxury shoe made with materials sourced from  farms using regenerative practices.  So many relevant lessons for the regenerative food movement.  
**[0:00:41-0:00:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:00:41):**  Enjoy.  Welcome to another episode of investing in regenerative agriculture, investing as if  the planet mattered.  Podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work, to regenerate soil, people, local communities  
**[0:00:59-0:01:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:00:59):**  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small and consumers start paying much more  
**[0:01:18-0:01:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:01:18):**  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  In March last year, we launched our membership community to make it easy for fans to support  our work.  And so many of you have joined as a member.  We've launched different types of benefits, exclusive content, Q and A webinars with former  
**[0:01:33-0:01:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:01:33):**  guests, ask me anything sessions plus so much more to come in the future.  For more information on the different tiers, benefits and how to become a member, check  gumroad.com slash investing region egg, or find the link below.  Thank you.  Welcome to a very special episode because for the first time we step outside the world  
**[0:01:52-0:01:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:01:52):**  of food and agriculture and we go into the world of fashion.  And today we have the founder and co-CEO of Koio, creating sustainable luxury footwear.  And they're about to launch or when you're listening to this have already soft launched,  let's say a regenerative shoe.  So welcome Johannes, I'm so much looking forward to unpacking this.  
**[0:02:09-0:02:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:02:09):**  Yeah, excited to be here.  Thank you for having me, Colin.  And I mean, unpacking, when I said it, it's definitely wasn't intended as a pun, but we  could do, I mean, we're not using video, but we could almost do this unboxing of a shoebox.  But I want to start with a question, not necessarily why soil because we'll get to that in a minute.  
**[0:02:27-0:02:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:02:27):**  That's usually my opening question.  But in this case, how did you end up founding sustainable luxury footwear company?  Because you don't really come from a shoe shoe family, let's say I think.  Yeah, that's very true.  I started Koio during business school with my friend Chris.  
**[0:02:42-0:02:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:02:42):**  We both did our MBA at Wharton.  We're both German and Wharton is a place where a lot of digitally native brands originated  from Warby Parker is probably one of the most well known.  And they had already launched when we arrived there in 2013.  So Chris and I are originally from Germany.  
**[0:03:03-0:03:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:03:03):**  We both have a business background.  I used to work as a consultant at McKinsey and Chris was an investment banker at JP Morgan.  But when we arrived at Wharton, the fascination that immediately caught us was around this  business model of a direct to consumer brand.  And at the same time, we were passionate about nicely designed sneakers.  
**[0:03:26-0:03:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:03:26):**  We hadn't known each other in Europe, but we both had this fascination around, well,  nice Italian leather sneakers.  And during our first jobs, we regularly saved up and afforded a pair every once in a while.  And as we learned more about direct to consumer, when we were in Philly, we brought this direct  to consumer business model together with high end footwear and realized that many traditional  
**[0:03:53-0:03:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:03:53):**  luxury brands were going to be disrupted by direct to consumer and digitally native brands  at some point.  So we wanted to be one of the companies that are disrupting.  So we founded Koyo and did that really as a project during business school.  We even used some courses to work on it.  
**[0:04:15-0:04:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:04:15):**  But then after graduating, we decided to actually make it a real thing and move to New York  and build the company from there.  And I mean, I think many people that go to business school, I think because I don't know,  I never did, but start a project like this on the side or sort of started, I wouldn't  say fakely, but it doesn't really turn into you.  
**[0:04:35-0:04:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:04:35):**  You're not going to ship real shoes because there's a big difference between writing that  business plan and doing the calculations and the models and all of that.  And so what triggered it to actually saying, okay, we're going to actually turn this into  a company and do this for the next X years?  Was there a moment?  
**[0:04:51-0:04:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:04:51):**  Was there a decision?  Was there a few beers involved?  Like what happened there to make you to actually do that?  There was definitely a moment, maybe a few moments that made us take this very seriously  and make it into a real business.  
**[0:05:04-0:05:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:05:04):**  If I think about it, it was probably the summer between the first and second year of our MBA.  That was when Chris and I dedicated a few months to the project.  It was the first time that we went to New York.  We then designed our first shoe, met with professors from New York's design universities  like Parsons and FIT to learn about shoe making and design.  
**[0:05:27-0:05:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:05:27):**  Definitely the areas that we had to catch up on the most.  And it was a very special feeling when we held our first paper design of a shoe in hand  in the middle of this period, in the middle of the summer.  It made it much more tangible and got us much more invested in this project.  And then towards the end of that summer, the most important thing happened.  
**[0:05:52-0:06:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:05:52):**  We decided to go to Italy to find a manufacturer and spend weeks in the country looking for  the right partner to make our shoes.  Knocked on doors, visited over 30 factories and initially already got fairly lucky and  got some high-end manufacturers.  We found a Louis Vuitton manufacturer.  
**[0:06:14-0:06:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:06:14):**  We found a manufacturer for common projects, which is a brand that's quite popular in the  US.  It was at the end, however, that we actually found our dream factory, which was a Chanel  factory.  So, they were producing shoes for Chanel, but also for Saint Laurent and Golden Goose.  
**[0:06:34-0:06:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:06:34):**  And they agreed to work with us and agreed to do our first batch.  So, at the end of that summer, we had a partner that could not have been better in terms of  the quality, in terms of the designs they were able to realize.  And we had committed to doing 300 pairs as a first batch.  So, we were kind of in it.  
**[0:06:56-0:07:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:06:56):**  So, we got the shoes then in early 2015, right around when we were about to graduate and  organized a pop-up in New York, where we sold those shoes for the first time.  And we invited all our friends from business school, but also stopped people on the street  and kind of forced them to go into our store.  And people gave us really good feedback.  
**[0:07:20-0:07:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:07:20):**  The shoes looked beautiful.  The manufacturer had done an amazing job interpreting our design and turning it into really, really  high quality shoes.  And people bought the shoes.  So we realized, hey, we're probably onto something.  
**[0:07:33-0:07:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:07:33):**  How difficult is it to sell shoes online, like a digital native brand, as you mentioned,  we've seen examples on glasses, which I think is very tricky as well.  Metresses obviously, and many other things, shaving and all of that.  Clothing obviously has exploded as well, but shoes have seemed always to, wouldn't seem  to escape that, but it's, I think for many people, a tricky thing.  
**[0:07:55-0:07:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:07:55):**  Like, how do you approach that?  And don't worry, listeners, we're going to get to the regenerative part very soon, but  I'm very curious, how do you sell shoes online actually?  Yeah, there are a lot of learnings for us over the years.  It is just making the whole process very easy for anyone who goes through the buying process.  
**[0:08:14-0:08:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:08:14):**  Starts with being very present on all the channels where people might get to know brands  like Instagram, Facebook, definitely just getting your name out there and creating awareness  for the brand.  But then as soon as people get to your website, it's clear pictures, a clear user flow, showing  reviews that are authentic and offering things like free shipping, free returns, having a  
**[0:08:42-0:08:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:08:42):**  size finder on the website that allows people to enter their regular shoe size or like foot  measurements, and then determine a coil size.  All the way to doing more exotic things like try before you buy a program where people  leave their credit card information, but they don't have to pay their shoes yet.  They get them shipped and then they can try them on.  
**[0:09:05-0:09:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:09:05):**  And if they like them, they keep them and will be charged.  If not, they can send them back and will never be charged.  So it's really very multifaceted and there's always new stuff happening and innovation  being integrated.  But yeah, it's quite the learning curve for sure.  
**[0:09:22-0:09:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:09:22):**  I think it's very interesting in terms of really reducing any potential barrier, like  real or imaginary to get people to try them, to get people to actually.  And I think the food industry probably as we're massive amount is moving online at the  moment, we can learn a lot from that and how to get that first sale in and how to start  building that relationship and making sure that direct to consumer relationship, which  
**[0:09:47-0:09:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:09:47):**  can be absolutely crucial.  We've seen it in examples we had here on the podcast, Lavialla in Italy is one example,  but many others like to capture that full margin is an incredible amount of work.  Like let's not underestimate that.  But if you're able to do it, it's also an incredible opportunity and really puts you  
**[0:10:03-0:10:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:10:03):**  in a position for very interesting growth or very interesting future potential because  you're not so dependent on the retailers, et cetera.  But then COVID hit and you were, I think at that time, still a mix of shoe shops and retailers  and online.  And what happened when the pandemic hit?  
**[0:10:21-0:10:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:10:21):**  Yeah, the pandemic was obviously a big shock to the system.  We are making shoes for social situations and that include going for dinners with friends,  traveling, going on dates.  And suddenly from one day to the other, none of these happened anymore.  It was a challenge and we faced it head on and got through it in a very healthy way.  
**[0:10:44-0:10:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:10:44):**  Unfortunately, what happened for us during the pandemic was we saw a massive shift from  physical retail to online.  Before the pandemic, we had retail stores in New York, LA, San Francisco, Miami, and  suddenly from one day to the other, nobody was buying there anymore.  We refocused very much on online.  
**[0:11:07-0:11:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:11:07):**  During the pandemic, also refocused on two stores.  So now we still have New York and LA and online is by far now our dominant channel.  So yeah, if you look at 2019, our sales were pretty much still almost 60% online, 40% retail.  If you look at our direct channels and by now it's a big majority online.  So yeah, of our direct channels, about 80% are online, 20% retail.  
**[0:11:39-0:11:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:11:39):**  Wow.  That's a shift that probably sounds similar to some food and agriculture players during  the last two years, because it's almost two years we're in this, in this mess.  And so in terms of sustainability and then regeneration, obviously, where did that journey  start?  
**[0:11:57-0:11:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:11:57):**  What was, were there any triggers?  Was it from the onset, the goal to really push the limits as you're doing now, or was  it something that grew into the company slowly or maybe more strongly?  What were the triggers there?  It really happened in three phases from the beginning of Koyo till now.  
**[0:12:15-0:12:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:12:15):**  And at the beginning, when we started the brand, Chris and I were convinced that we  wanted to make a high-end product.  And given that we wanted to make a high-end product, we wanted to make it not only nice  and shiny and beautiful at the surface.  We also wanted to make it really healthy at the core.  
**[0:12:36-0:12:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:12:36):**  And healthy at the core meant to us that we are complying with our ideas around sustainability.  So in phase one, right at the beginning of Koyo, we decided to make high-end leather  shoes.  And to us, that was a sustainability activity because these shoes you can wear for years.  And the longer you wear the product, the less waste you create.  
**[0:13:04-0:13:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:13:04):**  So that was a very important element for us.  Secondly, we decided to make them in a country where generally labor standards are high,  industrial standards are high.  So we chose Italy as a place to manufacture the shoes over emerging markets where some  of these standards are not as well managed.  
**[0:13:26-0:13:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:13:26):**  That was the first phase.  So very basic.  We just focused on very high quality and producing in a high standard country at a very high  quality manufacturer.  And then over the first two years, we got really interested in materials and wanted  
**[0:13:44-0:13:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:13:44):**  to improve our material sourcing and make that more environmentally sustainable.  And it coincided with a lot of innovation around sustainability from the supplier side.  So the leather manufacturers, the sole manufacturers, they all realized, hey, we can't ignore the  sustainability trend.  We really need to do something.  
**[0:14:05-0:14:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:14:05):**  So when you went to the leather fair in Milan, like MECAM, sorry, Lineapella, that's a leather  fair, you saw a lot of innovation.  But what frustrated us when we did our first rounds of research and talked to suppliers  was that many of these solutions were quite insular.  So the innovations were, for example, vegan leathers, which we thought at first glance  
**[0:14:33-0:14:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:14:33):**  are great.  And we got really interested.  But then as we looked into them, we heard they're actually just plastic.  And another innovation was recycled leather, which is ground up leather that's then made  into recycled leather.  
**[0:14:50-0:14:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:14:50):**  Also super excited at first.  And then we learned in order to make this recycled leather, you need to add a bunch  of chemicals and also plastic coatings.  So for all of these quote unquote solutions, you're really only replacing one problem with  another problem.  
**[0:15:07-0:15:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:15:07):**  And that's what we found extremely frustrating as we did our research.  What we did end up doing in this phase two was we picked the materials that we found  best in the current offering.  So for leathers, we picked leather working group certified leathers, which mean that  the leathers are manufactured with very high standards in terms of waste management, chemicals  
**[0:15:32-0:15:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:15:32):**  management, water management, etc.  Because what are the issues with leather?  I mean, apart from the animal side of things where we'll get to, but I think some people  know, but just to paint the picture, what are the main issues with the leather industry  in terms of I mean, you mentioned waste, water and chemicals?  
**[0:15:49-0:15:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:15:49):**  How bad is it?  Yeah, I mean, it can be really bad.  It really depends on who's making the leather.  And that's why it's so important to know exactly who your suppliers are.  If you look at the worst kind, like in some countries, leather is sourced from meat farms  
**[0:16:07-0:16:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:16:07):**  that hold these animals in inhumane ways.  And then it's tanned with toxic tannins like chrome six, that are carcinogenic, and pose  massive problems for people who work with this leather, but anyone also lives near the  tannery all the way to the environment and people who wear the leather afterwards.  But that's really the most extreme case.  
**[0:16:34-0:16:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:16:34):**  If you look at like Italian tannery, the problem with leather is that it's well, it again,  it's sourced probably from cows that are held fairly, like pretty much in captivity as part  of the meat industry.  So it's sometimes cows that are raised under questionable conditions.  And then you need a lot of chemicals to make this leather.  
**[0:16:57-0:17:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:16:57):**  There are some 18 steps that you need to go through in order to turn a cowhide into actual  leather, starting with salting and drying the hide, then removing all like fat and hair  and then starting pre-tanning and then tanning, then the dying.  There's often plastic coatings that are applied to the leather.  So yeah, a lot of steps and each of them has a bunch of chemicals that are included.  
**[0:17:25-0:17:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:17:25):**  So it's very, very important to know exactly who you're working with and making sure that  a tannery you work with is very considerate about chemical use and only uses the best  ingredients in order to make the leather.  And then, I mean, you mentioned something fascinating I never thought about.  Let's say the worst possible case, like are there actually cases of people getting sick  
**[0:17:47-0:17:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:17:47):**  because they wear something that has been treated very badly?  Are there, because you mentioned even for the people that wear, of course, for the people  that have to work with it and that live nearby, et cetera, but all the way down to the end  consumer.  Oh yeah.  
**[0:18:01-0:18:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:18:01):**  Wow.  Yeah, yeah, definitely.  There's a big problem in India, for example, that tanning often takes place with this toxic  chrome six and it stays in the leather and it's, yeah, it's really bad.  I mean, it's, yeah, it's released the skin.  
**[0:18:19-0:18:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:18:19):**  Exactly.  Yeah.  No, it's very important as a customer to know that you're wearing high quality leather.  And so in the best case, like what's the highest standard you can get to now in terms of chemical  use?  
**[0:18:32-0:18:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:18:32):**  Is it no danger chemicals or is it very minimum amount?  What's the ideal situation currently that you can actually work with as a company like  yourself?  And then we get to what's the ideal future scenario, but what's the best case scenario  you can get to now?  
**[0:18:45-0:18:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:18:45):**  What's important to know is that if you are wearing leather that's produced in Italy,  you can assume that it fulfills the most important standards in terms of chemical use.  So chrome tanning is the most commercialized tanning method.  And so one that's used in Italy the most and what high quality tanneries do is they only  use Chrome three, which is a different state of the Chrome and which is not toxic or anything  
**[0:19:20-0:19:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:19:20):**  like that.  It is relatively tricky to maintain Chrome three and not have it turn into Chrome six.  That's why the industrial processes need to be very well managed, but it's also very doable  and Italian tanneries do that.  So that's important to know.  
**[0:19:36-0:19:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:19:36):**  Like if you get high quality leather, then there shouldn't be any concerns around health.  Now there's a lot of innovation happening in tanning.  People want to move away from Chrome, not only because of the risk of having it turn  into Chrome six, but also because some people might be allergic to Chrome or just don't  want to have any metals in the leather.  
**[0:20:00-0:20:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:20:00):**  And therefore there are different tanning agents being developed.  A really promising one is one called zeolite.  It's a tanning agent that is Chrome free, that's aldehyde free and where the leather  can actually biodegrade.  So extremely promising and one that we're already working with.  
**[0:20:21-0:20:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:20:21):**  And then there's also always the super traditional vegetable tanning method, which is probably  thousands of years old and probably the first tanning method ever where you really use fruits  or barks that contain tannins and use them to tan the leather.  Some of the shoes that we're doing use this vegetable tanning method.  The difference between something like zeolite and vegetable tanning is that with zeolite,  
**[0:20:50-0:20:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:20:50):**  you can create actual white leather and then make it any color you want.  Also the leather is very soft and malleable.  Vegetable tanning only creates these classic crunchy leather colors, like the chestnut  colors, the darker colors.  You can't achieve a true white with vegetable tanning.  
**[0:21:13-0:21:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:21:13):**  And it's also always a bit harder, so it takes a bit longer for the leather to get soft as  you wear it in.  And so, I mean, now we go deep into materials, but I think we were still in phase two.  Yeah, exactly.  We were still in phase two.  
**[0:21:26-0:21:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:21:26):**  And perfectly fine to go down this rabbit hole because I'm extremely interested.  Never thought about leather at this level.  But what triggered stage three, basically?  Stage three was triggered because we were still not happy with stage two.  We were obviously excited that we had found these materials like leather working, group  
**[0:21:45-0:21:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:21:45):**  leather or recycled rubber or natural rubber to use in our outsold.  But we felt like all of these activities were going in different directions and there was  no holistic umbrella or vision that united it all and made us go into one direction.  And in the search for this vision, we talked with investors in Koyo and people close to  our brand.  
**[0:22:15-0:22:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:22:15):**  And it just so happened that one of our biggest investors Acton Capital and Jan Schulze, who's  on our board.  Shout out to Jan.  Yeah, exactly.  Is a thought leader in regenerative agriculture and has invested a lot of time and effort  
**[0:22:33-0:22:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:22:33):**  in promoting this very interesting development.  And as we started talking more about regenerative agriculture, we suddenly started seeing the  link between regenerative agriculture and our product.  And the link was cows.  Cows play such an important role in regenerative agriculture with their potential to heal soil  
**[0:22:59-0:23:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:22:59):**  and build up organic matter and build up healthy soil that we started thinking about ways to  bring this holistic vision of regenerative agriculture into Koyo.  And as we started exploring this topic, we realized that, hey, we can actually create  a product that sources leather from regenerative farming.  And we can very likely also source other elements of the shoe from regenerative farming, the  
**[0:23:32-0:23:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:23:32):**  sole, the laces, and therefore make a shoe that is completely sourced from regenerative  farms, which made suddenly all our activities converge.  And that's when we realized, hey, this is the holistic approach that we were looking  for.  This is our vision that has a dramatic and positive impact on our ecosystems and our  
**[0:23:58-0:23:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:23:58):**  planet.  And where as deep as you dig, you only see that it makes more sense and it's reinforcing.  It was a dramatic difference to all the other things that we had seen in the market before,  like vegan leather or recycled leather, which were also insular and not systemic at all.  So yeah, it was that moment when we got really excited and started down the path of regenerative  
**[0:24:25-0:24:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:24:25):**  agriculture.  And it sounds easy on paper in theory, like, oh, let's build a regenerative shoe and we're  going to do the regenerative sole and the laces and of course the leather and then reality  hit.  So you've launched or soft launched the shoe as we're putting this online.  
**[0:24:41-0:24:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:24:41):**  And where are you at now?  I mean, a regenerative shoe, I don't think it existed yet or it exists even in general.  Like what's the current status of the shoe?  Where are you?  And then we're going to talk obviously where you would like to go.  
**[0:24:53-0:24:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:24:53):**  Yeah, indeed.  We are launching the first regenerative luxury shoe, which is really incredible achievement.  And we're super proud of everyone at Koyo that we executed this together so quickly.  It was really less than a year of like setting all this up, a really quick turnaround.  And it's really challenging, like you say, just looking at the leather, which is the  
**[0:25:18-0:25:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:25:18):**  main component of the shoe and also the one that's regenerative in this current version.  If you look at how conventional leather is made, it's part of the massive meat industry.  And in the meat industry, millions of cow hides are collected and go through the leather  making process.  It's very industrialized and it's highly specialized companies that take over a very specific step  
**[0:25:47-0:25:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:25:47):**  in the leather production.  For example, there are tanneries that only work with the height of the shoulders.  And what they do is because there's millions of cow hides, they procure a selection of  cow hides that are virtually identical to one another.  They just select the ones that are all looking the same and are exactly...  
**[0:26:10-0:26:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:26:10):**  I can hear an issue coming up when the cows are outside and have gone through managed  grazing and all this.  I can imagine they're not all the same.  So what did the tanner say when you showed up with this idea of, let's say, adding some  personality to the hides?  
**[0:26:26-0:26:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:26:26):**  Exactly.  You're pointing at the heart of the challenge.  They told us it's a great idea, but then they went radio silent.  So we kicked it off talking to all our current Italian suppliers, which do very high quality  leather and are not always the big ones.  
**[0:26:43-0:26:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:26:43):**  There are also some more artisan style smaller ones, but even those were already so specialized  that they only work with certain parts of the skin.  They require big amounts of hides because they have massive tanning drums that they  need to fill.  It really sounds like processing of meat in general or the food industry are very specialized  
**[0:27:04-0:27:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:27:04):**  on a specific vertical or specific part of the vertical, of the vertical and saying,  yeah, it would be great to do different sized pumpkins, but we need them all the same because  otherwise we just cannot cook the soup or we cannot do that because the machines are  made for tomatoes that are always exactly the same at exactly the same moment, etc.  And so what did you do?  
**[0:27:24-0:27:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:27:24):**  Absolutely.  So yeah, we had to rethink the supply chain and basically had to build our own supply  chain.  And there were a few challenges.  The biggest challenge was the supply of regenerative leather super scars.  
**[0:27:39-0:27:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:27:39):**  So there is, as you know, there are not many regenerative farms yet.  It's very much a growing phenomenon.  And because there's not many, there's no industrial system set up to collect hides, to select  the ones that have a certain quality.  So we had to really rethink the whole process.  
**[0:28:01-0:28:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:28:01):**  We basically accepted that we'd have to work with whatever cowhide we're getting.  Let me actually backtrack a little bit.  We needed to find a place where a solid amount of cow hides that are sourced regeneratively  are coming together, and we identified an abattoir in Switzerland that only procures  cows from farms that are biodynamic regenerative or fulfilled like all of these standards.  
**[0:28:36-0:28:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:28:36):**  So for us, this abattoir became the key relationship.  It produces about 10 hides per week, which equates about 100 pairs of shoes per week.  And there we are basically getting all our hides from.  And then these hides go from the abattoir to a hide dealer in Switzerland.  They need to be removed from the abattoir for sanitary reasons and regulatory reasons  
**[0:29:05-0:29:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:29:05):**  very quickly.  So the hide dealer is the one that takes the hides and salts them and dries them so that  they can be transported.  And then the next challenge was to find a tannery that can work with these non-industrial  hides.  
**[0:29:19-0:29:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:29:19):**  Because they're 10 hides, but they're all different for sure.  Yeah, exactly.  They're all different.  I mean, yeah, the cows that we're getting the hides from, they're actually the cows  that are on alpine pastures all summer long and are maintaining the alpine ecosystem by  
**[0:29:36-0:29:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:29:36):**  grazing and preventing overforestation.  And yeah, you can imagine cows that are around on the mountains all summer, they have scratches  and scars and pigmentation.  Does it mean that the shoes are going to get more personality?  They're not going to be all the same?  
**[0:29:51-0:29:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:29:51):**  And is that for you a challenge and potential opportunity to sell that story?  Like, look, if your shoes are all the same, they probably come from this place, aka a  CAFO.  If your shoes are not all the same, it meant maybe the cow had a story.  Exactly.  
**[0:30:05-0:30:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:30:05):**  So, to have a unique, beautiful, natural material is one that we 100% want to tell.  And that adds a lot of personality and interest and value to the shoe.  And so then this hide dealer that I never knew that was a thing, picks it up, and then  you have to find this tanning.  And that must have been a few knocking on a few doors as well, someone that can process  
**[0:30:28-0:30:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:30:28):**  only 10 hides, because it sounds like that's not a lot.  And then even very different ones and getting to sort of a standard that you can send to  your shoemaker in Italy.  Yeah, exactly.  It was quite a challenge to find someone to tan these hides.  
**[0:30:42-0:30:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:30:42):**  We did have great support from people who are in the leather industry and are also very  forward thinking around more sustainable methods.  Eventually, we found this tannery in Germany that can produce in small batches.  And that also has very high standards in terms of what inputs they use and in general, what  methods they apply.  
**[0:31:07-0:31:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:31:07):**  So yeah, those are now the people that are tanning our hides and the minimum quantity  that we need to hit is 25 hides.  So 250 pairs of shoes, we're always collecting leather until we get that.  And eventually, once that leather is ready, we ship it back to Italy to our manufacturer  to have it turned into shoes.  
**[0:31:31-0:31:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:31:31):**  But here again, we're facing this challenge of a non-industrial production where when  you cut the pattern pieces, you definitely have more imperfections.  And sometimes they're nice and charming.  Sometimes they're pretty visible and people who have high standards and expectations from  a luxury shoe might not end up buying a shoe where you can see visible imperfections.  
**[0:31:56-0:32:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:31:56):**  So we would have to cut around those which lowers the efficiency of the leather and makes  production more expensive.  But overall, and in the end, once we've gone through all the steps, we get a product that  from far away looks like our best selling and original sneaker, the Capri model, which  is a clean and minimalist shoe.  
**[0:32:18-0:32:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:32:18):**  But if you look closer, you can really see this beautiful leather that has a lot of character  and where you can rest assured that it really contributes to healthy ecosystems and a healthier  planet.  And so what are next steps there?  I mean, you're launching obviously, you're going to sell this first batch and then hopefully  
**[0:32:36-0:32:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:32:36):**  slowly I mean, there are not many so you hopefully sell out etc.  And you'll be launching the first regenerative leather luxury shoe in the world.  But what are the next steps like this year to tackle?  Is it scaling up?  Is it finding more heights?  
**[0:32:50-0:32:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:32:50):**  Is it changing the tanning?  Is it working on the sole and other pieces of the shoe?  Like what are you maybe all of the above?  But what are you mostly excited about to tackle this year?  In the very near term, our first goal will be to introduce more colours.  
**[0:33:03-0:33:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:33:03):**  The first capsule that we're dropping is going to be black leather and chestnut coloured  leather, which are current top sellers.  So that's great.  But we want to introduce more colours.  We're known for having an array of minimalist, neutral, quite beautiful colours and we want  
**[0:33:22-0:33:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:33:22):**  to introduce an array of nice colours also for regenerative leather.  That in itself is quite tricky because typically how you achieve colour in leather is you chrome  tan the leather and make it like it's called wet blue, which is like a very bright whitish  blue and then you can just dye it and have coatings and achieve the perfect colour.  But what we're doing here is we're sourcing the highest quality, most environmentally  
**[0:33:52-0:33:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:33:52):**  sustainable leather from the Swiss Alps.  Obviously we don't want to just put a plastic coating on it.  We want to have a high quality tanning and dyeing method and doing the research for that,  how to achieve the right colours and the colours that we want is a whole other project.  And that's what we're currently busying ourselves with.  
**[0:34:14-0:34:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:34:14):**  And then once we've introduced these colours, we can look into our long-term goal.  Our long-term goal is to make a shoe that is completely sourced from Regener farms and  that is biodegradable.  And if we break this down into both components, completely sourced from Regener farms means  sourcing the leather from Regener farms, but also the outsole from regeneratively managed  
**[0:34:47-0:34:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:34:47):**  kauchook forests, tree rubber forests, the laces from regeneratively farmed cotton or  hemp and on and on and on because a shoe has many components and many of them you don't  even see like packing materials or insoles.  So our ambition is to bit by bit find out how we can source all of these components  from regenerative farms.  
**[0:35:14-0:35:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:35:14):**  And then the second part to it is biodegradability.  We want to make a shoe that if you were to throw it away into the forest, it would actually  biodegrade over a not too long period of time.  And here the processing is super important next to the materials that we actually source.  So the leather processing is very important.  
**[0:35:37-0:35:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:35:37):**  We need to find the right tanning method, the right dyeing method to make the leather  super stable and comfortable, but also unstable enough so that it can decompose in the soil  when it's around the right microbes.  The same for all the other materials, the kauchook, outsole and all the other elements.  So yeah, it's a big vision and it's definitely a lot of research and development work towards  
**[0:36:04-0:36:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:36:04):**  that, but we're making some very meaningful strides.  One example of like a move towards biodegradability is we found a construction method where we  basically don't have to use glue in order to combine the upper of the shoes, so the  leather part and the sole.  And that's pretty much unheard of in sneakers.  
**[0:36:27-0:36:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:36:27):**  Right now you still use a lot of glue in sneaker production to bond the upper and the bottom  of the shoe.  And by using that glue, you make it basically impossible to A, recycle and B, have that  shoe biodegrade.  So yeah, finding a construction method that only uses stitching and no glue is a massive  
**[0:36:50-0:36:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:36:50):**  achievement and something that we'll integrate in our shoes in the next 12 months.  Wow.  So what do you see for like this launch in the fashion industry?  Do you see a lot of interest?  Do you hope, I mean, obviously you might be hoped to be sort of copied in terms of this  
**[0:37:07-0:37:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:37:07):**  impact and not necessarily on the designs, et cetera.  And what do you see this, is there a growing interest in the sourcing of materials in going  as deep as you're going?  I mean, there are a few examples.  I think there's Fivo Barefoot on definitely not on a luxurious path, but that have been  
**[0:37:23-0:37:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:37:23):**  very vocal about regenerative.  There's land to market with Timberland on the leather side of things, but it's US obviously  you're selling in the US, but are sourcing in Europe.  What do you see happening?  Is there something happening beyond sustainable in the fashion space or have I mentioned just  
**[0:37:38-0:37:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:37:38):**  the two others that are out there?  That's pretty much it.  You have mentioned the two that are most prominent.  Timberland is the one that immediately comes to mind and they've done great things.  It's really impressive how such a big company is making meaningful commitments around regenerative  
**[0:37:55-0:38:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:37:55):** . If you look at European brands, especially luxury conglomerates, it's interesting.  They are definitely aware of it and want to do something in regenerative.  I mean, I've seen things like Gucci has made commitments or a big statement.  So let's say commitments.  Exactly.  
**[0:38:14-0:38:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:38:14):**  So Kering, for example, they launched a biodiversity fund to convert land use to regenerate farming  practices.  And LBMH now targets the preservation or restoration of five million hectares of habitat for flora  and fauna by 2030.  In the US Ralph Lauren Foundation, they just announced a grant for regenerative cotton  
**[0:38:39-0:38:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:38:39):**  of five million dollars.  So you can see that people are aware of it and they're doing something.  But at this point, it seems like it's really like chief sustainability officer and communication  officer probably.  Yeah, exactly.  
**[0:38:53-0:38:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:38:53):**  And not chief product officer.  Exactly.  And some fund commitments, which are probably even fairly small in comparison to the revenues  that these companies are making.  So I think that awareness is there, but many conglomerates and brands find it extremely  
**[0:39:12-0:39:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:39:12):**  challenging to make a regenerative product reality.  And yeah, I get it.  It's really hard and you really need to rethink your whole supply chain and you need to be  happy with relatively modest volume at the beginning and then find ways to scale that.  And we're very lucky in that we're on the one hand, an established company.  
**[0:39:40-0:39:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:39:40):**  We've been around for a couple of years now and on the other hand, are still nimble enough  to find such a project meaningful.  Therefore we're probably just at the right size to be a leader in regenerative luxury  footwear.  And just to give an idea for people that are not so much in this space, like the luxury  
**[0:40:01-0:40:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:40:01):**  world is enormous.  Like how much money is going through there every year?  I mean, maybe 2020 wasn't a good year to measure, but in terms of just in terms of sheer size,  what are we talking about more or less?  Like these conglomerates you mentioned are not household names, usually Keiring and LVMH,  
**[0:40:18-0:40:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:40:18):**  but they are mostly family owned still and absolutely massive.  Just to give a number, what are we talking about?  Yeah, I mean, it's huge.  Bain does this great study where they look at the luxury market.  I don't have the number off the top of my head, but...  
**[0:40:35-0:40:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:40:35):**  We'll put it in the show notes.  Absolutely not to underestimate market.  And if you would be telling investors that are interested in regeneration and regen ag  and food, what would you, obviously without giving investment advice, but what would you  tell them where to look in the fashion industry?  
**[0:40:51-0:40:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:40:51):**  Is that companies like yourself that are not too big, not too small?  Is that startup?  Is that really the technology side of things?  Where do you get excited for potential investments or for investors to let's say, dig a bit deeper  and potentially also investing?  
**[0:41:05-0:41:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:41:05):**  What parts of the fashion industry are extremely interesting from a regeneration perspective?  Yeah, I think it's very case by case.  And it's the companies that are extremely authentic about their efforts and that go  deep in these efforts.  You can see it with sustainability, with a sustainability wave over the last 10 years.  
**[0:41:29-0:41:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:41:29):**  Only a few companies were really, really serious.  And for a lot of them, it was a marketing promotion and it was greenwashing.  So if you look at regenerative, it has to be companies where people are going super  deep and question everything, because those are the ones that are going to be around and  will be able to be challenged on this topic over years and withstand any public scrutiny  
**[0:42:00-0:42:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:42:00):**  around this topic, which will for sure happen as regenerative becomes more popular and the  public starts to ask more questions around it.  And where do you see that?  I mean, we're not going to conferences very often, but at the moment when you talk to  peers in the fashion industry that are looking at sustainability and are going deeper, where  
**[0:42:21-0:42:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:42:21):**  do you really think different?  Like what do you believe to be true?  What others in your peers not necessarily agree on?  Like where are you contrarian?  And this question definitely comes from John Kempf, inspired by his podcast.  
**[0:42:32-0:42:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:42:32):**  Yeah.  I mean, there's a massive trend towards anything vegan right now.  And I see the solution as being much more holistic than just focusing on vegan.  We talked about it briefly before, but let's unpack it a bit more.  Like what's the biggest issue there?  
**[0:42:52-0:42:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:42:52):**  Because I see the exams, I see fruit letter coming up.  I see it sounds wonderful.  I don't know enough about it.  And you saying others, but it's like, is the main, I wouldn't say argument against it,  but the main issue with it, all the plastics and all the chemicals, like what's the main  
**[0:43:04-0:43:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:43:04):**  issue with it and why hasn't it taken off as I've seen many nice pilots, let's say,  or nice, nice, small examples.  Like of course there's pineapple and leather and of course, and I thought it would be amazing.  What is your response as a shoemaker and shoe seller to that?  Yeah, I was equally excited.  
**[0:43:20-0:43:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:43:20):**  Fruit leather, pineapple leather, apple leather, mushroom leather.  And as soon as we heard about it, we looked into it.  What we quickly saw was these materials are kind of monstrous in the sense that sure you  have some organic component of it that comes from apples or pineapples or mushroom, but  there's so much plastic in these things.  
**[0:43:47-0:43:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:43:47):**  Sometimes it's a majority of the final product is plastic.  And then it's back to that problem you're replacing one issue with another issue and  not only perpetuate these materials, fossil fuel dependency, or if you have plastic that  is plant-based in most cases, very likely monoculture farming.  You also have a product where all sorts of different compounds are mixed together and  
**[0:44:20-0:44:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:44:20):**  bonded together and that stuff is never going to be able to be recycled because you can  take these components apart and it's also not going to biodegrade.  So the only place this is going to end up is a landfill.  And for that reason, it's not a solution at all.  And in contrast to that, the leather that we're sourcing is still a by-product of the  
**[0:44:47-0:44:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:44:47):**  meat industry.  Like if you look at the, it's really a waste product and oftentimes cow hides are burned  or thrown away because in many cases it's not economic to turn them into leather.  If you look at the value of a cow hide, it's actually less than the tongue of the cow.  So it's like, and especially I'm imagining the certain drop, but this line you're developing  
**[0:45:12-0:45:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:45:12):**  now or you're launching now are cow hides that have even less value because they are  not perfect.  And the chances of them being thrown away are very, very high, I'm imagining.  Exactly.  Most of them would be thrown, if not all of them, would be thrown away.  
**[0:45:26-0:45:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:45:26):**  And we're taking these hides that throughout the cow's life have really contributed to  a healthy planet and maintaining a beautiful ecosystem, the Swiss Alps, and then value  that material and appreciate it and make leather out of it in the most responsible and environmentally  friendly ways that are possible.  So yeah, if I look at these two options, vegan, like plastic hybrid leathers and our regenerative  
**[0:45:58-0:46:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:45:58):**  leathers, I would always pick our leather in terms of the overall impact and what it  does for the planet.  Have there been any life cycle assessments or LCAs done on these different materials  just to see, because I know in the vegan space we had Brad Willigroft or Brett Van Stone  of Willigroft, which is a vegan cheesemaker, and they did an LCA on their ingredients or  
**[0:46:20-0:46:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:46:20):**  their vegan cheese and found out it was not as impactful as they hoped.  And so they completely overturned their ingredient list from cashew nuts to beans and white beans  and started working with dairy farmers to change their practices into buying white beans  from them, et cetera.  And that triggered quite a huge shift in the company.  
**[0:46:38-0:46:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:46:38):**  But they also see that many vegan cheese makers are not looking beyond their ingredient list,  are actually not looking at their ingredient list, and simply because it's vegan, it's  better in terms of impact.  But that turned out not to be the case.  So are you seeing any of that happening in the vegan leather space or is it that too  
**[0:46:55-0:47:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:46:55):**  early or you see vegan leather and people think it's better than anything else?  Yeah, it's that heuristic that's happening right now.  I haven't seen anything compelling around the life cycle assessment.  I mean, some companies measure their carbon impact.  But yeah, we looked into that as well.  
**[0:47:16-0:47:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:47:16):**  In the end, it's other providers that offer this service.  And these assessments are extremely expensive.  We looked into it, it was something like $100,000 per style, and we have like 20, 30 styles.  We'd rather invest that money into research and digging deep and doing something that  we feel is absolutely right than trying to show something.  
**[0:47:40-0:47:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:47:40):**  And in terms of difference for the farmer, maybe that's a step too far at the moment,  but the fact that you're bringing value or creating value out of practically a waste  product, would that at some point, maybe not now, would that at some point be interesting  for the farmer as well?  Would it always be so little that it's maybe two tongs or something like that, that it  
**[0:47:59-0:48:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:47:59):**  can have a difference?  Or what do you see there as for the bottom line of a farmer?  Would that be a rancher?  Sorry, I always get corrected when I say it wrong.  For a rancher, would that be at some point interesting to also supply this or to also  
**[0:48:11-0:48:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:48:11):**  get value from something that anyway is produced as we're producing meat if we continue to  do that, obviously?  Yeah, I would love that.  My conviction is that by going regenerative and being very vocal about it, we're increasing  demand and are creating a pool for these kinds of ranching and farming methods.  
**[0:48:34-0:48:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:48:34):**  And then eventually, I would love if we were part of the system that incentivises more  farmers to go regenerative.  And if we do that by paying more for the hides, I'm super happy to do that.  And not as a final question, because I have a few more and it's never the final question,  but if there's one thing you could change in the fashion industry, I usually ask it  
**[0:48:59-0:49:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:48:59):**  about agriculture and food, but in this case, let's say the land use industry or how you're  touching that.  If you have a magic wand, what would that be?  What would be your one, could be anything, could be from a taste, could be colours, could  be chemical tanning, could be anything you can possibly imagine or consciousness, but  
**[0:49:15-0:49:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:49:15):**  what would it be if you had this global power?  What would be your one thing you would change overnight?  It would be complete transparency about production processes.  Because I think there's a lot that customers don't see and a lot that many brands get away  with.  
**[0:49:33-0:49:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:49:33):**  And for us as a brand that really tries to do things right, we're having to do so much  education and convincing of customers of what we're doing and why it's better.  And that, yeah, I wish there were perfect transparency and everyone could see the reality  and be much better informed in that way and make better decisions when they're buying  fashion.  
**[0:49:58-0:50:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:49:58):**  And let's say you would be, so you'd no longer have the magic wand, unfortunately, but you  are in charge of a large investment portfolio.  Focusing could be on fashion, but in sustainability, maybe in general regeneration, where would  your priorities be?  Would you set up your own tanning?  
**[0:50:15-0:50:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:50:15):**  Would you start your own ranch?  Would you launch other brands into different areas of the fashion industry?  What would you do if you wouldn't be the shoemaker and seller or the shoe seller, but if you  would be an investor in the space, what would you prioritise?  Yeah, that's a great question.  
**[0:50:32-0:50:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:50:32):**  I would focus on the supply chain because, yeah, like I said, that's one of the big challenges  that we face.  And I would probably invest in turning ranching into regenerative and scaling that or replacing  current conventional meat production with regenerative, environmentally beneficial meat  production.  
**[0:50:54-0:51:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:50:54):**  And then, yeah, we would use the byproducts, the hides to make the leather and also tan  it in a responsible way and make these shoes.  Yeah, that would be your focus.  So you would really focus, really the bottleneck at the moment is the number of hides, if I  like to source them in a big enough bundle because you cannot have them like two in Portugal,  
**[0:51:17-0:51:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:51:17):**  one in Denmark and then another few a week in Norway and then a few in Germany, like  you need them sort of concentrated.  That's why you're in Switzerland.  But that's the biggest bottleneck at the moment.  You're saying, I mean, apart from a lot of research into glue replacement and all of  
**[0:51:29-0:51:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:51:29):**  that, is the sheer just a number of biodynamic or at least close to regenerative hides you're  getting in Europe?  That's correct.  Yeah.  We wish we had easy access to those.  
**[0:51:41-0:51:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:51:41):**  It's fascinating to hear if anybody has a 10 or 20 hides a week laying around in Europe,  they should definitely give you a call, I think.  Yes.  Please let us know.  I want to thank you so much for sharing your honest and for your openness and to this journey  
**[0:51:56-0:52:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:51:56):**  into leather that I never thought we would do, but I'm very happy we did because I learned  a lot.  I learned a lot about the different sides of the business, the complexity, the chemical  use and that you can even get sick if leather has been treated very, very, very badly.  Again, that's not a norm, but it can happen, which is an interesting bridge, obviously,  
**[0:52:12-0:52:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:52:12):**  to the food industry where we talk about food as medicine a whole lot, but I never imagined  and it makes so much sense when you think about it, that what you wear obviously gets  into your skin and into your body as well.  So thank you and good luck with the launch.  It will be when we are listening to this, it will be launched and I'm hoping it sells  
**[0:52:29-0:52:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:52:29):**  out very quickly, which means you need to get to work and get to the next batch.  Awesome.  Thank you so much, Cohen.  It was great being with you.  If you found the investing in regenerative agriculture and food podcast valuable, there  
**[0:52:41-0:52:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:52:41):**  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  
**[0:53:00-0:53:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:53:00):**  join my membership community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on cambro.com slash investing region egg or in the description  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  
**[0:53:26-0:53:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:53:26):**  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After a hundred interviews and more than a hundred hours of audio asking the question,  how to put money to work in regenerating soils and I've been following the space since 2011  
**[0:53:44-0:53:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:53:44):**  and recording these podcasts since 2016 we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees and what questions should you ask?  
**[0:54:01-0:54:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:54:01):**  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  
**[0:54:08-0:54:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:54:08):**  For whom is this course?  You the soil builders and investors in this space, the soil builders, people working in  this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers, vehicle builders, crowd investing,  platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food companies, permaculture, key line  designers, holistic management consultants, et cetera, et cetera.  
**[0:54:27-0:54:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:54:27):**  People that are building soil at scale and the investors who are putting their own money  to work through their family office or as private individuals or people who are putting  other people's money to work through foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies,  et cetera.  Is this course free?  
**[0:54:43-0:54:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:54:43):**  No, this is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you.  And I'm very aware that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very  different means.  So I'm inviting you if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  
**[0:55:01-0:55:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:55:01):**  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides.  So you don't have to ride along.  
**[0:55:15-0:55:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:55:15):**  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find, or what kind of investors you could  find if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  
**[0:55:36-0:55:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:55:36):**  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design, and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  
**[0:55:50-0:55:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/johannes-quodt#t=0:55:50):**  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking, click on  the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  