### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2017-26-18)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  You're going to listen to an interview with Jesse Solomon, founder and CEO of Emerinco,  working to change the chicken business from the ground up.  
**[0:00:21-0:00:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:00:21):**  We're going to talk about transparency and their first VR chicken experience.  We're going to talk about regenerative agriculture and what the role of chicken and livestock is.  But also about their challenges, their challenges with investors and their relatively short timeframe.  But everything in agriculture takes time, especially building soil.  Enjoy!  
**[0:00:39-0:00:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:00:39):**  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture.  Investing as if the planet mattered.  Podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  
**[0:01:01-0:01:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:01:01):**  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  
**[0:01:19-0:01:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:01:19):**  Before we get started, I've been recording these interviews next to my day job and I  will definitely continue to do so and release about an episode a month.  But at the same time I would love to take this further.  Share more interviews, there are many more stories to share on investing in regenerative  food and agriculture.  
**[0:01:35-0:01:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:01:35):**  More depth, improve the quality, maybe even doing some video series.  So I started a Patreon community which makes it easy to support creators like myself.  If these podcasts have been of value to you and if you have the means, I invite you to  support me and make this happen.  For more information please find the link to my Patreon account in the description below.  
**[0:01:57-0:02:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:01:57):**  And now, without further ado, the interview.  Enjoy!  Welcome to Investing in Regenerative Agriculture, Investing as if the Planet Mattered.  I'm Koen van Zeyen, your host.  In the podcast of today I'm joined by Jesse Solomon, founder and CEO of EmerandCo, a former  
**[0:02:12-0:02:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:02:12):**  investment manager who since 2015 sells heritage chickens from regenerative farms.  I'm going to ask all about it.  Welcome Jesse!  Thanks so much Koen for having me.  Excited to talk.  
**[0:02:23-0:02:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:02:23):**  I always love to start with a personal question and I think in this case it makes a lot of  sense as well.  How do you end up in regenerative agriculture to begin with but heritage chickens as a niche  within the niche of the niche?  So about ten or actually more than that now, years ago I read a book called Eating Animals  
**[0:02:43-0:02:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:02:43):**  by Jonathan Safran Foer and after I finished that book I instantly became a vegetarian.  I decided that I couldn't eat the meat that I was eating anymore unless I knew exactly  where it came from and I had a personal connection to it.  So I started to hunt and for me that was the only way that I could trust that what I was  eating was pure, that the animal was respected, and that it was the healthiest and purest  
**[0:03:08-0:03:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:03:08):**  form of food that I could eat and that it tasted just amazing.  So through hunting I discovered a love and connection to food that I'd never had before  and it wasn't just about my own personal journey but it was about bringing that meat back  for family and friends and cooking these amazing wild game dinners and seeing how much more  they appreciated their food when I could connect them in that extremely personal, intimate  
**[0:03:31-0:03:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:03:31):**  way.  And that was really the genesis of Emmer & Co.  It started off as a question.  Is there an opportunity out there where I can create a food company that can replicate  that as close to wild experience for as many people as possible and what did that mean?  
**[0:03:49-0:03:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:03:49):**  And when I stripped away kind of the layers of where I wanted to focus, the two things  that were the most important were going back to animals that grew the way they were supposed  to so they weren't manipulated for fast growth or any kind of non-welfare optimization and  raising those animals holistically with the environment so that you could actually improve  the land.  
**[0:04:15-0:04:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:04:15):**  And these days you hear the phrase a lot of being carbon neutral but it felt like we really  had an opportunity to actually improve the soil health, sequester more carbon, grow taller  grasses, actually have a net positive impact on land just by growing animals the way they  used to be grown.  And do you still remember, because this is quite a big moment I can imagine when you  
**[0:04:41-0:04:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:04:41):**  first saw that agriculture or meat eating actually could have a positive effect on the  land, do you still remember when you came across that and what that did to you?  Yeah, absolutely, so I kind of had an intuitive sense for a long time.  I spent a lot of time in Africa and other emerging markets where there wasn't a whole  lot of industrialized, mechanized agriculture and so historically if farmers wanted to continue  
**[0:05:13-0:05:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:05:13):**  to farm in land that they lived in, you had to farm holistically.  There wasn't this phrase regenerative agriculture, it used to just be called farming because  if you didn't regenerate the soil health and let land rest and have these holistic practices  you would ruin the land and you wouldn't be able to grow any food for your family.  So I was always exposed to that way of doing things but when we started Emerinco and we  
**[0:05:40-0:05:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:05:40):**  started with building our first regional production hub on the West Coast, I needed to find a  farmer who could partner with me who appreciated this way of raising animals.  The first time I was introduced to our current farmer who is our partner in production, Tyler  up in Red Bluff, and I went out to meet him and when we toured his property he basically  spent the first hour not even talking about chicken, we spent the first hour running around  
**[0:06:15-0:06:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:06:15):**  his ranch where he kept pointing out various perennial grasses like the purple needle grass  and others and we were talking about clovers as indicators of nitrogen fixing and it was  like a crash course in soil health and again we barely said even the word chicken and I  knew that this was the guy that I wanted to work with.  Furthermore the way that it really hit home was when you could see the results of this.  
**[0:06:47-0:06:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:06:47):**  He had been farming holistically for the last 10 years and the soil on his property was  extremely fertile and even in a drought year, this was before a lot of the major rains came  in California over the last winter, but the soil was healthy, there was kind of this meadow  of grasses, the seeds were really soft which is another indicator of health and yeah you  could just see the results.  
**[0:07:18-0:07:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:07:18):**  Yeah that sounds extremely interesting and also at the same time a story that I've heard  many times where it starts with soil and then in this case the chickens etc are almost a  tool to build that and of course you need to find a business model and to work with  those tools and so you started to then you focus on chickens and how did you build up,  how does Emerincode work at the moment?  
**[0:07:46-0:07:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:07:46):**  If I want to get chickens where can I get them?  How does it end up in my oven?  Yeah so we're a wholesale business where we sell mostly to distributors and other partners  who can then get our product, our chickens to various consumers whether it's direct at  your house or if you're dining in a restaurant.  
**[0:08:08-0:08:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:08:08):**  So right now we sell to distributors who then sell to retail channels, we also sell to distributors  who sell to restaurants and other food service operators and then we work with great online  partners who distribute direct to the consumer, people like Good Eggs in San Francisco, Amazon  Fresh nationally, other partners like Wild Idea Buffalo and yeah these are, you know  this is right now for the fresh products we're limited through logistics to the West Coast  
**[0:08:40-0:08:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:08:40):**  but eventually we'd like to expand our production model on the East Coast and further afield  and make sure that our slow growth pasture raised chickens are as widely available for  consumers as possible.  And when it came to, I mean we're getting into the juicy details, when it came to choosing  the chicken where did you go because you come from an investment background and knew a lot  
**[0:09:02-0:09:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:09:02):**  about hunting and cooking, where do you go to find these chickens and that fit so well  on these lands and it actually are the closest thing as you said you can basically get to  wild?  Yeah so you kind of start at the beginning, you go back, you do a lot of research, you  first have to understand how the chicken industry evolved and how we ended up at the current,  
**[0:09:28-0:09:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:09:28):**  you know with the current system which predominantly raises a Cornish cross breed which is the  type of chicken that's kind of the modern conventional chicken and that chicken for  some context grows to market weight in about 42 days, sometimes a little less and that  has nothing to do with hormones or anything like that, it's truly through breeding over  decades that they've been able to identify various genetic markers that allow these birds  
**[0:10:00-0:10:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:10:00):**  to put on meat very fast.  And what that means is when you have a bird that grows that quickly its muscles outgrow  its skeletal system, it has severe welfare issues and health issues, its heart is the  same size as it was 100 years ago and yet now has twice the muscle mass that it has  to pump blood through.  
**[0:10:20-0:10:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:10:20):**  So you have heart problems, you have lung problems, you have leg problems and so when  you understand the context of this industry it becomes easier to identify where we kind  of went off on the wrong track.  And so we were able to find older breeds of chicken, we call them slow growth breeds,  that were still developed with meat so that you could have good yield on the carcass,  
**[0:10:48-0:10:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:10:48):**  they wouldn't really be like those yard birds that a lot of people are used to in  various countries but these were bred for production but still have the slow growth  so that their body and anatomy grows in sync with itself and develops a healthy immune  system so you never need antibiotics.  And because their muscle and skeletal systems grow together it means they're really active  
**[0:11:15-0:11:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:11:15):**  and they can run around and they can do all the things that chickens do which are important  for soil based regenerative production model where you want the chickens running around,  you want them scratching up the soil, you need them to be warriors in the system and  agents of that kind of healthy change.  And when you look at those farms they fit in a larger system, they fit in a holistic  
**[0:11:39-0:11:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:11:39):**  management system.  Can you briefly describe for anyone who's listening and hasn't seen that or hasn't  heard about that how they fit in there and what their role is?  Yeah of course, so it depends on the region so obviously the environment in every part  of the world is not the same so what this looks like in South Dakota is very different  
**[0:12:01-0:12:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:12:01):**  from what it looks like in California and even in California what it looks like where  we raise birds in Northern California is going to be different than what it looks like closer  to the coast.  So just keep in mind that it's a general term to describe farming in sync with the environment  and never over impacting anyone part of the ecosystem.  
**[0:12:23-0:12:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:12:23):**  So for us it primarily means raising multiple species of animals in the same area of land  and rotating those pastures with cover crops and rest so that you can always ensure that  you're putting the right amount of nutrients into the soil and creating a healthy microbial  environment so that you can grow deeper root structures and encourage perennial growth  and grow taller grasses.  
**[0:12:49-0:12:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:12:49):**  So for us we have cattle on the property and those are the first, obviously this is a cycle,  but if you imagine the cattle are in one pasture and they're trimming the grasses and depositing  their manure and then once the cattle move off of that pasture then you come in with  the chickens and the chickens will forage and scratch up the cattle manure, help break  that up and spread it around.  
**[0:13:12-0:13:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:13:12):**  Their manure is much richer and has a different NPK composition and it's extremely fertile  and then once the chickens leave those pastures you come back in with no-till cover crops  which are a varying mix of different legumes and other annuals that again help with deeper  root structure and create that complex soil aggregate.  And after the no-till cover crop comes in then you're going to let those pastures rest  
**[0:13:39-0:13:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:13:39):**  for at least six months or more.  And then again you start the whole process again.  And so when you have this kind of symbiotic relationship between chickens and ruminants  like cattle or sheep and then cover crops and rest you get a really healthy engine that  kind of starts working on its own.  
**[0:13:59-0:14:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:13:59):**  And when you look at the farms and the farmers you work with, what's the difference for  them working with you and selling those heritage chickens through you instead of maybe doing  it themselves or what's the difference it means for their daily lives?  Yeah, so our model is very different.  As we grow what we're excited about is rethinking all the parts of a meat production model.  
**[0:14:25-0:14:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:14:25):**  So not only the animals we grow, making sure they're healthy and slow growing, not only  the way we produce these animals, so with regenerative practices that improve the soil  health and we're constantly thinking about that aspect, but it's also about the workers  that we work with and what kind of company are we.  And so I like to, we always say that the co in our name actually doesn't stand for company.  
**[0:14:50-0:14:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:14:50):**  I intentionally named it this to stand for community.  And I like when people say, oh, Emmer and Company, and I get to correct them.  And I say, no, actually the co, it stands for community.  And that was important to us because I wanted to make sure that the community of people,  whether it's our customers, our employees, the workers we have in the organization, that  
**[0:15:14-0:15:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:15:14):**  they're front and center of everything we do.  So what we get excited about is again, flipping the model around.  Up to now, most meat production has been built on a contract model where workers are extremely  disintermediated from the end product that gets produced.  And you have, so you have a contract model on one end of a system and on the other end,  
**[0:15:32-0:15:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:15:32):**  you would have a co-op model like organic valley.  And I think there's room in the middle where we can take elements of a co-op where you  can have profit sharing pools and upward mobility and shared knowledge and a community of people  that you can work with and really not feel like you're isolated.  And yet actually also have elements of a company where we can employ the workers, we can give  
**[0:15:57-0:16:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:15:57):**  them health benefits, we can provide a pathway to being part of a bigger system.  Because of the way we grow these birds, it's not likely that you're going to find hundreds  and hundreds of thousands of people who have the land base to do this kind of work, have  the knowledge to do it, have the systems in place to do it.  So we get excited about creating a different model where we can hire these workers, they  
**[0:16:23-0:16:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:16:23):**  can be trained on training farms and then eventually they could even manage farms if  they wanted to, they could eventually if they wanted to even transition into the marketing  department or other parts of the organization, they would have the opportunity to do that.  And if you look at the business, I mean, you started in 2015, what do we look, it's now  July 2017.  
**[0:16:48-0:16:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:16:48):**  If we look a year ago, what has changed since then and what was, let's say, the most difficult  or maybe the most challenging, what really kept you up at night in the last year and  what can you share about that?  Yeah, well, pretty much everything keeps me up at night.  When you're, I mean, this is what we're trying to do, which is rebuild a meat industry from  
**[0:17:13-0:17:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:17:13):**  the ground up.  Literally.  Yeah, literally from the ground up.  It's really hard.  This supply chain of food production, people barely have a glimpse at what this means.  
**[0:17:28-0:17:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:17:28):**  Our current food system is really, really, really, really good at getting a whole lot  of bad food to the most amount of people at the cheapest price.  And they've built billions of dollars of infrastructure that helps support that cycle of bad food  to the most amount of people at the cheapest price.  And they control all that infrastructure.  
**[0:17:51-0:17:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:17:51):**  So if you're trying to start a new kind of company that is trying to think differently  about that supply chain, it's really challenging to stitch together infrastructure when you're  really small because food production is about scale.  And even for us, we want to get bigger.  We want to scale the right way.  
**[0:18:10-0:18:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:18:10):**  We want our regenerative practices to be so widely practiced that they're everywhere in  America and hopefully even further afield.  But it's a challenge.  And you have to work with a lot of great partners as you go and trust them and kind of stitch  that system together until you get to a big enough scale where you can actually integrate  
**[0:18:33-0:18:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:18:33):**  some of those pieces of the supply chain.  So I'd say what's changed since a year ago is the appreciation for what we do.  Half of what we do is rebuilding the supply chain and the other half of what we do is  education and marketing, what it means to be regenerative, what it means to go back  to slow growth breeds and help people connect to food that, again, for 60 to 100 years,  
**[0:18:59-0:19:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:18:59):**  they haven't had this option.  And so they're less familiar with what these words mean.  Panic was really great, did an amazing job at teaching people to look at labels.  But now we have to teach people to look beyond the label because it's been too easy for large  companies to take these labels that people think mean healthy and they may or they may  
**[0:19:23-0:19:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:19:23):**  not.  And so now, again, we have to teach people to go beyond the label to ask questions about  breeds, to ask to see videos of where their food's produced.  We put a virtual reality tour on our website at www.emmerandco.com.experience.  And as far as I know, it's the first VR chicken experience on the internet.  
**[0:19:48-0:19:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:19:48):**  And we did it to show people this is our food.  There's no secrets, there's nothing to hide.  And we can be 100% transparent.  And I think consumers these days need to demand that level of transparency.  I mean, if producers or companies they're currently buying from can't provide this to  
**[0:20:07-0:20:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:20:07):**  them, they should probably ask why.  I think the education part is key there.  And at the same time, very challenging if you are operating or living in food deserts  and operating in places where you don't have access to that.  Of course, the internet is helping in that.  
**[0:20:25-0:20:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:20:25):**  And what have you been working on?  Something concrete on the last, I mean, the VR one is definitely one.  But were there other things in the last few months that you're very excited about that  just went live or the things that are rolling out or things that are part of the operation  that really made a difference?  
**[0:20:42-0:20:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:20:42):**  I mean, the VR experience was a great start.  For us, it's, again, we're educating a market that's been used to a certain kind of food  system for a very, very long time.  So our education initiatives will never end.  They're a constant thing.  
**[0:21:01-0:21:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:21:01):**  And I get excited about it because it's so fun to be able to help connect people to where  their food comes from in this really transparent manner.  So the VR experience, we're going to be continually putting out white papers and infographics  and data around what regenerative means in our practices.  As we grow throughout this year, we're going to be bringing on more food customers.  
**[0:21:27-0:21:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:21:27):**  We're going to be expanding to different markets like Los Angeles.  And as we do this, we're going to be organizing more events, whether it's community dinners  or other various kind of grassroots initiatives where we're excited about continuing to spread  these messages.  And when you started at the beginning, how did you start?  
**[0:21:48-0:21:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:21:48):**  Did you have any investors?  Or what was the birth of basically MR&Co?  And what was it like in the first period?  Yeah.  So no, we don't have any outside investors.  
**[0:21:58-0:22:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:21:58):**  We're self-funded to date.  There aren't a lot of investors who truly understand animal agriculture production.  There's a lot of investors who understand that sector at the private equity level when  you're a little bit bigger and profitable and you want to scale your infrastructure.  Those organizations have been financing the industrial food companies for a very long  
**[0:22:22-0:22:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:22:22):**  time.  And from zero to one, this kind of early stage capital, there's very few investors who have  the history of investing in this space.  Did you meet and talk to many?  Yeah.  
**[0:22:34-0:22:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:22:34):**  Yeah.  I've, anyone who answers the phone.  Probably to all of them.  Yeah.  I've talked to a lot.  
**[0:22:41-0:22:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:22:41):**  And what are the two most common barriers that you find apart from that they don't know  it?  I can imagine a lot, especially if you tell the story, are interested in it.  What has made it so far not a match?  Yeah.  
**[0:22:55-0:22:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:22:55):**  Everyone's very interested in it.  The not knowing it.  So being outside the scope of their current remit or what they're used to investing in,  that's really important.  I mean, that's an easy way for investors to lose a lot of money is investing in things  
**[0:23:09-0:23:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:23:09):**  that they don't understand.  But what that means is it creates a cycle where it's hard to kind of push people into  a new thing if they haven't had the experience of doing it.  If they never tried.  If they never tried.  
**[0:23:21-0:23:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:23:21):**  So, you know, I think there, there needs to be some activity on the investor side of them  getting up to speed with what this means and learning, you know, on their own.  But the I'd say the largest challenge once they even possibly do learn about animal agriculture,  meat production, et cetera, is the time horizon.  So you know, we're used in, well, certain sectors of investment are used to a certain  
**[0:23:49-0:23:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:23:49):**  return profile and getting their money back in a certain timeframe.  They're often investing out of out of vehicles that are structured in 10 year time horizons.  You know, it's animals take a long time to grow, right?  If we're talking about changing soil health, that's, that's not an overnight process.  And you're never going to have the same kind of returns that you might have if you're,  
**[0:24:13-0:24:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:24:13):**  if you're used to investing in a technology company.  You know, a cow can take, takes many years to grow and that already would bite into,  you know a 10 year fund.  So you know, I think there needs to be some reorientation of expectations of if you want  to invest in animal agriculture or agriculture broadly speaking, and you have to understand  
**[0:24:38-0:24:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:24:38):**  that the time horizon and the return profile is extremely different.  Now for me, I think that's exciting because it provides diversification and kind of longer  term stability.  But it's, it's, it's just something that people are going to have to, you know, get comfortable  with.  
**[0:24:55-0:24:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:24:55):**  Yeah.  And get off the, also because a lot of these investments that have this extremely high  return profile, of course also have the extremely high risk profile that we often forget about  because we only hear the stories of the, the 20x returns and 20x exits, et cetera.  But yeah, you can, even if you would like to do that, you can only do it with a small  
**[0:25:16-0:25:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:25:16):**  part of your portfolio and yet to be diversified and, and to have a connection with real assets,  agriculture seems to be a very interesting, very interesting angle.  And then of course, as far as I'm concerned, regenerative agriculture has a completely  different risk profile than chemical or industrial, however we call it.  And in terms of, so yeah, I've been self-funded so far.  
**[0:25:40-0:25:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:25:40):**  You're going well, I assume.  What's what's up for the next, I mean, you mentioned a lot of education parts, but let's  say until the end of the year in terms of, of, they're going to be, they're going to  be new cities, et cetera, going to be fundamental things inside the company that are changing  as well that you're working on and that you could share.  
**[0:25:58-0:25:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:25:58):**  Yeah.  We're looking to expand our team primarily on the marketing side.  So if there's any great folks out there who are excited about marketing the future of  agriculture and future of farming, please get in touch.  And yeah, the expansion of our customer base.  
**[0:26:13-0:26:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:26:13):**  So we're, we've, we've focused a lot on the San Francisco Bay area for our restaurant  food service customers.  This by the end of the summer, early fall, we'll be expanding with some really great  owners and distributors in the Los Angeles area.  And so that's going to be really exciting to just start working with some other great  
**[0:26:35-0:26:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:26:35):**  chefs and be able to, you know, touch consumers in more areas.  And as we, as we expand that those customer bases, that just allows us more resources  to keep producing more content, keep educating and just keep growing our supply chain.  So those are the big initiatives.  It's all about growing the right way, but slow growing.  
**[0:26:58-0:26:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:26:58):**  Yeah.  Slow, like slow.  Exactly.  We want, we want to grow the right way, which is like our birds like growing slowly, but  you know, at the same time we do want to get bigger so that eventually we can own various  
**[0:27:08-0:27:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:27:08):**  pieces of our supply chain so we can keep bringing our cost structure down.  Our, whatever our current pricing is purely based on demand and the economy as a scale  that we get with working with third party supply chain partners.  So eventually if we own our own processing plant, if we can contract directly for feed,  you know, all of these pieces allow us to keep reducing our pricing and, you know, make  
**[0:27:34-0:27:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:27:34):**  sure that we can get the most affordable products that is the, you know, healthiest and best  for the land to the most people.  And just to get it out of the way, you mentioned feed.  I've seen some articles on that.  You are sometimes supplementing the feed of the chickens with a non-GMO, almost organic  
**[0:27:54-0:27:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:27:54):**  feed, right?  That's the feed you're mentioning here.  Yeah.  So the chickens are on pasture 100% of their lives.  Like we, from day one to the time they're, so they're brooded out on pasture.  
**[0:28:05-0:28:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:28:05):**  They don't even have a barn, right?  There's no barns.  There's everything, you know, again, you come to the website and you can see what we mean  when we talk about.  Yeah, we'll definitely link it below.  
**[0:28:15-0:28:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:28:15):**  It's a great experience.  When we say pasture raised, this is what we mean.  We mean no barns, movable hoop houses, you know, they're on pasture as early as possible.  But that, but so they're getting seeds and bugs and you know, all sorts of things from  the pastures, but they, you still have to supplement with feed that primarily is comprised  
**[0:28:37-0:28:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:28:37):**  of protein and carbohydrates.  And right now we work with third party mills to supply that mostly are, you know, most  of the sources of the feed are sourced within California for the West coast production.  What we get excited about is as we grow and we can get to what we have larger buying power,  we'll be able to work with specific farmers who will be growing feed also in a regenerative  
**[0:29:00-0:29:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:29:00):**  process where we're going to be working on no tilling.  We're working on, you know, crops that are able to create really deep root structures  and rotating with the right kind of mix that is always ensuring again, healthy soil, complex  aggregates, you know, these deep root systems that help trap more rainwater and you know,  sequester carbon.  
**[0:29:23-0:29:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:29:23):**  So it's just a process, you know, you have to, you can't solve every problem, you know,  on day one, but it's exciting that we're, we're getting closer and closer to be able  to, you know, keep fixing all these parts of the supply chain, you know, as we get bigger.  And I want to end with a question there, actually, it's a two folded question.  That processing part or actually your supply chain or supply stream, as some people in  
**[0:29:47-0:29:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:29:47):**  this podcast have called it, is that an interesting angle for impact investors who want to get  into the regenerative agriculture space?  In your specific case, would it be something that you're looking for for funding at some  point, maybe not now, but maybe in the future?  And in general, if you would be a smart impact investor, where would you start if you want  
**[0:30:07-0:30:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:30:07):**  to get into the regenerative agriculture space?  Yeah, great question.  So if you want to get into the regenerative agriculture space, I think first you have  to think about what part of that sector you want to focus on.  Do you want to focus on, you know, meat production?  
**[0:30:23-0:30:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:30:23):**  Do you want to focus on the grain side of it?  Do you want to focus on aquaculture and, you know, the fish industry?  You know, there are very different parts of regenerative agriculture that all have the  same goals in mind.  The insect meal industry as a replacement for soy and feed is a fascinating industry,  
**[0:30:48-0:30:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:30:48):**  something we get very excited about.  I know the European industry is, I think, a little further along than the US industry.  That's a really fascinating sector.  When it comes to our supply chain, the milling and the grain side of it, you know, definitely  there are third party companies, that's all they do.  
**[0:31:05-0:31:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:31:05):**  And then, you know, you will, there is a multibillion dollar global feed industry.  And so that is definitely a sector that is interesting.  On the processing plant side, it tends to be that those are not necessarily independent  businesses that you would want to own, rather they are integrated pieces of an integrated,  you know, company.  
**[0:31:31-0:31:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:31:31):**  And so for us, you know, we will definitely look at, you know, raising capital for, you  know, financing those kinds of pieces of our supply chain, you know, when we get to that  stage.  But I think that there's a really exciting opportunity to work with early stage companies  like us and others who want to get to that stage and, you know, a small amount of capital  
**[0:31:53-0:31:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:31:53):**  in these early stages can really help us accelerate that process.  Yeah, because that will be actually my final question.  I said it before, but this is my final one.  What would you need to double your impact?  And it could be investment, it could be much bigger education, it could be nonprofit, it  
**[0:32:09-0:32:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:32:09):**  could be what would you envision for the next, let's say, five years to or next few years,  actually, because you're still relatively small to really double your impacts of hectares  or birds?  What would you measure?  What would you look at if you want to achieve that?  
**[0:32:23-0:32:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:32:23):**  Sure.  So it would be investment to scale up our regenerative practices so that we could eventually  have the scale to justify owning a processing plant, contracting directly with feed mills,  so that we could get our cost structure down.  So the faster we can get our costs down of our product allows us to expand our market  
**[0:32:50-0:32:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:32:50):**  dramatically and really opens up new distribution channels and new customers.  And so the faster we can get our pricing down, closer to where the larger conventional meat  businesses are, that allows us to accelerate our impact overnight.  And do you see the larger meat industry as well?  I mean, do you see them under attack basically from all sides?  
**[0:33:15-0:33:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:33:15):**  Are their prices going to go up at some point or that's just a race to the bottom until  we find out all the scandals and all of that?  You know, I think for a lot of the larger meat businesses, they've been operating in  a conventional commodity based market.  There is a global chicken commodity business.  
**[0:33:37-0:33:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:33:37):**  There are global prices for beef, for chicken, for soy, these commodities.  So they're already operating in a certain system that won't really allow them to raise  prices.  And there is a market for every price point.  I don't see KFC necessarily disappearing and KFC would never be able to afford our chicken  
**[0:34:03-0:34:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:34:03):**  based on what margins they need to hit and the price point of their products.  And that's fine.  You know, I think what I get excited about is, again, it's choice.  Right now, consumers in the US and elsewhere, they don't have an alternative choice for  chicken, for pasture raised other meats that's at a price point that can make sense for them.  
**[0:34:25-0:34:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:34:25):**  So I think the big industrial food companies see the way that consumers are shifting and  they want to get exposure to that, but their core business is still very profitable and  will be for quite some time.  Yeah, no, I agree.  I think that it's very difficult to find, unless you live next to an realistically managed  
**[0:34:46-0:34:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:34:46):**  farm who maybe is processing on the farm, which is almost never the case, it's very  difficult to find a meat and livestock that has been grown in the way that we like it  to be.  I think that's difficult in the US, difficult here in Europe, and hopefully that will be  a lot easier soon.  
**[0:35:05-0:35:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:35:05):**  So I want to thank you so much for your time and whatever you shared, and I definitely  will be checking in and see how fast you're doubling your impact and when the first processing  plant will be there and the first direct contracts with the feed mills and the first insects,  of course.  Exactly.  
**[0:35:23-0:35:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:35:23):**  Thanks so much for having me, Kon.  You just listened to an interview with Jesse Soloman, founder and CEO of Emerinco.  I hope you enjoyed our discussion about changing the chicken business from the ground up, and  I hope to see you back here soon for more of these podcasts.  If you found the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast valuable, there  
**[0:35:42-0:35:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:35:42):**  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast, and it only takes a few  seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  
**[0:35:58-0:36:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:35:58):**  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  join my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or in the description  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  
**[0:36:26-0:36:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:36:26):**  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to put money  
**[0:36:45-0:36:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:36:45):**  to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011 and recording  these podcasts since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  
**[0:37:01-0:37:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:37:01):**  How have we picked interviewees?  What questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  
**[0:37:09-0:37:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:37:09):**  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  You, the soil builders and investors in this space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  
**[0:37:22-0:37:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:37:22):**  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management consultants, etc.  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  
**[0:37:42-0:37:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:37:42):**  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  
**[0:37:56-0:38:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:37:56):**  that among the listeners of this podcast we have people with very different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  
**[0:38:11-0:38:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:38:11):**  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to ride along.  We're gonna look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  
**[0:38:34-0:38:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:38:34):**  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're gonna look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  
**[0:38:50-0:38:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:38:50):**  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment please find professional investment advice.  
**[0:39:06-0:39:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/07/21/jesse-solomon/#t=0:39:06):**  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  