### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2022-00-22)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  Most products we buy in supermarkets come from a few, very few large food companies,  also known as FMCGs, fast moving consumer good companies.  
**[0:00:23-0:00:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:00:23):**  They have made very big commitments about climate change, about biodiversity, not all,  but they should.  But is that enough?  Today we dive deep into why they need to fundamentally change the design of their products.  And I'm not talking about packaging, which they also have to change, but about the ingredients  
**[0:00:37-0:00:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:00:37):**  and how to buy the ingredients what our landscape can produce regeneratively and how to turn  that into appealing and tasty products.  Simply sourcing responsibly isn't enough and the results can be actually quite astonishing  on emissions, calories produced, biodiversity and farmers' profit.  So join me in an episode about the big food redesign with an organization that works with  
**[0:00:57-0:01:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:00:57):**  most of the large food companies, which mind you, touch about 40% of the farmland in the  UK and Europe with their products and their sourcing.  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture, Investing as if  the Planet Mattered, a podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative  food and agriculture space to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate  
**[0:01:22-0:01:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:01:22):**  soil, people, local communities and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much more  
**[0:01:42-0:01:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:01:42):**  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  In March last year, we launched our membership community to make it easy for fans to support  our work.  So many of you have joined as a member.  We've launched different types of benefits, exclusive content, Q&A webinars with former  
**[0:01:58-0:02:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:01:58):**  guests, ask me anything sessions, plus so much more to come in the future.  For more information on the different tiers, benefits and how to become a member, check  gumroad.com slash investing region egg or find the link below.  Thank you.  Welcome to another episode today with the team of the Ellen MacArthur Food Initiative.  
**[0:02:17-0:02:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:02:17):**  We recently published a report, the Big Food Redesign.  Rather than bending nature to produce food, food can be designed for nature to thrive.  I see a lot of things we should unpack there.  So welcome Emma and Elliot.  Thanks for having us.  
**[0:02:29-0:02:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:02:29):**  Thank you so much for having us.  And to start with a personal question to both of you, you can decide who steps in first.  How did you end up working on the big redesign for food?  Because that's quite a specific, it's very needed, but it's very specific within a niche.  Yes, maybe I'll start.  
**[0:02:46-0:02:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:02:46):**  For me, the origins were way back when I was, I think I was 18 and I read Bill McKibben's  book, The End of Nature.  And that lit this fire in front of me that gave the sense of urgency that I'd never felt  before, particularly around climate change and needing to be part of the solution.  So it was then that I thought I would dive into economics and environmental studies when  
**[0:03:11-0:03:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:03:11):**  I pursued my degree.  And I didn't dive deeply into food though, at that point.  It was years later when I was done my studies and I was volunteering on organic farms through  Europe.  That was so many aha moments, but I realized growing up in the city of Toronto in Canada,  
**[0:03:32-0:03:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:03:32):**  I really hadn't spent time on farms.  And I was like so many urban citizens these days, detached from the food I was eating,  the stories behind it, the impact it had, the people that grew it, what soil even meant,  right?  What does healthy soil even look like?  
**[0:03:49-0:03:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:03:49):**  I knew nothing.  And I felt like a total beginner, a child learning in this space.  And I'm still very much a beginner when it comes to farming.  But it was that moment that my whole relationship at a personal level was rewritten with food.  And this food had such amazing flavor.  
**[0:04:08-0:04:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:04:08):**  And suddenly I liked all these vegetables that I thought I hated growing up.  And I had this question, like, how have I never been exposed to food like this in my  life?  First question.  And second, why are we not in a world where this is the norm, not the anomaly?  
**[0:04:25-0:04:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:04:25):**  And what's it going to take to get there?  Because it's not realistic to expect that everyone is going to, in our capitalist society,  be ditching their jobs tomorrow and doing organic farming and living the stories that  so many of the hosts I was with were embodying.  And so this question around how do we get this at scale sat with me for some more years  
**[0:04:48-0:04:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:04:48):**  and ultimately led me to this amazing opportunity to work at the Ellen MacArthur Foundation  on food, just when we were starting to explore what contributions circular economy could  make to positive food system transformation.  And we've now been working on this for about four years on food.  And this latest publication, the Big Food Redesign, which we can unpack a lot more,  
**[0:05:14-0:05:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:05:14):**  is about how we can get that scale with major food buyers, like the food brands that we  see every day on grocery store shelves and the retailers that we get so many of our groceries  from.  So that's a short form version of my long journey to getting to where I am today and  speaking to you about this.  
**[0:05:34-0:05:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:05:34):**  One follow up question before we go to Elliot.  I mean, you finished university and you decided to go roofing on organic farms in Europe.  That's quite a leap.  I mean, for somebody who didn't grow up on farming and had an interest in food, but not  maybe not the huge interest.  
**[0:05:47-0:05:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:05:47):**  You said there were a lot of aha moments when you did that.  Why did you decided to go and volunteer on organic farms in Europe?  I had a roommate my first year at university who had taken a gap year and she told me all  these ridiculous stories that I thought, wow, she's so much more adventurous than I'd ever  be.  
**[0:06:05-0:06:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:06:05):**  And then I found myself four years later with a six month gap before I was starting my job.  And so I thought, what am I going to do with this?  And I didn't have a lot of money and there's all sorts of work exchange platforms out there.  And Woofing is one of those.  And I thought, this could be cool.  
**[0:06:25-0:06:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:06:25):**  I can be in nature.  I can learn something new, get a cultural experience.  I had no idea what I was really signing up for.  And yet it changed your life.  Yeah, no, fascinating.  
**[0:06:37-0:06:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:06:37):**  And what about you Elliot?  How did you end up working on the Big Food redesign?  So I studied climate change at university.  And as I was studying that, I kind of realized that the food system was both like such a  major driver of many of the problems that we face in the world today, but also could  
**[0:06:53-0:06:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:06:53):**  potentially be a big part of the solution as well.  And I came across this term regenerative agriculture some way through my studies and got reading  on about it.  And it just really struck me as something that would potentially solve so many of the  problems that the food system faces like climate change, which is what I've been studying,  
**[0:07:11-0:07:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:07:11):**  as well as the biodiversity crisis, and then improving socioeconomics of rural communities  as well.  And I felt like if it was done right, it could be an amazing solution to some of the problems  we face.  I guess what I wanted to contribute to the space was to really ensure that it didn't  
**[0:07:30-0:07:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:07:30):**  just become a greenwashing term, which is something that I kind of feared if it fell  into the wrong hands or if it was approached from a very shallow perspective.  I really don't think it should be or that it is, but I wanted to contribute to make  sure that there was an evidence based agenda around regenerative agriculture to make sure  that outcomes are measured.  
**[0:07:53-0:07:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:07:53):**  And just to try and help organizations working in that space to develop a bit more of a deeper  understanding of what regeneration can be.  So let's start unpack the circular design for food, because I think many know the Ellen  MacArthur Foundation from the food work, but also from the circular economy work, from  the broader work, and of course, sailing around the ocean by herself.  
**[0:08:11-0:08:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:08:11):**  But what I mean, you join Emma when the food focus started and you said it's been like  a four year journey now, leading to a number of reports, a number of work pieces and at  the end now to this big one on a redesign of food, which is quite, quite deep.  It goes quite deep.  So what is circular design for food to both of you?  
**[0:08:29-0:08:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:08:29):**  I mean, obviously who wants to take this one?  I'll start with the basics and then Elliot can build.  I'll start, especially for listeners who may have never heard of circular economy, which  is perfectly normal and fine if you never have.  But it's based on three principles of eliminating waste and pollution, circulating nutrients  
**[0:08:46-0:08:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:08:46):**  and products at their highest value and regenerating nature.  And so we can take these principles and we can apply them throughout all aspects of our  economy to move from today's what we call linear take make waste system to one that  is restorative and regenerative by design.  So that's the starting point.  
**[0:09:05-0:09:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:09:05):**  And you heard at the end there by design, which is just so central.  I feel that design piece is going to be fundamental.  Right.  We're talking about redesigning business models, services, products.  And here we're talking about redesigning food.  
**[0:09:21-0:09:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:09:21):**  So we can move towards a future where our food is contributing to that nature positive  outcome and through its very productive production, actually helping to regenerate nature rather  than today, which is at large, hugely degenerative.  And it all starts with design.  We can't just try and incrementally improve the sourcing of current ingredients.  
**[0:09:46-0:09:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:09:46):**  We actually need to rethink what foods are being offered on the market.  And this is where we see that a big part of that unlock sits with a relatively small group  of major food manufacturers, what we call FMCGs and retailers.  And we found that about 40% of the agricultural land in the EU and UK are supplying ingredients  to the top 10 FMCGs and retailers.  
**[0:10:13-0:10:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:10:13):**  FMCGs is for anybody not in the sector, fast moving consumer goods, I think, right?  The stuff we buy in the supermarket.  Often called CPGs in North America.  So we all know these brands.  And just like our clothes or the device that you're listening to this on today, we don't  
**[0:10:30-0:10:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:10:30):**  think about it so much, but our food is designed just like a pair of jeans are.  And what I mean by that is one or often several people have made decisions on your behalf  that determine the flavor, the texture, the nutrition, the price and the impact of the  foods that you eat, whether it's the pasta you're going to make for your family this  evening or the cereal that you ate for breakfast today.  
**[0:10:57-0:11:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:10:57):**  Those design decisions have been made for you.  And we're not today fully realizing the potential of that food design process to maximize the  positive impacts that the food can have for your own body and nutrition and wellbeing,  but also for the farmers who produce those ingredients for the soil and the nature that  gave way to those ingredients as well.  
**[0:11:20-0:11:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:11:20):**  And so that's what this whole piece of work was all about.  And I'll stop there because I'm sure there's more questions.  So what you're saying is the current design of the things we find in the supermarket shelves  and we're not talking about, but even potentially the fresh stuff, but mostly the processed  things is not made for regional agriculture producers or practices.  
**[0:11:41-0:11:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:11:41):**  It's made for a different system.  And if we want to change the agriculture system, we have to change the design recipes.  So we're not talking about the design of the packaging.  We're talking about design of the products in it, just like you're talking design of  the headphones, I happen to wear one that you can actually fix.  
**[0:11:55-0:12:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:11:55):**  Yeah, phones that you can actually fix like the same principles you apply to products.  We can also, and have to apply to food because otherwise we just be making very, very small  marginal changes and we're not going to get the results we're looking for.  Exactly.  So what does it mean?  
**[0:12:10-0:12:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:12:10):**  Like how does that concrete?  You have a number of examples in the report.  I will link it below, obviously for everybody to read it.  It's very visual, relatively short, and it's amazing to read.  It's one of the best ones or one of the nicest and interesting ones I've seen last year,  
**[0:12:22-0:12:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:12:22):**  but let's bring it to life.  What are some examples where we see that the current design is limited and design changes  could unlock a lot of potential benefits?  Yeah, we worked with a design agency in North America called Alpha Food Labs, who are specialists  in design and innovation.  
**[0:12:40-0:12:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:12:40):**  And we wanted to work with them to create some speculative food products of the future  to try and illustrate what some of these products could actually look like in future.  What it would look like if companies redesign their product portfolios in line with circular  economy principles and then how that would affect agricultural landscapes.  Because as Emma was saying, the decisions that are made upstream in offices and research  
**[0:13:02-0:13:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:13:02):**  and development labs and places, they ultimately influence what farmers grow, how they grow  it and that ultimately influences what agricultural landscapes look like.  So one of the examples, my favorite example from the report actually is called Silvo.  So Silvo is a line of cheeses which is made from all the outputs of the Silvo pasture  system.  
**[0:13:24-0:13:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:13:24):**  So many of your listeners may know already, but Silvo pasture is when you're grazing animals  in the field, which also has lots of trees in it.  And those trees are also used to produce, they could be used to produce food for humans.  They could be used to produce feed for animals or timber or oils or other useful products.  So the line of cheeses Silvo is made from walnuts and then from dairy milk.  
**[0:13:49-0:13:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:13:49):**  And yeah, in the case of Silvo's farms, the cattle that are grazed amongst the walnut  trees are also managed using a system called managed intensive grazing.  So this is when you have cattle in a sort of bigger agricultural land that are fenced  into a much smaller portion of that agricultural land.  And each day they're moved to a different section of that agricultural land.  
**[0:14:11-0:14:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:14:11):**  It's kind of like herds of water beast in Africa or bison in North America because they're  constantly moving.  They're not degrading the land in the same way as if they were staying in that same place  all the time.  And the nutrients that they produce in their urine and in their dung helps to fertilize  
**[0:14:29-0:14:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:14:29):**  that land and build the soil health as well.  So when you do silvopasture and when you manage the cattle in that silvopasture system using  managed intensive grazing, under the right conditions, that farm system overall could  actually be sequestering more carbon than all the greenhouse gas emissions produced  by the cows living in that system, which is amazing, like such incredible regenerative  
**[0:14:53-0:14:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:14:53):**  outcomes.  And this is a really nice example of how if you're designing food products with the intention  of them having regenerative outcomes from the start, then you can really achieve these  quite impressive outcomes at the end.  And just one final thing to say on silvo.  
**[0:15:10-0:15:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:15:10):**  There's quite an important design decision made by the imagined product concept.  Because just to be clear, this is not for sale yet.  Yeah, unfortunately, this is not on the shelves.  If everybody starts googling now, or DuckDuckGo or Ecosia, it doesn't exist yet.  We wish.  
**[0:15:25-0:15:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:15:25):**  So sorry, an important design decision made.  No, no, I definitely should have mentioned that.  You're right.  But one important feature is that, so this line of cheeses is made from the cow's milk,  it's made from the walnuts milk.  
**[0:15:37-0:15:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:15:37):**  So you have a vegan walnut milk cheese, you have a normal dairy cheese made from the drenth  of cow's milk, you have a blended cheese made from the walnuts and the cow's milk together.  Rather than selling those individually, to help match the demand of what the agro ecosystem  can actually produce, the cheeses are sold in a tasting pack.  So you can't just buy the vegan cheese if that's what you want.  
**[0:16:01-0:16:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:16:01):**  So in that way, you're sort of matching the demand with what the agro system can actually  provide.  And it's those types of seemingly small decisions that can actually help to, yeah, help those  adjustments in the buying models can actually be pretty powerful for farmers.  So almost like we have the nose to tail or using the full vegetable.  
**[0:16:20-0:16:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:16:20):**  I mean, there's a lot of discussion on that, but in this case, you're saying use the full  landscape, harvest the full landscape, make those products and don't allow somebody to  buy one thing out of it and then hope that it will lead to a huge change, but actually  force through design because it's forcing you, you don't have to choose that you can  buy another brand, but force through design these landscape outcomes almost.  
**[0:16:40-0:16:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:16:40):**  Yeah, definitely.  That most of the tail analogy that you just made is actually a really nice one.  You're matching the using everything that the landscape provides and designing products  around that rather than just saying we want cow's milk and it doesn't matter what else  the landscape is producing.  
**[0:16:56-0:16:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:16:56):**  How different is that from the current situation?  I mean, let's say, of course, we can imagine many other of these products and then going  to your partners and the people you're working with in these large, because you mentioned  40% of the agricultural land in Europe and the UK is influenced directly by a very small  amount of, I mean, large companies, but very small amount of companies.  
**[0:17:16-0:17:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:17:16):**  When you bring this to them and say, look, there's a huge difference from sourcing one  ingredient and hoping for a better outcome of these grain practices because you're making  pasta.  It's a very big shift to saying this is what a landscape could produce.  How is, is or was the reaction, because it's quite a significant shift, not different than  
**[0:17:33-0:17:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:17:33):**  the circular economy shift in physical products or like you've been doing that for years.  How has been the response or has been the reception, let's say, from this huge food  redesign, because this is a fundamental, like you force companies or you ask companies to,  to change their recipes, to change their products, literally not just to change packaging a bit  and put a nice green logo on it.  
**[0:17:52-0:17:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:17:52):**  So yes, it does entail a big shift, right?  And that can be much harder to rethink, renovate old products or innovate new ones in a fundamentally  different way from how things have been done before.  And at the same time, I would say the response has been incredibly positive and hugely, you  know, spilling over with inspiration because this is a new way of doing things.  
**[0:18:16-0:18:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:18:16):**  And there's so much potential because of the influence they have.  They can use their demand fairly quickly if we do things right to influence these positive  outcomes that are much better for biodiversity, for climate, for farmers and their incomes  and for total food output because you're doing, making the most of the land that we're using.  So that's supporting these businesses goals on multiple levels.  
**[0:18:38-0:18:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:18:38):**  One is we're seeing a wave of many companies now setting and stone commitments and roadmaps  for climate and increasingly biodiversity as well.  So those are, you know, CEO endorsed commitments that they need to deliver on and we're giving  them a how and a pathway.  So that's one thing.  
**[0:18:56-0:19:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:18:56):**  And two is the increasing resilience piece and de-risking supply chains, which again  is hitting companies' bottom lines, especially as extreme weather instances are becoming  more frequent.  So again, it's not just a sustainability piece.  It's actually coming to the core business and we quantified and we looked at different  
**[0:19:16-0:19:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:19:16):**  scenarios by imagining these different products for wheat, dairy, potatoes in the EU and the  UK.  And we found that across the board, it's consistent.  You are getting much better outcomes when you take this design approach rather than  just saying, okay, I have been using this type of wheat today.  
**[0:19:34-0:19:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:19:34):**  I'm going to try and source it better.  I can still get you some good outcomes.  That's not a bad thing.  It's well intended and it's part of the journey, but that's not going to get us to the end  state, which is fundamentally at that landscape level, which is why we need to work collectively  
**[0:19:49-0:19:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:19:49):**  because it's no single company or actor in the system who can change it alone.  And the policy piece needs to be there to help set those enabling conditions as well.  So if we get government and we get industry working together, we can be bringing these  much better products and food offerings more broadly that consumers want, that are tasty,  that are nutritious and make this nature positive future the norm and bring it as soon as possible,  
**[0:20:18-0:20:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:20:18):**  which is what we need.  What I really like about the report is you quantified this, you modeled it.  Could you speak a bit about that?  Because you looked at reduction of biodiversity loss, the obviously emissions and total food  output.  
**[0:20:29-0:20:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:20:29):**  That's something like, oh, can we feed the world?  It always gets thrown at the food sector.  And of course, farmer profitability, like how big is the difference if you have the  numbers on top of your head?  Otherwise I would push everybody to read the report.  
**[0:20:40-0:20:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:20:40):**  But how big are the differences between better sourcing only and actually doing this full  food circular redesign for food?  So what we see is the climate reduction is about 70% reduction when you're doing the  redesign approach versus again on potatoes, on what are the four, the three or four, wheat  and dairy.  
**[0:21:03-0:21:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:21:03):**  So those are the three that we assessed for some of the changes.  And then we also looked at upcycling opportunity, which was a bit of a different approach and  we can speak to that too.  Which is massive for sugar, which is super interesting.  But what we see in the greenhouse gas emissions reduction for better sourcing is about 50%  
**[0:21:20-0:21:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:21:20):**  reduction, but then you can get further 20% to get 70% total reduction if you take the  circular design for food approach.  Actually with biodiversity loss reduction, it's about 20% reduction when you're doing  better sourcing only.  But then if you do circular design for food, you got a 50% reduction.  
**[0:21:39-0:21:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:21:39):**  Which is massive difference.  Yeah.  And a lot of that is the footprint, right?  Maximizing what we're getting from the land and making as much as possible everything  that's coming out, becoming edible and an ingredient.  
**[0:21:53-0:21:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:21:53):**  And again, because of that, we see a huge difference, 5% increase in total food output  when we're doing better sourcing, but a 50% increase in total food output when we're doing  circular design for food.  And then because of that higher total food output and yield, you can say for the farmer,  profitability rather per hectare in US dollars, it could be $200 more with better sourcing  
**[0:22:19-0:22:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:22:19):**  alone or we see about $3,100 in the US for circular design for food.  That's massive as well.  Yes.  That's a huge, those differences, I mean, even on the emissions, it's a lot, but the  other ones are just off the scale.  
**[0:22:36-0:22:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:22:36):**  So I think, I mean, I can imagine a lot of these companies get very excited, but what  then, what is the next sort of pathway?  Like you're working on that now, you released this report, obviously it took a while to  write and then it gets released into the world in September and now what are the next steps  or pathways?  
**[0:22:51-0:22:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:22:51):**  I mean, all the companies are excited, but getting them from excitement to actually action,  what does it look like in your ideal world, in the current world as well?  Maybe I can speak about the five action areas that we laid out, but before that, I think  it could be good to define even what circular design for food is.  If Elliot, you want to, you want to just lay out the four design opportunities and how  
**[0:23:13-0:23:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:23:13):**  we see them being combined.  Yeah, definitely.  So, I mean, yeah, just linking back to very briefly to food design earlier.  So we mentioned how food design is, it's a set of decisions that are made at the product  level about how food should look, it should taste and its price, its nutrition, et cetera.  
**[0:23:32-0:23:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:23:32):**  And the difference between that, which is done today and circular design for food is  applying the principles of the circular economy to every aspect of food design.  So if I could just run through some of the steps that that could look like.  So to start with, it's, you actually have to embed this very early on in the product  concept stage.  
**[0:23:52-0:23:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:23:52):**  So in order to give the rest of the team, the agency to try and achieve regenerative  outcomes, if you embed that in the product concept, and if you set targets embedding  a nature positive regenerative targets in the product brief, then that can give the  team down the line much clearer incentives, give the product development team, the research  and development team, much clearer incentives to design for these outcomes.  
**[0:24:16-0:24:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:24:16):**  And then after that, research and development teams and procurement teams who probably traditionally  worked in two different silos, probably didn't talk to each other perhaps as much as they  could have or should have, they can work together to make the ingredient selection sourcing  decisions together.  So that would mean talking together and deciding what ingredients they should include, how  
**[0:24:38-0:24:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:24:38):**  those ingredients should be produced, and then not only that, but then think about how  those ingredients could play a role in regenerating landscapes as well.  And then last but not least, a really important thing as well is actually thinking about the  packaging as well, because it wouldn't be much good having a beautiful, like the diverse  regenerative up-circuit ingredient based food product that's then put into single use packaging  
**[0:25:03-0:25:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:25:03):**  that then goes up in the ocean.  So these are the different steps that can take place through the design process.  And we'd argue that those four main design opportunities that companies can use and can  combine to achieve the best outcomes.  So this is using diverse ingredients, using lower impact ingredients, so shifting from  
**[0:25:26-0:25:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:25:26):**  ingredients that in a conventional agricultural system have a higher impact to those that  have a much lower impact in the conventional agricultural system.  So that might be shifting from conventional animal based products to plant based ingredients,  or it might be shifting from a higher impact plant based ingredient to a lower impact plant  based ingredient.  
**[0:25:44-0:25:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:25:44):**  So that's the second one.  The third one is including up-circuit ingredients as well.  So up-circuit ingredients or up-cycling, I should say, is when you take a byproduct of  the food industry that's typically considered to be inedible.  So it might be a banana skin, it might be spent brewer's grain, the byproduct of the  
**[0:26:04-0:26:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:26:04):**  beer industry.  You take those and although they're typically considered to be inedible, you can transform  those into food ingredients to be used in these types of products as well.  And then the fourth one, which everyone, all your listeners are very familiar with, is  regeneratively produced ingredients as well.  
**[0:26:22-0:26:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:26:22):**  And we found that by combining those four different design opportunities, you can really  get the best outcomes.  So just one example of that would be a lower impact ingredient could be switching from  conventional, conventionally produced cow's milk to conventionally grown oat milk, oat  milk made from conventionally grown oats.  
**[0:26:43-0:26:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:26:43):**  There's probably a significant reduction in the impacts, but to really maximize that,  you could be growing those oats regeneratively and then having a regeneratively produced  oat milk.  Or to link it back to the silvo example that we used earlier, you could be producing both  plant-based products and animal-based products in the same system.  
**[0:27:03-0:27:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:27:03):**  And that's where you get the most benefits we've found.  And potentially using a sweetener that is upcycled.  I think there was something in, was it cacao or coffee?  How much we throw away of that, of the bean, of at source, which is actually a perfect  sweetener which could replace a very large amount of the sweeteners we use in the world,  
**[0:27:22-0:27:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:27:22):**  which we should be using less, but still we're going to be using that for quite a while and  replacing that with an upcycled, with a waste product basically is a very interesting opportunity  there.  And then of course the packaging, which is a whole different topic.  And so when are we going to see any of the, because products look amazing.  
**[0:27:37-0:27:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:27:37):**  If you look in the imaginary products, obviously, and the models products look amazing, when  are we going to see something similar or maybe even better or more interesting in shelves  or are it going to be pilots launched?  What is next for to making this become a reality and not just an amazing report that's going  to be on a shelf somewhere?  
**[0:27:55-0:27:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:27:55):**  Well, I hope soon, I hope soon.  I think there's lots of promising efforts and examples that we are starting to see hit  market often very small or quite niche.  So the question is like, how do we get the scale piece?  And I think that links to what we call the five action areas for these major food companies,  
**[0:28:16-0:28:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:28:16):**  the FMCGs and retailers that they can already start taking today to get us on that right  trajectory.  So the first one is within their own companies, creating these ambitious and well-actioned  or well-resourced rather action plans to transform their entire portfolios, which is a massive  undertaking.  
**[0:28:34-0:28:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:28:34):**  And so that's why already we need to get going on the baselining and understand what ingredients  you're using today, where there's a coming from the impacts and then what are the pathways  for transformation?  So that's the first piece.  The second is kind of reinvigorating these relationships with farmers and creating a  
**[0:28:51-0:28:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:28:51):**  new collaborative dynamic with farmers.  Right now, the relationships can really range where you can be going through multiple suppliers  or aggregators as a buyer.  And it's often there's a real lack of visibility, but even more so there's something that's  quite qualitative in nature, but it's the relationship with the farmer.  
**[0:29:11-0:29:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:29:11):**  And so we are seeing some major food companies starting to do farmer kind of relationship  projects where they are, it's very small at first.  I'm working with these farmers to understand what does a regenerative future on that plot  of land actually look like?  Because that's where we need to get to.  
**[0:29:28-0:29:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:29:28):**  And it needs to be this two-way conversation of what does the land need?  What would be produced there?  Okay, what ingredients do I use today?  And then jumping out forward and saying, what ingredients could I use in the future if I  design products that are ready for market that use those ingredients?  
**[0:29:45-0:29:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:29:45):**  So then it's a demand driven, the right financial incentives are there.  The market is actually working for these farmers.  And there's ways that companies can modify things like the contracts and the terms, the  duration, helping to lower the perceived risk for farmers and create the right incentives.  And doing things like equipment sharing programs and new innovative ways to support farmers  
**[0:30:12-0:30:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:30:12):**  with what they need to go through this transition.  The third action area is about having iconic products out in market.  We were mentioning about plant-based milks earlier and I often cite Oatly as a great  example of, I would count as being iconic.  They have amazing marketing.  
**[0:30:31-0:30:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:30:31):**  That really helped set the plant-based milk alternative industry off on a new trajectory.  And we need to see these sort of iconic products for what positive impact foods can actually  be in the market to inspire industry to move along and show what's actually possible.  Because until we have that North Star and can see what's possible, we can't start moving  towards it.  
**[0:30:54-0:30:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:30:54):**  But once you have that, it's like the four minute mile, once you overcome what you thought  wouldn't even be a threshold you could break, suddenly everyone's able to do it.  Not everyone.  Yeah, no, it's interesting with Oatly.  I mean, there's a lot of discussion on drinking oat milk in general, but we haven't interviewed  
**[0:31:11-0:31:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:31:11):**  them yet.  But then of course you get the ones that say, okay, how do you grow these oats?  And wide open agriculture in Australia is very small, but it's very pushing and they  wouldn't be there without an Oatly or they wouldn't be there without.  And so you start, yeah, once you overcome like actually a large company in the plant-based  
**[0:31:28-0:31:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:31:28):**  milk space, which probably 10 years ago we thought wouldn't be even possible remotely  possible and they became very large and suddenly everybody else is seeing that as an example  of this is possible.  Let's innovate further and let's push it.  Let's et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.  
**[0:31:43-0:31:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:31:43):**  And it forces them to be pushed further because of course I think they went public.  So they are under huge scrutiny of course of the financial market.  So they need to keep pushing as well.  So it creates a very interesting flywheel.  Yeah, for sure.  
**[0:31:55-0:31:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:31:55):**  And hopefully better contracts for farmers.  And that's the underlying.  Yeah.  And then there's two final elements and one is really having the foundation of metrics.  So what we don't see today, but we'd like to see these businesses doing is contributing  
**[0:32:11-0:32:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:32:11):**  to the development and adoption of common on-farm metrics that are able to measure these  outcomes that we're looking for.  And also definitions, which there's lots of debate and confusion and ambiguity around.  So that's an important foundational piece to get right.  And then the final piece, which I was mentioning briefly earlier is, is policy.  
**[0:32:33-0:32:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:32:33):**  So advocating for policies that can support a nature positive food system.  Which they can, yeah.  Which maybe the small tiny startups can't.  I mean, they don't have the capacity to also lobby.  And it sounds really like a decommodification of the food industry and not just on the commodifying  
**[0:32:50-0:32:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:32:50):**  part, but also on the recipe part.  How much is this a risk to them?  Like how much of these large food companies are made on our successful because of the  commodity?  And this is sort of an existential threat, maybe the same as in renewable energy that  
**[0:33:03-0:33:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:33:03):**  we'll see potentially many, but it is a very difficult question, but many energy companies  or oil companies not making the shift.  Some will do and some will thrive, but how much of this, this commodification is part  of their DNA or how do you see also there the shifts happening?  Like we need to get closer to farmers, but it means we probably have need some kind of  
**[0:33:22-0:33:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:33:22):**  longterm agreement with them and we cannot just shop around for the cheapest oats.  We actually are committed to this.  How deep runs this change of this shift?  Well, I think it's all embedded and intertwined with the rise of the industrial food system,  which is linear in nature and their businesses and the models and the types of products that  
**[0:33:41-0:33:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:33:41):**  are offered and commoditization of commodities as you're mentioning are all outcomes of that.  And what's really interesting and I often look to as a moment of hope is remembering  that if you look at human history, it's quite a recent little blip where we've really gone  off the rails when it comes to food.  Like I truly believe we have inherently this wisdom and ability to work symbiotically with  
**[0:34:10-0:34:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:34:10):**  nature in how we are feeding ourselves.  That's what we did for ages, right?  It's very recent that we've deviated away from that.  So while there's a system that may look quite locked in and entrenched today, we can transform  that and we've seen that happen in things like energy.  
**[0:34:29-0:34:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:34:29):**  And once you get that momentum going, it can move quite quickly.  So I think there's, yes, there's some risks of course on the table.  If you're looking out as a company and go, oh, I want to do this, that's going to be  overhauling my supply chain.  That's going to be all, will it even work, right?  
**[0:34:47-0:34:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:34:47):**  Will these numbers actually transpire?  But there's much bigger risks on two fronts.  One is the threats to your supply chain because if you don't get moving, are you going to  exist a hundred years from now if your soils, which are your battery of your supply chain  are dead?  
**[0:35:06-0:35:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:35:06):**  You can't grow food in dead soil, right?  The answer is no.  Yeah.  So that's one.  And then the other is the market shifting.  
**[0:35:13-0:35:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:35:13):**  We are seeing rapidly increasing market growth in areas like organic food, like plant-based,  which is signaling that customers are wanting industry to provide better solutions.  Climate awareness is increasing and there's other reasons too, including nutrition.  Healthy soil equals high nutrition food.  So it's not just about environment, but actually there's a business play here and we're seeing  
**[0:35:42-0:35:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:35:42):**  increasingly that there's a pure competitive advantage in the marketplace.  So what's the role of investors?  What should people listening here and entrepreneurs as well, that maybe they're exposed to the  big food companies, of course you can pressure, but I'm not imagining many have like a significant  stake in the big eight or the big 10 to actually pressure them on this.  
**[0:36:01-0:36:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:36:01):**  What would be the role for smart investors, obviously without giving investment advice  and entrepreneurs in this space, where do you see gaps and the most interesting places  to get to work or to put money to work?  So full disclosure, Emma and I are not investment gurus, but we do have some thoughts on this.  And I would not trust any investment guru, by the way, but that's a whole different podcast.  
**[0:36:23-0:36:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:36:23):**  Yeah.  No, fair point.  But yeah, just a few thoughts on that.  I suppose, so redemptive agriculture is an increasingly popular idea right now and I  think rightly so.  
**[0:36:36-0:36:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:36:36):**  I think we all fully, all of us on this call right now fully believe that it can solve  many of the problems with the food system like we talked about earlier.  There's a lot of goods being done in the space right now.  Don't get me wrong at all.  I think there are some companies and some organizations that are in the space or maybe  
**[0:36:51-0:36:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:36:51):**  entering the space that maybe have a bit of a shallow understanding of what regenerative  and regeneration really is and really can be.  And maybe as the idea becomes a bit more popular, it's not a new idea really is it?  But as it becomes more popular, I think there could be a risk that it could stray into the  realms of greenwashing if they're not careful.  
**[0:37:12-0:37:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:37:12):**  So I guess my first tip would be that investors should be avoiding any organization that only  really demonstrates a shallow understanding of what regenerative really is.  So a couple of examples I could give would be if an organization is only talking about  practices rather than outcomes, so an example of that could be if an organization talks  about just applying a couple of practices here and there like no-till for example, regardless  
**[0:37:38-0:37:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:37:38):**  of the context and they call that regenerative, that's a bit of a shallow understanding because  yeah, don't get me wrong, no-till in certain contexts for certain crops is amazing for  soil health.  It can really work.  But not in all contexts and not without pairing it with different other practices like cover  
**[0:37:56-0:38:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:37:56):**  crops, living mulches with agroforestry and of course not just combining it with practices  but combining it with a specific set of practices to achieve a specific set of regenerative  outcomes.  So regenerative isn't about just bolting on a few new practices here and there but it's  about transforming landscapes, providing ecosystem services and helping to achieve these outcomes.  
**[0:38:19-0:38:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:38:19):**  So to summarize that, the first point is not just talking about practices but considering  the long-term outcomes but not only considering long-term outcomes but also measuring them  as well.  It's not just enough to talk about carbon sequestration or biodiversity provision but  we do need that evidence base, that rigor to measure the outcomes and to make sure that  
**[0:38:42-0:38:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:38:42):**  if you're going to invest in payment for ecosystem services for example, to make sure that farmers  are appropriately rewarded for the types of outcomes so that they're actually providing  not just what a certain practice may or may not provide in any context.  And then final thought from me is just for food buyers, whether it's food manufacturers,  retailers, whoever, to move away from an expectation that they will be able to just source exactly  
**[0:39:09-0:39:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:39:09):**  the same ingredients in exactly the same quantities with regenerative as a little add-on at the  end to link back to the work on circular design for food like we've talked about for most  of this call.  Yeah, we hope that this is one tool that these companies can use to try and develop a bit  more of a nuanced understanding and see how if they apply the principles of circular economy,  
**[0:39:33-0:39:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:39:33):**  if they design around what agri-ecosystems can provide, that demonstrates a bit more  of a deeper understanding of regeneration.  And if companies are doing that, then maybe they would be a good bet to invest in.  And I think it's very interesting, the shallow part and the outcome versus practices.  And I think we've seen the regenerative washing very strongly already in a number of places.  
**[0:39:55-0:40:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:39:55):**  And I mean, one is the lack of a definition, which is also a strength at the same time.  But looking at the outcome piece and focusing on that and really like, what do we want to  see?  What does the landscape want?  Or what does nature want?  
**[0:40:07-0:40:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:40:07):**  We had an interview on that before.  We have to see if it's already out there.  Otherwise, I will link it onto tropical gargoyle forestry and really deep discussion.  What does this piece of land wants to be or could be or what is actually a full expression  of the full biodiversity of life on that piece?  
**[0:40:22-0:40:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:40:22):**  Which is a very deep question, which most farmers can't ask at the moment because they're  locked into a lot of other things, but which is a very fundamental question to ask at a  landscape scale.  Like what could be here and what could be here over the next 20, 30, 40 years with all  the climate models in mind, obviously.  
**[0:40:38-0:40:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:40:38):**  So what if you would both or one of you be in charge of a large investment fund?  And it would be, of course, not investment gurus.  This is not advice.  But if you had to, you're forced to put, let's say, a billion dollars to work.  What would you focus on?  
**[0:40:51-0:40:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:40:51):**  Where would you start and what would be your priorities?  If I can start, to everything that we've discussed today and especially what Elliot was just  emphasizing, I think investors are quite well placed to have this helicopter view of a full  landscape which very few other actors have.  And while we can optimize for a single plot of land in that landscape, it's almost like  
**[0:41:18-0:41:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:41:18):**  Lego blocks.  It's like we need to set the conditions for all of those little pieces of that broader  tapestry to be part of that regeneration for that place, which sits beyond just the one  square plot level.  So I think I would want to embed that ethos and approach at the very core of that investment.  
**[0:41:42-0:41:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:41:42):**  But definitely allocating a solid share of it to be directly supporting farmers in their  transition because it does take new equipment, it does take training, it does carry costs  that we can accelerate this transition if we get the finances right.  So helping those farmers move, but that's only one piece of the puzzle because we do  see some of that already happening and that's great.  
**[0:42:06-0:42:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:42:06):**  But then how do we link it?  Is there a way to structure such a fund or model, for instance, in that you have off-takers,  including at least some of these major food buyers to be calibrating their design and  demand with the ingredients that are transitioning and evolving over time?  Because a farmer who's purely growing coffee today and goes in an agroforestry system,  
**[0:42:29-0:42:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:42:29):**  maybe it will be five years, 10 years before they start producing mangoes and different  fruits that are also part of that system.  And so there's this calibration that right now there's a missing link.  And so there's also a piece around for me, in my dream, if I had one, could a portion  of that investment, that one billion, be supporting or investing in really tech innovators to  
**[0:42:58-0:43:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:42:58):**  create the digital marketplace for not only having the metrics and the data and transparency  of those ingredients, but also giving those like, you know, in two years and five years,  what's the output of those farms going to be so that it makes it possible suddenly for  these companies to actually have visibility for the first time as to future supplies of  the high integrity, I'll say, like measured ingredients that they're looking for and start  
**[0:43:27-0:43:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:43:27):**  to design their product pipeline accordingly.  Because you know it's coming.  It's going to complexify, so I'm going to have like in your example, mangoes, etc. coming.  I need to be ready to absorb them.  Yeah, that's the thing.  
**[0:43:39-0:43:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:43:39):**  We need to find ways to lean into the complexity, which is inherent in regenerative systems.  And so we can't be scared of that.  We need to lean into it.  We need to use things like digital, etc. and you know how we structure things like funds  to enable that because otherwise it is simplifying.  
**[0:43:57-0:44:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:43:57):**  And if we're simplifying, nature isn't simple.  Then we get into reductionist approach and it's putting the regenerative label on something  that is not truly having, aiming for positive outcomes.  I can sense tension there, but a good tension to have.  Like how do we hold that complexity in our supply webs, probably not chains anymore in  
**[0:44:18-0:44:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:44:18):**  the landscapes and it's going to be a bit messy, but it's okay.  Yeah, it is going to mean much more distributed models, much more diversity in supply chains  across geographies and yeah, decentralization in some ways.  And I think the word like agility as well.  So again, it just comes with the diversity of ingredients because we're so far at the  
**[0:44:41-0:44:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:44:41):**  other end of the spectrum today.  And you Elliot, what would you do tomorrow morning?  You're an investment guru with a billion dollars under management.  Where would you start?  I mean, how do you follow such a nuanced answer as Emma just gave there?  
**[0:44:55-0:44:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:44:55):**  I mean, if I could add it to my fund.  Yeah, I just pulled, we'd have $2 billion.  Network effects for sure.  I think if I can just lean back on the Silvo example that I gave earlier, because I think  it was actually a nice example here as well.  
**[0:45:11-0:45:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:45:11):**  So we talked earlier about how silver pasture has many benefits in terms of ecosystem services,  but probably one of the big sticking points is when you're setting up a new agroforestry  system, well the walnut trees in Silvo's example take somewhere between eight and 13 years  to reach maturity and to be bearing a full tree of walnuts.  And that is obviously a pretty big turnoff for farmers in the current system who have  
**[0:45:38-0:45:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:45:38):**  tight margins and who probably don't have the luxury to think in the longterm by spending  that type of money that won't pay back for years.  So I think I would target money towards these types of interventions which have much bigger  longer term payoffs that are probably not so appealing to farmers in the short or medium  term simply because of the economics behind them.  
**[0:46:02-0:46:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:46:02):**  So whether that is transition finance to help them plant the trees, whether that is longer  term contracts like Emma was talking about so that over a 20 year period, a food buyer  can buy initially the milk then the regentive milk as the managed intensive grazing system  is established and then once the trees reach maturity then they can start buying the walnuts  as well.  
**[0:46:25-0:46:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:46:25):**  Some kind of incentivization to build those long term contracts.  And then linked to that as well is the payment for ecosystem services as well which probably  agroforestry is particularly a good example of sequestering that carbon.  I think actually in a silver pasture system where managed intensive grazing takes place,  the carbon is stored 50% in the soils and 50% in the trees or so.  
**[0:46:49-0:46:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:46:49):**  So it's not just the trees, the actual grazing is having a real good effect as well.  But it's just one example of although we shouldn't just think about practices as I mentioned  earlier, it's an example of a practice that probably is very well suited to payment for  ecosystem services.  So if all those mechanisms played together, I think that could really make some of these  
**[0:47:10-0:47:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:47:10):**  like longer term thinking objectives work.  Basically using the one or two billion to force longer term thinking, if I had to summarize  it, which is extremely needed.  We all need the trees and nobody wants to pay for the planting, which sort of sounds  like a finance question.  
**[0:47:27-0:47:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:47:27):**  It's like how can we bridge that time between now and eight years or 13 or in the case of  chestnuts could be 20 plus years before they're fully.  I mean you get some chestnuts before but and it's amazing because we have some that are  planted by the Romans.  So if you calculate, we can't, but if we calculate the ROI from that little seed to a tree that  
**[0:47:48-0:47:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:47:48):**  has been producing for a good 2000 plus years, I mean that wouldn't even fit in your spreadsheet,  but still we are unable to find the money to plant many of them.  And it comes down to processing and de-risking and of course, planning carefully and changing  climates etc. etc. and building the food brands around it, which includes these products.  And to ask a final question to both, you already hinted a bit but you were still in your investor  
**[0:48:09-0:48:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:48:09):**  role Emma.  What if you had a magic wand to change one thing in the food and agriculture system?  What would that be?  So you're no longer investing.  I'm sorry we took away your fund, but you have a magic power, which is pretty powerful.  
**[0:48:21-0:48:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:48:21):**  You can change one thing and one thing only.  Some people start to say, yeah, the first thing I would do is like, no, this is a one  thing only, but it is powerful because it could be anything from global consciousness  to taste to banning subsidy.  I mean anything you can imagine.  
**[0:48:34-0:48:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:48:34):**  Well mine would definitely be in the space of rewiring our relationship with food, starting  at a personal level.  I mean, I shared at the very beginning that was what set things in motion.  The vegetables.  For me.  
**[0:48:48-0:48:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:48:48):**  Yeah.  And we're in an era where very few of us ever set foot on a farm or really know where our  food comes from, the land that grew it, the hands that tended to it, that harvested it.  And the people and places behind it.  And food has such a rich story that we used to be so much closer to.  
**[0:49:11-0:49:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:49:11):**  And as a result of the way we valued it, which can go both ways, right?  In terms of how it was produced and what that food actually is in the first place and how  we enjoy it.  It really shifts when we look at the relationship that we have at large today versus probably  many generations ago, our ancestors.  
**[0:49:35-0:49:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:49:35):**  And at the end of the day, again, for so many of us who are in this privileged position  where we actually have an abundance of food, we can afford more food than we actually need.  At the end of the day, food is what we depend on for our existence and our survival.  But so often we live our entire lives and forget all of that, let alone the incredible  other kind of rules that food plays as a centrepiece of culture, of social and convening, of flavour  
**[0:50:05-0:50:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:50:05):**  and experiences that touch all of our senses.  So yeah, I think it's just remembering, remembering what food really is for us at this human level.  And what about you, Elliot?  What would you change overnight?  Apart from planting trees, obviously everywhere?  
**[0:50:22-0:50:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:50:22):**  I mean, I grew up in rural Leicestershire in the UK and whenever I go back there, I  just, I'm so disappointed with how boring the landscape looks around there, even if  it is all agricultural.  It's pretty much rapeseed, commodity grains, maybe some cows, maybe some sheep, but that's  about it.  
**[0:50:43-0:50:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:50:43):**  And that's probably one of the main consequences of the industrial food system, isn't it, that  we've gone to this great simplification where farmers probably just do one or two crops  for one or two animals and that's about it.  So if I had a magic wand, it would be to bring back diversity that we used to have and to  have the countryside filled with thousands and thousands of smaller farms that are producing  
**[0:51:03-0:51:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:51:03):**  diverse, locally appropriate varieties of different crops, combining livestock and arable  systems on the same farm and yeah, lots of trees as well.  You probably realise that I'm pretty big into agroforestry and linked to that.  Yeah, I mean you've probably heard of the term terroir in terms of wine, how the climate  and the soil and geology and all those local conditions really affect the flavours of the  
**[0:51:30-0:51:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:51:30):**  grapes and the wine.  That's always talked about in the context of wine and maybe more so now in the context  of coffee and chocolate and a couple of other ingredients.  I don't see why there's any reason why that couldn't really apply to any food ingredient  if we decommodify and move to these more diverse, interesting varieties.  
**[0:51:53-0:52:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:51:53):**  So if we could start applying the principles of circular economy to food and create some  food products that do celebrate that terroir, that diversity, I think we'd be heading in  the right direction for that.  And maybe we don't need a magic wand, maybe we just need to read the Big Food Redesign  and move from there.  
**[0:52:12-0:52:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:52:12):**  And apply it.  I want to thank you both so much for your time and unpacking this a bit.  I mean there's a lot more and I urge everybody to take the report, have a good read and then  apply it please because this shouldn't be one of the things that lies in a shelf somewhere  digitally or non-digitally.  
**[0:52:28-0:52:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:52:28):**  And thank you so much for sharing and very interested in the following steps of how this  report is going to be brought to life with the partners you have, which are many of the  larger food companies in the space.  So thank you so much.  Thank you.  
**[0:52:41-0:52:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:52:41):**  Yes, stay tuned.  I look forward to seeing great products soon on shelves.  Thanks very much, Amna.  It's really appreciated.  If you found the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast valuable, there  
**[0:52:53-0:52:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:52:53):**  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  It's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  
**[0:53:13-0:53:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:53:13):**  join my membership community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on cambrot.com slash investing region egg or in the description  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  
**[0:53:38-0:53:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:53:38):**  Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to put money  to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011 and recording  
**[0:53:57-0:54:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:53:57):**  this podcast since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework, what to focus on with the podcast, how have  we picked interviewees, what questions should you ask, what is happening in the space, what  should you read, what should you listen, what should you watch, how to approach this space.  
**[0:54:21-0:54:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:54:21):**  For whom is this course?  You, the soil builders and investors in the space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management, consultants, etc.  
**[0:54:39-0:54:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:54:39):**  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  
**[0:54:55-0:54:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:54:55):**  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you.  And I'm very aware that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very  different means.  
**[0:55:08-0:55:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:55:08):**  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you, and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  
**[0:55:25-0:55:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:55:25):**  so you don't have to write along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find, or what kind of investors you could  find if you're a soil builder.  
**[0:55:43-0:55:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:55:43):**  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design, and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  
**[0:56:00-0:56:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:56:00):**  Unfortunately, that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea, or whatever you're drinking.  
**[0:56:17-0:56:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/emma-chow-eliot-beeby#t=0:56:17):**  Click on the link below, sign up, and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  