### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2022-00-22)
**[0:00:00-0:00:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:00:00):**  Data, data, data.  Terabytes of data are collected by satellites and remote sensing every day.  But what is needed to turn that into decisions?  How do we look back 20 and sometimes 40 years and how do we make models to predict the next  20 or 40 when we're planting trees, regenerating ecosystems, landscapes, etc.  
**[0:00:20-0:00:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:00:20):**  If we want to revegetate the earth with trees, plants, animals and more life we need better  data and better data tools.  We only scratched the surface in this interview but I really enjoyed talking to you and asking  my beginner questions to some of the smartest data scientists on this planet.  Tempering climate change, bringing back rivers, preventing floods and obviously lots and lots  
**[0:00:43-0:00:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:00:43):**  of nutrient dense food.  The promises of Regen-ac often sounds straight out of a science fiction book.  And for these promises to be met we need to significantly scale regeneration to a landscape  scale within this decade.  Welcome to a new series where we look into the technologies needed to bring regeneration  
**[0:01:01-0:01:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:01:01):**  to a landscape scale.  In this series we'll look at already existing technologies, digital tech, ag tech, new financing  mechanisms etc. that can scale fast enough during the next 10 years.  Technologies which put significantly more money into the pockets of farmers, landowners  and land stewards who are regenerating their and our soils so they can go faster.  
**[0:01:21-0:01:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:01:21):**  And we'll ask the question what is missing?  What needs to be urgently developed over the next years?  We're very happy with the support for this series by the Grantham Environmental Trust  which supports strategic communications and collaboration in solving the world's most  pressing environmental problems.  
**[0:01:37-0:01:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:01:37):**  You can find out more at granthamfoundation.org.  In March last year we launched our membership community.  Make it easy for fans to support our work and so many of you have joined as a member.  We've launched different types of benefits, exclusive content, Q&A webinars with former  guests.  
**[0:01:53-0:01:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:01:53):**  Ask me anything sessions plus so much more to come in the future.  For more information on the different tiers, benefits and how to become a member check  gumroad.com slash investing region ag or find the link below.  Thank you.  So welcome to another episode today with the co-founders of Envirometrics and OpenGeoHub.  
**[0:02:13-0:02:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:02:13):**  OpenGeoHub is an independent non-for-profit research foundation promoting open source  and open data solutions.  They provide solutions and training in cutting edge open geospatial and data services.  And their expertise, and that's why they're here, lies in combining remote sensing with  ground data for monitoring essential biodiversity variables at scale.  
**[0:02:31-0:02:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:02:31):**  Envirometrics is a deep tech group helping businesses and organizations to find the right  balance between satellites and samples.  And also that's why they're here.  They fuse sensors, juggle big data and optimize modeling pathways and to solve the unsolvable  accurately measure and monitor soil nutrients through scale, depth and time.  
**[0:02:49-0:02:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:02:49):**  Welcome Ish and Tom.  It's your intro.  I took it from the website.  Don't be.  No pressure.  
**[0:02:57-0:02:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:02:57):**  No pressure.  But I'm very excited to have you here.  We talk about satellites a lot.  We did a full series on how to bring regeneration to a landscape scale.  And this is the final episode of that.  
**[0:03:08-0:03:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:03:08):**  And I'm very much looking forward to having this conversation.  But let's start with a personal question for both of you.  You can decide who goes first.  Why and how did you end up focusing so much on soil?  It's always soil.  
**[0:03:22-0:03:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:03:22):**  It was always soil from the beginning.  I'm really happy everyone else is getting excited about soil now.  No, but for me, I grew up in a permaculture farm back to the land.  Permaculture was like the first thing my parents taught me.  So you know, in there, it's got a fundamental ethic of Earth care and caring for soil is  
**[0:03:42-0:03:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:03:42):**  part of that.  Composting is a daily thing.  So for me, that went through from childhood through to professional training, and I studied  as a soil scientist.  And I was always obsessed with organic matter, much dismay of my pedology teachers.  
**[0:04:01-0:04:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:04:01):**  And then after that, did doctorate measuring and monitoring carbon on farms because I thought,  okay, if we can get the farmers paid for it, they can transition their landscape usage.  And that was back in 2013.  And yeah, so for me, it's always been soil.  And I'm really happy everyone's coming now.  
**[0:04:20-0:04:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:04:20):**  And for you, Tom?  Well, I'm not, let's say I'm not originally enthusiastic in soil.  When I look back when I was maybe a teenager or something.  I'm an urban kid.  So I got more inspired by wilderness.  
**[0:04:35-0:04:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:04:35):**  So I like wilderness and nature.  And then that was one of the reasons that my parents, actually, my mother told me, why  don't you go and study like ecology or, and then I went and studied forestry, forest engineering  and forest ecology.  And then there I actually developed infinity for science.  
**[0:04:53-0:05:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:04:53):**  Already when I was about 20, 21, I became a bit geeky, started fantasizing about different  things, reading, yeah, let's say not the common literature.  And then science-wise, I became interested in actually measurement and more like in the  metric part.  And then I got the position, they told me, well, this stuff you're interested, we need  
**[0:05:14-0:05:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:05:14):**  your profile.  I was then a best student or something.  And then they gave me a scholarship, but it says we need you for soils.  And so I was kind of, I finished with soils by demand actually.  But then later on, I developed, let's say a passion for soil.  
**[0:05:29-0:05:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:05:29):**  I especially like about soil that it's quite complex.  It's really challenging.  It's way more difficult to map soils and model soils than to model things above ground.  And also I met really some amazing researchers in soil science.  Soil science came to my life a bit later.  
**[0:05:50-0:05:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:05:50):**  But recently now as an entrepreneur, we started looking at also the world and what's happening.  And now I value soil a bit from a different perspective.  I do see it as something actually fundamental for our survival also.  And so now I'm looking more at the soil as an intellectual, you know, and as a scientist,  as a human being, you know, I'm thinking about what's important, what's happening, what's  
**[0:06:17-0:06:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:06:17):**  the process in soil, what happened last 50 years, last 100 years, et cetera.  Very, very interesting.  And so what gave birth to this open geo hub?  Let's start with the open side or the non-for-profit side, because both are relatively open.  And what was the need you saw there?  
**[0:06:33-0:06:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:06:33):**  What was the reason?  What was the nudge to start that process?  Which I will obviously link a lot of links below because it's a lot of visual things  we're going to talk about in a visual way on audio where you have to see a lot of these  things, but I will leave them below.  
**[0:06:47-0:06:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:06:47):**  But what gave birth to open geo hub?  What was the reason to start that?  Well, I started flirting with the open source and the geeks in open source way back in 2002,  2003, and then in 2008, I think, 2007, we did some summer school because I started doing  things and some people asked me, hey, can you run a course for PhD students?  
**[0:07:13-0:07:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:07:13):**  And then it was in Italy still.  And then we went to south of Naples and we did a little summer school and it kind of  felt good.  And I noticed in education that we are, because the commercial companies, they have much stronger  marketing campaigns and so like, you know, if you buy a computer, you will get Microsoft  
**[0:07:30-0:07:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:07:30):**  Windows on your machine and it's a bit tricky, you know, to get everyone to use Windows.  I think Bill Gates did very good there.  But then you start looking, okay, open source.  And then I fell in love a bit in it.  And then we started doing the summer school.  
**[0:07:44-0:07:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:07:44):**  So the, I think, 12 years it was running and it became something very natural and a lot  of enthusiasm was around.  What were you teaching?  What was the summer school about?  What was happening at the summer school?  
**[0:07:56-0:07:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:07:56):**  We wanted to promote.  So like the open source and sharing culture, basically it's about sharing culture and it's  about collaborating, collaboration, sharing culture.  It's open source, not about free software.  I mean, everybody who goes for it for that reason is missing the point.  
**[0:08:12-0:08:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:08:12):**  The open source is about the sharing culture and it's about collaborating in a larger group.  So open development communities.  And so that was really for me fantastic and later on I read books, you know, the people  that started the creative commons and all this free culture movement.  So I read and became kind of bit my religion, you know, so when people, I met some actually  
**[0:08:34-0:08:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:08:34):**  once I met some people from Salt Lake City and then they started saying, you know, we  are a bit religious.  But I said, I'm also very religious.  I said, well, which religion is it?  They said open source, open source.  
**[0:08:48-0:08:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:08:48):**  Anyway, and in this case, what were you collaborating on or what were you sharing?  Because it wasn't software or it wasn't tools.  It was something else.  Well, so, yeah, the software, I'm actually not a software engineer.  So I met some people that made software and they made like, of course, the stars of our  
**[0:09:04-0:09:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:09:04):**  summer schools were people who make crucial software in open source, especially in open  source spatial, spatial, open source, geospatial.  And what is geospatial?  Just as a complete newbie, what is geospatial?  It sounds like satellite, but.  
**[0:09:17-0:09:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:09:17):**  Yeah, yeah, it's a geospatial.  It's like to complete newbies, you know, when you want to know where you are, you open Google  Maps, you know, that's a geospatial data.  And then if you look at Google Maps, you can also see a satellite image.  That's another evolution of spatial data, Earth observation images.  
**[0:09:33-0:09:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:09:33):**  Then geospatial is also if you look at soil science, you know, you want to know how much  soil carbon you have in soil.  So you need to go and sample.  And so when you sample, you need the geospatial sciences to help you with the sampling.  And then from samples, you want to estimate how much carbon you have, again, geospatial  
**[0:09:48-0:09:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:09:48):**  sciences.  So these are geospatial.  Where you are and which space, like if you want to, and we get to the soil carbon later,  but if you want to, I'm looking out over a field and I want to measure the soil carbon,  you're not going to measure every centimeter, obviously, because way too expensive, way  
**[0:10:04-0:10:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:10:04):**  too difficult, way too time, et cetera.  You need a certain number of spots.  And you're saying that a very good map, a geospatial map that of course you took from  above because otherwise it's not a map, can tell you which spots you should actually sample.  And obviously it will tell you these are the minimum amount, this is the best amount, this  
**[0:10:21-0:10:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:10:21):**  is the optimum, but make sure you sample here, here, here and here.  And then with some modeling software after we can have a pretty good estimate of the  soil carbon that's on your field or other things that are in your field.  We start with soil carbon, but other things as well.  And then we'll get to questions like, can you only do it with satellite without the  
**[0:10:37-0:10:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:10:37):**  sampling?  Probably the answer is not, but actually you need a good map to know where you are, where  you need to drill, what you need to dig up, et cetera, et cetera.  Yeah.  And that's the core of my expertise.  
**[0:10:46-0:10:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:10:46):**  It's called also predictive modeling.  So using the methods from statistics and from data science and then using them for real  life problems or applied sciences.  So one of the questions is like, where do you sample or how many samples you need?  How do you estimate from samples, quantities over the whole farm?  
**[0:11:06-0:11:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:11:06):**  What is the uncertainty related with that?  What happens if you reduce number of samples, what will happen with uncertainty?  What's the, what are the risks for decision making based on the data that you collect?  So this is all predictive modeling.  And this data has to be open or what's the role of open sourcing?  
**[0:11:24-0:11:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:11:24):**  With the OpenGeo Hub, we are very honest about it and it's a not-for-profit foundation and  we promote open source, open data.  And we do believe we wrote that pamphlet on Medium.  We call it, everybody has a right to know what's happening with the planet.  I will link it below.  
**[0:11:39-0:11:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:11:39):**  So we wrote this pamphlet and we seriously believe that this open data should be under  open data license.  And it's also inspired by the decisions that in US, Algor promoted back in 2008 to release  all the USGS and NASA products open.  So especially like a Landsat and then later on European Union, luckily they also took  
**[0:12:03-0:12:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:12:03):**  that model.  And so they released this data in open.  And we believe that it should become, many of environmental data, I think it should be  open because the real problem of economy and future will be in environmental problems.  It shouldn't be about the data.  
**[0:12:19-0:12:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:12:19):**  So we need to have the data open so everybody feels invited to do things and to explore  and to find out what's happening.  The value is not in the data, it's in its use.  Yeah, that was going to be my question.  Like what, if all this data is open, we have like swimming pools full of data, terabytes  
**[0:12:37-0:12:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:12:37):**  and terabytes, and all these satellite images are there.  And even maybe I could find them.  What is holding me back or a farmer back to use them?  Is it very difficult to use?  How does these maps look like?  
**[0:12:49-0:12:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:12:49):**  Do they need to be cleaned up?  Probably all of the above.  But what's the, how far is it from a practical thing for me to use?  Like, okay, I have a satellite image.  How do I get that into a concrete answer to my question of where to sample?  
**[0:13:02-0:13:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:13:02):**  Like how big are those steps between the two?  Yeah, so that's several entire disciplines of science to connect those things together.  And part of the core discipline of doing predictive mapping is taking points on the ground and  relating those to a huge stack of satellite images, the layers that give you the shape  of a land surface, the slope where the water is going to accumulate.  
**[0:13:28-0:13:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:13:28):**  So it's not just a picture.  No.  When you say a stack, it's all kinds of layers, which are like a different kind of picture  of that piece of land.  Yeah, absolutely.  
**[0:13:38-0:13:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:13:38):**  You have the ones that track the land through time, like how much vegetation, how much light  it's absorbing.  And then you have ones that are like give you whether you're in a valley depression  or on the side of a hill.  And all these relationships can be stitched together with observations on the ground to  
**[0:13:56-0:13:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:13:56):**  create these predictive maps.  And it's not just carbon.  It's many things.  We also use these techniques for water and for trees, like tree species prediction, one  of our PhDs is doing.  
**[0:14:08-0:14:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:14:08):**  Also land cover classification through time, another one of the PhDs is doing.  So it's actually quite a flexible framework.  And it's really exciting because I think like people are locking data, they're locking information.  You have to come to them to get your answer.  Also in the satellite space, as all this data, as you mentioned, Tom, is open because most  
**[0:14:32-0:14:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:14:32):**  of the satellites are, let's say, run by government organizations that now have like the European  Union and NASA have released that.  So everybody's building on top of that, but then they're still locking it.  Or how does that work?  Well, so on one hand, you have this.  
**[0:14:46-0:14:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:14:46):**  So there's this knowledge and data gap problem.  So on one hand, you have something like NASA or European Space Agency, you have like multi-billion  euro budgets, and they will make some amazing satellites that are really scientific.  The people that design them are engineers, scientists, and they will then collect the  data.  
**[0:15:05-0:15:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:15:05):**  And suddenly what happens like with Sentinel, compared with Sentinel, you will have like  a terabyte of data flowing on a daily basis.  And so the data is really exploding.  And so there's this famous plot that shows the professional knowledge we have now going  through the time that doesn't go exponentially.  
**[0:15:24-0:15:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:15:24):**  So we have this professional knowledge, which is kind of stagnating, and you have this exponential  growth of data.  And this is called this data gap.  And so what happened is that we are in a danger of generating like super useful data that  we are not able to extract the information, right, because the information has multiple  
**[0:15:44-0:15:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:15:44):**  levels.  They always said that.  So, for example, there's the raw data.  There's the raw data.  That's the first thing that the satellite takes, the first image.  
**[0:15:51-0:15:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:15:51):**  Then this image gets processed to remove artifacts and do corrections, and then you finish with  something which is, let's say, still like a processed product, but it's not ready to  do any decisions.  Then you have to do analysis of the data.  Then from analysis, you do analysis.  
**[0:16:07-0:16:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:16:07):**  Then you can maybe make some decisions.  And decision is really what people can work with, right?  So when you open a Google Maps, if you say, well, I'm here, I need to get to Amsterdam  or someplace, and you click on a button and what Google provides you is a cloud service  to calculate the optimal route given the traffic and then suggest to you this is the route.  
**[0:16:28-0:16:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:16:28):**  And it tells you now on this crossing you turn left, on the next crossing turn right.  These are decisions, right?  But behind the decision, there's a lot of data.  And so the problem now with satellite data for environmental sciences, for the land restoration  projects, and et cetera, the problem is that there's more and more data, but we have a  
**[0:16:46-0:16:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:16:46):**  less and less capacity to turn it into a decision.  And then there's this famous...  So we need to build...  Yeah, there's a famous podcast also.  One person said the problem of today's satellite images is it's not a commodity.  
**[0:16:59-0:17:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:16:59):**  Many people cannot make use of it.  Like out of 99% of data, very little use.  And we are trying to fill in that gap.  We try to make the data to convert it at least to like a decision ready data or to decisions.  Ideally you would like to serve decisions, of course.  
**[0:17:14-0:17:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:17:14):**  That's the ideal.  Ultimately.  And in these projects you've been working on, Anish, what's the...  I wouldn't say the coolest because it's...  But what's the most surprising or when somebody asks you, okay, tell me one project you've  
**[0:17:26-0:17:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:17:26):**  been working on both in the for-profit company, which we'll go into, but also with the PhDs.  What's the...  Let's say the people of the podcast here on investing in region ag and food should really  know about what is possible now.  I would pick 20 years of soil carbon history, 2000 to 2019.  
**[0:17:45-0:17:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:17:45):**  We've predicted those in-house for Europe and for the USA.  And they're both in pilot at the moment because we're looking to make updatable models so  that a landholder can at least have an idea of what their carbon is and the uncertainty.  And if they want to get a more certain answer, a more certain baseline for their farm, they're  able to get a sampling design and then put the effort in to take some samples and get  
**[0:18:15-0:18:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:18:15):**  updated maps.  So the calculation side of things is all automated.  The front end is still not open for people.  It's not ready yet.  But that's probably the most exciting.  
**[0:18:28-0:18:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:18:28):**  And it's based on satellite data, obviously not on sampling, but when I start sampling  as a farmer, the machine gets better.  Is that or gets better in predicting or it's also based on sampling?  It's hundreds of thousands of public data points.  And I mean, this is Tom's core discipline is taking these points and combining them.  
**[0:18:48-0:18:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:18:48):**  And how close are we?  Like how far or how close are we?  Like, is it an estimated guess or what would you say if somebody says, can you base decisions  on this or is it the starting point for doing more research on my land if I would put my  if I would look at my land?  
**[0:19:01-0:19:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:19:01):**  To be honest, what we're trying to enable is every farmer to do their own on farm experimentation  and to be able to have a system that gives them near real time feedback, not specifically  on their practices, but just from the point of view of the ecosystem.  Because if you look at the world as an ecosystem, which it is, you can monitor various like  vital signs like a pulse, like things like this.  
**[0:19:26-0:19:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:19:26):**  And this crosses over many different managements.  So we really want farmers to be able to innovate themselves and track themselves because, I  mean, I'm not driving the tractor, they are.  So we're really trying to be conscious to enable and support rather than to like dictate  and try and capture all the value of carbon offsets, etc. from people.  
**[0:19:50-0:19:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:19:50):**  I doesn't know we need to unpack that a bit later.  But like this would mean in Europe and the US, we could also track or look back in time  of a few farms that have gone through transitions over the last 20 years.  And that's probably where it gets interesting where we know management has changed in 2008,  or they started holistic grazing in X, or they did no two and then compared with their  
**[0:20:14-0:20:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:20:14):**  neighbors, you get a very interesting picture, I'm assuming.  Yes.  And if I may add to the accuracy question.  So we are now in Europe and US, I think we came to for the mineral agricultural source,  we came to about half percent accuracy, the RMSE.  
**[0:20:31-0:20:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:20:31):**  But the more important is we took these paths instead of like today, I think many companies,  they just look, okay, what's the carbon you have now in the field, and they consider it  as a commercial service.  And for me, that was really shallow.  I mean, I felt both, well, also, I felt like, you know, well, you're missing the point here.  
**[0:20:51-0:20:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:20:51):**  I mean, come on, guys.  So what we looked at, actually, we look at what they call soil forensics.  So we try to get the best satellite data for last 20 up to 40 years, you have, you know,  last one goes back 40 years, get the data, and then we do this so called space time machine  learning.  
**[0:21:10-0:21:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:21:10):**  And then we can reconstruct what happened with the soil and on the large scales and  using the biggest pool of data we could generate.  I mean, we're ready to process millions of points.  And then we discovered that there's an added value on putting all this data on a pile.  So to go back to your question, what is the coolest thing about my research when people  
**[0:21:28-0:21:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:21:28):**  ask me, I do have my top five picks, but let's start with the number one.  So it's like the worst order, Tom, we cannot go to number one.  If you get top five, we have to do at least three, two, one, like that's the number people  stay on.  Okay, but let me start something I really proud of.  
**[0:21:44-0:21:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:21:44):**  I did this, I helped make this soil agronomy data cube for Africa.  It's all open data.  It's something I worked on long time, like 10 years.  And in the end, we released the data openly at 30 meter resolution, it's like four terabytes  of data.  
**[0:21:57-0:22:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:21:57):**  But what we did, we took the global models, and we took the data from US and Europe, which  is paid by wealthy countries.  And this data has been already paid.  And I call it a gold mine for data science.  So they have fantastic data, which is openly available, but nobody thought like you could  
**[0:22:12-0:22:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:22:12):**  use that to also help map the soils in Africa, or that you could use Brazilian data to map  soils in Africa, etc.  And so we kind of transfer that knowledge from the wealthy countries to developing countries,  let's say.  And we did it without disruption.  
**[0:22:28-0:22:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:22:28):**  So we were like a Robin Hood, I tell my staff also, like I'm a Robin Hood of data science,  but I'm not the Robin Hood that goes and steals from the rich to give to poor.  I go to the rich and I say, look, you have these extra things you're not using.  Do you mind if we...  Now you go to the dustbin, you go to the dustbin behind the castle of the rich, and there you  
**[0:22:46-0:22:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:22:46):**  find it.  Yeah, exactly, exactly.  I'm the Robin Hood that goes to the dustbin of the wealthy nations and then finds many  interesting things that could be reused.  And I like that idea of this technology and knowledge transfer.  
**[0:23:00-0:23:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:23:00):**  It really feels good when you do it properly.  And then what can, let's say, African countries do with that?  Like I'm in Ethiopia or I'm in Uganda and say, okay, wow, I now have 30 meter data, which  sounds very cool, but still it sounds very abstract.  What can I do with it?  
**[0:23:16-0:23:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:23:16):**  How can I change my agriculture decisions?  Or is that a few steps away?  Yeah, you wouldn't believe the Africa is of course changing.  You have less progressive, more progressive countries, but many countries in Africa, especially  like Western Africa, like if you go to Cameroon, Uganda, what's happening, you know, Google  
**[0:23:32-0:23:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:23:32):**  is bringing offices there.  There's incubators in Ethiopia also very active, lots of incubators, lots of young companies,  startups, and they need it.  They need that platforms, you know, they need something to develop on.  And when it comes to agronomy, yeah, we're very proud we made that soil agronomy data  
**[0:23:50-0:23:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:23:50):**  cube.  It's not perfect.  I mean, it could be always better, but you know, we are proud that we put it open and  we just enable it for everyone to create a platform.  It's a field scale, you know, 30 meter resolution.  
**[0:24:01-0:24:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:24:01):**  You pick up even small scale farmers.  They can see inside their farm where they have nutrient problems, which are the nutrient  problems, you know, anything about soils.  They could estimate using some simple formulas.  You can estimate the fertilizer requirement.  
**[0:24:15-0:24:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:24:15):**  They could see what are the limiting factors, what do they have to focus on.  Also for the regional planning offices, agriculture extension, they can all use their data.  They don't have to wait until their national systems reduce or reproduce something like  that.  It's magic we made maps of countries without having any points in these countries.  
**[0:24:37-0:24:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:24:37):**  People told us, how did you do that?  Well, you know, we do global models.  That's it.  Globally, one gap.  Nature doesn't care what your country is called.  
**[0:24:45-0:24:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:24:45):**  You know, she's complex, but it's not infinite complexity.  There is repetition.  So that those relationships, finding those environmental relationships and relations  with the soil, and that drives a lot of this transfer of knowledge.  And that's also what we hope to you hope that if we can get it down to the farm level in  
**[0:25:07-0:25:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:25:07):**  like US and Europe and other countries where you can have farm level innovation, then the  landholders themselves can start comparing amongst themselves and can start building  their own on farm science essentially, because we don't have time for the agricultural scientists  to do all the field trials to go, okay, you need to do A not B.  We have to sort this out real time.  
**[0:25:33-0:25:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:25:33):**  We have to make like actually almost like a living experiment now.  So that relies on the same concept that you can, a prairie over here is going in the same  rainfall with the same soil type is going to be very actually similar to a prairie over  there with the same rainfall and the same soil type, even though they may be on completely  different continents, the species may be different.  
**[0:25:58-0:26:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:25:58):**  There are these driving factors in soil formation.  And do you see like this has to be like this layer of open source data cleaned up or to  a certain extent process so it can be used?  Do you see the same as in a lot of open source software world where then their companies  build on top of that, like applications build on top that sort of plugin, obviously give  
**[0:26:19-0:26:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:26:19):**  back to it in a sense that keep the underlying data set growing and living and cleaned up  etc. and not closing it, or is there the same struggle with the closed systems that maybe  want to use a bit of open data, but don't really want to contribute because we see an  endless amount of satellite companies popping up or companies popping up saying they use  satellite imagery to calculate soil carbon and sell it, for instance, etc.  
**[0:26:42-0:26:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:26:42):**  What do you see?  Is it that easy?  I mean, how do you because you've been in this for a long time.  And what do you see there in terms of are we going through that same movement as the  open source software movement there?  
**[0:26:55-0:26:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:26:55):**  We see some some very successful companies on top of the underlying layers are still  relatively, let's say, open source.  Yeah, that's a question a business person will say, well, this open source, how do you  make business?  I mean, if it's all like open, you know, but this, of course, is an excellent business  
**[0:27:10-0:27:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:27:10):**  model.  And the typical example is like, for example, Android, you know, Android, if you look, Microsoft  went and invested, I don't know, four billion or something into Nokia, they said people  like Microsoft Windows, so they will love it on the mobile phones.  And we know that that was a flop.  
**[0:27:26-0:27:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:27:26):**  And we know that Android actually ate for breakfast all the other operating system.  And that means it created a lot of revenue for anybody who chose Android 10 years ago,  right.  So that's an example of open source.  Then you look at the servers, world servers, you know, people don't know that, but the  
**[0:27:41-0:27:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:27:41):**  world servers, they run on Linux, you know, most of the backbone of world servers and  all the companies, they use actually Linux.  So if we didn't have a Linux, we wouldn't have basically internet.  And so what's the value of that?  Right.  
**[0:27:56-0:28:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:27:56):**  So there are many examples in business where the open source becomes a backbone, it becomes  actually it speeds up the business.  As I said, with Android, it will speed up the business.  I think it's just with the open source and open data.  So it's not something that you have to choose business or no, it's more like about that  
**[0:28:12-0:28:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:28:12):**  you have to understand what is the priority.  So when you look at the open data, so when you look at soil data, when you make soil  data, we don't want, we don't believe like, we're not convinced that the profit should  be made from the primary data.  We think that the profit should be made from restoring land from combating climate change  
**[0:28:30-0:28:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:28:30):**  from, you know, saving people's lives that you should, you know, if you do a good service,  and if you do something good, you know, you should be rewarded for that, but not for the  something like a primary thing.  Do you see that happening?  Like, do you see, are you interacting with a lot of companies that are building on top  
**[0:28:46-0:28:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:28:46):**  of this layer?  Yeah, one of the big examples, I gave examples for open source, and then the example for  open data.  Open data, if you look this earth observation industry, right, so somebody like Al Gore  goes and says, hey, you know what, we're going to make Landsat free.  
**[0:29:03-0:29:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:29:03):**  And in 2007, you still have to pay, and it was bureaucratic.  So it's bureaucratic, it costs money.  Even the money, it's, you know, the processing was done by government agencies.  It was all clumsy.  I mean, it only just slowed down things.  
**[0:29:17-0:29:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:29:17):**  So Al Gore goes like this, look, government pay for this data already.  If we release it, the companies can grow on it, and as they grow, the economy grows, they  pay more taxes, and actually we will make profit.  So they did a thorough analysis, and they correctly concluded that if they release data  openly, that they will make more profit.  
**[0:29:37-0:29:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:29:37):**  And so that's one of the nicest examples in environmental sciences is the NASA and European  Space Agency releasing the data, just open license, download it, go nuts, make a copy,  process it, build things, whatever.  And it's actually to the benefit of business.  So we do actually get a lot of visitors from various startups and other like big organizations  
**[0:30:01-0:30:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:30:01):**  too.  We've got probably more than 250,000.  That was my last check.  Downloads of open data layers, a lot of followings on the tutorials of how to do these more  complex analyses, lots of following on the YouTube channel.  
**[0:30:17-0:30:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:30:17):**  There's like 800 and something lectures where you can follow along.  I mean, they're not simple introductory.  They're difficult.  They're really hard actually.  So we seem to be fairly popular as OpenGeoHub with many startups and good because this has  
**[0:30:34-0:30:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:30:34):**  to be an enormous industry with many different businesses.  We won't succeed if it's just one business trying to eat everything and own all the things.  So we could say that Elgort had a bigger impact potentially on regeneration, restoration and  sustainability by opening up this data.  Then this is inconvenient truth and generation management.  
**[0:30:56-0:30:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:30:56):**  He's big investment firm.  Yeah, that's interesting.  It's possible.  Probably.  We wrote in that pamphlet, you know, exactly when we wrote like everybody has a right to  
**[0:31:04-0:31:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:31:04):**  know what's happening in the world.  It's really when you look before 2005 and now.  So look at the difference before 2005.  You had it was exclusive business.  If you wanted to find out what's happening in Brazil, let's say in Amazon, you know,  
**[0:31:19-0:31:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:31:19):**  you will have to trust scientists or you will have to like pay for some enormous amount  to cover large areas.  And so beyond 2005 and 2008 when they released it.  So we are now in 2020 and now you can watch observe it three meter whole world.  What's happening?  
**[0:31:37-0:31:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:31:37):**  Everybody can observe in really a different arena now.  So if you allow the farmer, if you allow the farmer in US, in Ghana, in Brazil, whatever,  in Australia, in the US, in Europe, everybody can see everybody can see it.  Yeah.  Yes.  
**[0:31:53-0:31:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:31:53):**  Yeah.  And so it's really changing now.  And so likewise, if you look on the other hand, there are some amazing farmers.  There are amazingly people really reading, doing, you know, the homework and, you know,  using really cutting edge, either regenerative agriculture steps or the organic farming.  
**[0:32:12-0:32:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:32:12):**  And you can see that they're really changing their landscape and they don't get any credit.  And we can see it in the data we checked.  Yeah, we think that's one of our basic business interests is to locate these good examples,  locate these people and find them because these are patterns that are not, this is not  something you see just on a satellite image.  
**[0:32:32-0:32:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:32:32):**  You know, you kind of see, oh, this is nice work, you know, you really have to use like  a lot of machine learning, a lot of also ground data.  And then you have to analyze 40 years because, you know, you cannot be a good farmer one  year, you have to be a good farmer, like 30 years.  And then you have to connect it to the farmer's knowledge.  
**[0:32:49-0:32:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:32:49):**  Yes.  That's the piece, the critical part of this whole thing is that we simply, it's a false  idea to think you could replace a landholder or someone who is stewarding a piece of land,  especially the successful places, right?  It's the farmer, what is this saying?  
**[0:33:04-0:33:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:33:04):**  The farmer's shadow is the best fertilizer.  And it's true.  So that's why we were just going, okay, can we actually find the places that are supposed  to be, have gone through a regenerative cycle already?  And can we show them these signals and these graphs and go, can you explain what happened  
**[0:33:23-0:33:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:33:23):**  here?  Because us looking at it, we don't know the history of a site.  We look across the continent.  And I remember you showing me an example in the Netherlands of a farm that was basically,  I remember, but please tell me and make it a visual story.  
**[0:33:40-0:33:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:33:40):**  But I remember slowly a line going up, which was, I think around sun, like the conversion  of sun energy into basically into something useful.  And you could see the line going up and down very rapidly every year because we're on a  new, an annual cycle.  And then it changed.  
**[0:33:55-0:33:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:33:55):**  So what happened there or what was, paint a picture for us.  So the advisor, we took this signal to the advisor, which is a signal.  It's like two things.  It shows you the amount of light that's used throughout the seasons over 20 years.  Which is sort of the crucial bit.  
**[0:34:10-0:34:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:34:10):**  Like how much sunlight are you as a farmer converting into something?  How many solar panels do you have?  In this case, leaves.  Absolutely.  I mean, it's your biggest lever in being able to optimize your farm.  
**[0:34:22-0:34:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:34:22):**  And you can see that from above.  Yes, of course.  You can see that from above.  Yes.  And so the issue we found was interpretation, right?  
**[0:34:30-0:34:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:34:30):**  Because we ourselves did not have the history, the site specific knowledge of the place to  go.  Why did this line shift up?  And why did the fluctuation, which we could guess was cropping, why did that fluctuation  change?  
**[0:34:47-0:34:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:34:47):**  Well, they transitioned from doing annual cropping to a much more diverse pasture system.  So this one with many, many different species.  And it showed up in the signal very distinctly.  But we didn't know that until we took it to the advisor, hunted out who it was, took it  to the advisor and went, can you explain it to us, please?  
**[0:35:07-0:35:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:35:07):**  What did he say or she?  Well, he said, well, in this year, it was like 2008 or 2009, we so and so bought the  farm and I advise to help transition.  This farm was very rundown, thin, sandy soils and to transition to a regenerative dairying  system.  
**[0:35:26-0:35:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:35:26):**  So you can argue whether the emissions from the cattle discount the sequestration in  the soil, et cetera, et cetera.  That's another argument.  But the point is, is that you can transition a farm and we can see it from space.  But if it's only us looking, we can't distinguish what is what, right?  
**[0:35:47-0:35:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:35:47):**  We can't distinguish why.  We can see something's changed, but we have no way to go, why did that change?  And that's the critical part of like on farm experimentation that we'd really like to join  with these signals.  Because I don't think it's actually for us to interpret those signals.  
**[0:36:05-0:36:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:36:05):**  I think it's for the people on the landscape doing that job to interpret those signals.  And to see, you know, how to shift them.  And does it respond?  I mean, it's what I would like to do, right?  If I think if I was farming, that's what are the numbers I would like?  
**[0:36:23-0:36:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:36:23):**  What are the kind of signals I would like to see?  And then would it be possible to train the machine learning basically to find these spots  around the world where maybe the biggest transition has taken place over the last 20 to 40 years?  Or do you have to look specifically at, okay, we go to Gabe Brown's farm, or we go to this  indigenous tribe in this place.  
**[0:36:44-0:36:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:36:44):**  And because then we can, I wouldn't say we can do a competition, but we can definitely  see like, okay, where has it happened?  And then ask the question, obviously, locally, why?  And then repeat.  So with machine learning, I mean, this is heavily dependent on the training data, right?  
**[0:36:58-0:37:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:36:58):**  Machine learning is no magic stick.  So the key is to have the highest quality training data that you can then correlate  it with satellite images or changing climate or changing the land use.  And if you find that correlation, then it's a bingo.  So it's really, at the moment, most of machine learning is basically it's like a data mining  
**[0:37:19-0:37:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:37:19):**  looking for correlations, right?  And if you find a correlation, it's a bingo, it means that you can apply that correlation  on places where you don't have any samples, you can even extrapolate, etc.  But there's another side which is focused not on machine learning, but on modeling processes.  So understanding the processes and simulating processes.  
**[0:37:37-0:37:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:37:37):**  So it's like more like the people that are more background in physics and geophysics.  And so what we are interested also as a company is a hybrid between the two, so that we both  become good in modeling processes.  The processes, by the way, you could do it also without any point data, training data.  So if you do this as a farmer, if you do this, this and this, we think that's highly likely  
**[0:37:58-0:37:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:37:58):**  this and this would happen.  So in very simple terms, like if your farmer says, look, I'm putting so much fertilizer,  it's so much stones, etc.  And now calculate what will happen with that in five years.  And you have formulas for, you know, so the formulas, they calculate iteratively, step  
**[0:38:14-0:38:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:38:14):**  by step, what happens almost every day.  And then you have this all these processes, the physical processes, you calculate, okay,  this is in five years.  Yes, but we don't have time to do all of the scientific field studies on the new regenerative  methods that are coming to light, to get all those numbers to train all those process models  
**[0:38:35-0:38:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:38:35):**  to give us the response.  So we're in this middle space where we kind of have some models that have been trained  on long term field trials, they do give us an idea.  But then you also have landholders that have done things that science hasn't had decades  to examine.  
**[0:38:53-0:38:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:38:53):**  Right.  So it's this really interesting tension.  Do you just take everything back to how we think the environment works?  Or do we start actually just paying attention to where landholders have already regenerated  to say, okay, well, you know what, we take that as the signal.  
**[0:39:13-0:39:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:39:13):**  So I don't want to say one is better than the other.  They're different, but they can be combined.  One is definitely faster.  Well, one is definitely faster.  But it you know, I would love to look at Gabe Brown's wrench.  
**[0:39:25-0:39:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:39:25):**  I don't know where it is, actually.  We can find it.  Yeah.  And there are some others.  That's what I'm thinking, like, especially thinking Ernest Goetsch, for instance, in  
**[0:39:33-0:39:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:39:33):**  tropical forestry, and a few of these extreme examples of we've seen, at least we've seen  from the imaging, like from like from the drone imaging, etc. 30 years explosion, 20  years explosion of life, etc.  And that would be very interesting to see.  But at the same time, I'm running, taking one step back, you mentioned our company,  
**[0:39:51-0:39:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:39:51):**  Tom and Ish as well.  Like what, if you are working in this open data side of things, and you're hoping others  are building companies on top and are taking this data to make these decisions, what made  you decide to actually set up a for profit company to be in that space as well?  Yeah.  
**[0:40:08-0:40:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:40:08):**  So for me, it's very natural, for example, to think like, I mean, I wish actually, I  wish that we just do not for profit.  I mean, to be honest with you, I wish because there would be others doing Yeah, well, when  we started the company, I had the one consultant, financial consultant, and I come as a scientist,  total geek, you know, I never thought about any business or anything.  
**[0:40:30-0:40:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:40:30):**  And total obsession with my field, you know, and bit of also ego trying to publish myself,  whatever, which worked out, by the way, you're very published, let's say, yeah, yeah.  But the this advisor said, Well, you know, what do you want to do?  And then I like, wow, I actually I don't know, I have to think so I had some deep reflection.  And then I wrote the list of things that they find important.  
**[0:40:52-0:40:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:40:52):**  And I boiled it down to maybe like a list of things.  And one of the things, for example, and I would like to increase the education of people,  I noticed, you know, I have all this education, I have like 20 years of top education, and  most of people don't get opportunities.  So I thought, well, I want to increase, I want to help people get, like, not my level  
**[0:41:11-0:41:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:41:11):**  education, but get in that direction.  Then I also put like the climate change, you know, I'm really thinking about that now.  I saw that movie also, the Don't Look Up.  It's really disturbing movie.  And, and, you know, I realized, actually, this is no joke.  
**[0:41:25-0:41:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:41:25):**  I mean, you know, we have children, and we have to take that seriously.  It's really no joke, this climate change, and it's going to be a horrible world, you  know, if we don't do anything in 20 years, and I bet you that our children, they're going  to look at us and say, What the hell were you doing?  What did you do to our lives to, you know, and so this is the list of things I listed,  
**[0:41:44-0:41:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:41:44):**  I'm not going to go all the 10.  So then I listed that, and then the guy says, Well, it looks like really ambitious, you  know.  As he said, you need to set up at least two companies.  So I do feel like sometimes a bit, I understand Elon Musk that he has like a 15 companies,  
**[0:42:02-0:42:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:42:02):**  I fully understand it.  So and I said, so let's set up, if we want to do a non for profit, you know, let's have  a non for profit.  But if somebody comes and they're interested in business, we're also interested in business.  But obviously, it's a different stream, you know,  
**[0:42:16-0:42:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:42:16):**  because capitalism is a really strong engine.  And I feel like most I mean, I come from this regenerative movement for my whole life long  time.  I'm almost 40.  And I feel like probably many of my compatriots will disown me for saying this.  
**[0:42:36-0:42:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:42:36):**  But I think really only with the capitalistic engine, are we going to have a chance of taking  industrial society forward?  I think only with moving that much money and capital and effort and attention into ecosystem  services and using that drive to money to transform the whole economic system, then  I go, Okay, I think we have a chance, maybe just there.  
**[0:43:05-0:43:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:43:05):**  Because otherwise, we all go back to the hills.  It's a bit more complicated, Ishani, than that, because, well, I saw this documentary,  and he said, the capitalism is not interested in anything they cannot own.  So if you look at the international seas, fish in the sea, air, you know, anything they  cannot own, they're not interested.  
**[0:43:27-0:43:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:43:27):**  So I think it has to be like a triangle between business, politics and science, I think.  And it has to be any solution, climate change, land restoration, only one corner is not going  to do it.  No, no, of course, of course.  You need to get all three corners harmonized.  
**[0:43:45-0:43:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:43:45):**  And I noticed also, you know, I'm not naive now, I look at the business, and I will tell  you my experience is that maybe 70% of business is politics.  The business comes from politics, there's a political decision that makes a business.  So I think the most important corner is actually politics.  I think that's the unfortunately.  
**[0:44:04-0:44:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:44:04):**  But to change politics, we need to change business.  I mean, it's a feedback loop that feeds itself.  Why are we in bed with most input companies?  It's because they have the politics on their side.  Why is the gap in Europe not changing?  
**[0:44:17-0:44:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:44:17):**  I mean, there's some very interesting lobby activities, because the other lobby activities  are a lot stronger, the same in the US with the farm bill, the same in Brazil, to a certain  extent, and the same in many other countries.  But when you see examples, there's a few regions in India that stopped subsidizing fertilizer  and put all the money into training of farmers and suddenly a whole region transforms.  
**[0:44:36-0:44:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:44:36):**  So there's where we need the strong examples, because I agreeish that one of the strongest  organizational forms we have is a company, probably the other one is the social movement.  But the company is something we have a lot of experience in building and mostly, not  necessarily for the good.  But in this case, I think there's an enormous amount of work to be done.  
**[0:44:55-0:44:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:44:55):**  And the only way to get that amount of money is from the investment world.  We've created so much money in the investment world that's looking for something.  It needs to go somewhere.  Yeah, many of these things can really go faster with a bit of extra money and does extra people  and does extra brains and does extra servers for Tom and does extra satellites and does  
**[0:45:12-0:45:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:45:12):**  etc, etc, etc.  So you set up this company, and what have you been mostly doing there that you couldn't  do or cannot do in the OpenGeo Hub?  Yeah, so we've mostly been doing consultancies.  So various groups that need pretty high level technical answers, like they need a methodology  
**[0:45:32-0:45:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:45:32):**  developed, or they need like an actual workflow, an actual coded workflow.  So not a report, like a functioning thing, or a functioning data output.  So mostly, we've been doing that.  But we actually get interest from individual landholders and small groups that want a lot.  And it's been growing actually, in the last couple of years, I'm surprised how much interest  
**[0:45:56-0:45:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:45:56):**  has grown so quickly.  And we're not really set up to service a direct to customer or a landholder.  But we're trying to work out how to do that.  Because we think that, you know, it's not for us to tell the landholder what is going  on on their land, I prefer they take all the tools, and then they tell me what's going  
**[0:46:15-0:46:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:46:15):**  on or somebody else.  So you might need to make the tools.  Yeah.  Well, we actually have them at the moment.  We run them in house.  
**[0:46:23-0:46:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:46:23):**  But it's a very different thing to run your own systems in house that are automated versus,  oh, no, now I have 1000 landholders that I have to service in a couple of days.  I think Amazon AWS has some experience in that.  Taking something that they're running in house to actually to sell to customers.  And it's a, I mean, you run a very different clean shop.  
**[0:46:45-0:46:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:46:45):**  Just as you're, I don't know, renting out a room on Airbnb, it's slightly different  than if it's your own room.  It requires a different interface, a different UX, a different cleanness, a different easiness,  frictionless.  Yeah.  
**[0:46:57-0:47:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:46:57):**  So you're in that process of how you're going to interface with the world and not between  brackets, just I'm not saying just as in a bad way, doing high level consultancy or consultancy  with a few players, this will be with a lot of them.  Yeah, it's like trying to like, I feel like, how do I describe the moment where like an  iceberg of information, of data, of all this really cool potential stuff, and it has, there's  
**[0:47:19-0:47:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:47:19):**  no bit above the water yet that you can build a door on.  And that's the little piece we're concentrating on going, how do we do this?  And that's why all the pilots are so interesting because they bring out like issues, simple  issues that we didn't even think of, like going to the field and sampling or interpretation  of maps, right?  
**[0:47:39-0:47:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:47:39):**  For which tree you want to plant where?  Like we've got one grower who wants to replace ash trees where there's an ash die back on  his farm.  And so we're working out how to just combine these different predictions for different  tree species that should grow well there.  
**[0:47:57-0:48:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:47:57):**  What do we do if the model says there are six different species on this one pixel that  would do well?  Like, do we just give him six species on a pixel?  Like it seems like silly trivial stuff, but it's really not at all.  No, no, no.  
**[0:48:11-0:48:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:48:11):**  It's the underlying question of this whole series, what to plant where or what to make  walk where and why.  And you're saying that we're very close to offering that answer.  And then, but is it also already possible, let's say, because we always, we talked about  the past a lot here to look into the future because obviously climate is changing fast  
**[0:48:30-0:48:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:48:30):**  and in many places very fast.  And will your predict, of course, there is a prediction, like say, okay, these six trees  would probably do really well.  But if we take this and this model into or this and this climate model into consideration,  we actually would say these three because the other three are more at risk.  
**[0:48:46-0:48:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:48:46):**  Is that something we're getting to?  It's a frontier we're moving towards.  Absolutely.  I have to say that the, from, and I mean, it was a PhD's work.  It's incredibly complicated to predict tree species, like way beyond what I expected.  
**[0:49:04-0:49:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:49:04):**  Yeah.  But the problem is if you, once you planted them, it's not that you can move them.  Like it's a very, like you took a decision.  Yes, that has to be bought in and that's on the cards.  The other thing to add to that is we also identified in that process of looking, scoping  
**[0:49:18-0:49:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:49:18):**  what bits of work next was that actually the rate at which the climate bands on the planet  are moving is now going faster than the seed dispersal rate of the trees.  So I used to think that I would just focus on agricultural land.  That was all I, you know, I need to just focus on fixing degradation there.  And then over the last year it's become apparent, I guess to me, cause I didn't actually know  
**[0:49:43-0:49:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:49:43):**  that much about trees, was that indeed given the changes that are coming, we're going to  have to basically pick everything up that we care about and move it ourselves.  Because the forest won't move.  Yeah.  It can't move fast enough.  
**[0:49:58-0:49:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:49:58):**  That's the thing.  And that made me a bit depressed for at least a week of trying to process that.  Yeah.  In general, modeling nature, you know, when you look at, for example, like a planet, I  mean, so you have these biomes and you have the vegetation, let's say interacting with  
**[0:50:15-0:50:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:50:15):**  climate, also controlling climate and these things going in cycles, you know, through  millions of years, I don't know.  And when you, now we go as a human system, okay, now we're going to simulate it.  And you realize actually it's very complex.  It's like.  
**[0:50:28-0:50:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:50:28):**  Yeah.  Just the word you said there, like the vegetation controlling the climate already is probably,  is such a, it's a hopeful message I would say, but also a very complex one.  How do you model that?  Like we don't really know.  
**[0:50:42-0:50:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:50:42):**  And it might be a followup series we're going to do.  It's looking at, okay, can we change the climate locally with vegetation?  Yeah.  It's kind of like a dance.  No, it's up to this climate we have, you know, oxygen in the air and everything.  
**[0:50:54-0:50:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:50:54):**  I mean, it's like controlled by life.  But it kind of goes in like it's like a dance between life and your chemical processes,  you know, it dance up and down and then you have extinctions and things.  Then you have also the ice ages, you know, they also disrupt everything and they move  the species and the sea level goes up and down 200 meter, I don't know, plus minus.  
**[0:51:14-0:51:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:51:14):**  So yeah, it's a crazy actually system.  And now we go and we said we're going to forecast what's going to happen, you know, and it's  like 50 years in advance.  It's very difficult.  So, but we realize what's important to make a system that is very, let's say, fast adjusting  
**[0:51:31-0:51:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:51:31):**  system or system that you like you feed with the new data every year and you recalibrate,  recalibrate and eventually it becomes, you know, like that's what they have in, for example,  in meteorology, they have a weather forecast at the beginning that you could predict maybe  two, three days, you know, what's weather going to be?  Now they can go maybe two weeks, you know, and eventually they can also see there are  
**[0:51:52-0:51:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:51:52):**  some La Nina, El Nino effects and then they predict next year, you know, this could happen,  it could be a dry year, et cetera.  So we're slowly getting into predicting a bit further and further.  So changing the local climate in really all the local weather in relation to the health  of your soil, of the plant species you have there.  
**[0:52:11-0:52:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:52:11):**  I mean, for physical scientists, physical environmental scientists, it's a no brainer.  We kind of just go, well, of course, I mean, some of the early lessons I remember from  my professors, they take you out in this big wheat field that's been wheat for 40 years  and right next to it is like a grazing pathway that's never been plowed, right?  And they take a piece of soil from each one and they drop it in the water and the soil  
**[0:52:37-0:52:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:52:37):**  under the wheat falls apart, it's muddy and you pick up the soil that's been under the  pasture, it's intact, right?  So that structure is an expression of living systems passing organic carbon through the  system.  I mean, it's an expression of the biophysics of the system.  
**[0:52:55-0:53:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:52:55):**  So if you have a more structured soil that can hold itself together when it's wet, that  means it actually can hold more water.  That increase of water with your plant cover means you have more humidity in the area.  You get-  Which means it's cooler.  
**[0:53:11-0:53:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:53:11):**  Yes, it means it's cooler.  It means you take some of that heat and you transfer it into the evaporation of water.  And then because of the temperature differentials, you get dew in an area if you have vegetation.  So the underlying answer is always, and we had it in, I don't know if the podcast will  be out yet when we publish this, but is when in doubt, plant more trees or when in doubt,  
**[0:53:31-0:53:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:53:31):**  have more vegetation.  Like vegetation life is by definition, whatever climate model we'll look at better for us  than no life.  Absolutely.  I mean, the world is, I think I found a paper on this topic about global fertility and nutrient  
**[0:53:47-0:53:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:53:47):**  cycling, right?  It's a very interesting topic to me.  It says the world is about 25% of the fertility in terms of nutrient cycling of what it was  100,000 years ago.  That basically says the world is actually a very abundant place, much more abundant  
**[0:54:05-0:54:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:54:05):**  than it is now and a huge capacity that could be filled up.  So yes, more grass, more trees, more animals, more plants, more water, more soil carbon,  all of it is good.  Really.  And so let's say I tried to now, because we're coming out of this COVID period, let's say  
**[0:54:22-0:54:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:54:22):**  we're in a big theater, maybe in Wageningen University or in Amsterdam or somewhere or  in London, there's a room full of investors and we're having this on stage.  So we're having this conversation on stage and what would you tell them?  Not as advice, because obviously we don't give business investment advice, but they  walk out of that theater after the evening inspired and they're like, okay, this data  
**[0:54:41-0:54:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:54:41):**  part is really gonna, this is not a magic wand, but definitely something that can change.  What should they do?  Where should they go look for?  Where should they, what would be the role for investors and business people in this  space?  
**[0:54:55-0:54:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:54:55):**  Build all companies on top of it or do something else?  What do you see as the role for people that want, that are not necessarily farmers, not  necessarily data scientists, but that could build things in the space, things as meaning  companies or invest in them?  Oof.  
**[0:55:09-0:55:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:55:09):**  That's a hard question.  Build supportive things.  Build scaled things.  Scaled implementation, because trying something out on a pilot scale, like it teaches you  the little things you never expected, but from day one, think about how do I make something  
**[0:55:25-0:55:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:55:25):**  that's available across continents, across the world, right?  So scaled implementation, because you have to be able to cover enough landscape.  That's the thing.  If you're, you could have the best system in the world.  If you can cover 10 farms, great.  
**[0:55:40-0:55:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:55:40):**  Give me 10 million farms.  Give me a hundred million farms.  Like that's level of basic infrastructure, like roads or just internet.  Really that in developed worlds, you don't think of, you turn the tap on, you get water,  something like that.  
**[0:55:57-0:56:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:55:57):**  Think of it at that level and at that scale.  And then probably I would say, look for domain expertise and experience.  There's a lot of people that have been in this space for a long time that are now surprised  actually with all the interest lately.  But I think it's really important to be grounded in how much we do know already and how much  
**[0:56:21-0:56:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:56:21):**  can already be applied.  And there's stuff I saw recently fertilizing with ground stone, silicate weathering as  a way to draw down carbon.  And I mean, Bread from Stones was written in 1894, how to fertilize from pulverized  rock dust.  
**[0:56:42-0:56:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:56:42):**  Okay.  And this is just in the Western science.  It's not even touching on all of the indigenous knowledge.  So I don't know, what would the advice be?  The world is really different than what you think it is.  
**[0:56:56-0:57:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:56:56):**  The actual, the living world.  Maybe be humble.  And if we switch the question, what if you would be an investor?  So you're no longer the top data scientist in the world, Tom, I'm sorry.  And you're no longer running this OpenGeo hub and et cetera.  
**[0:57:11-0:57:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:57:11):**  But you are in charge, both of you actually.  And it is a tricky question because it's a lot of money.  Let's say you're in charge of a billion dollars.  What would you invest in?  Literally, and this could be very long term investments, but it has to come back at some  
**[0:57:23-0:57:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:57:23):**  point and not necessarily through tax increase or through increased taxes.  But what would it be if you had to put money to work work?  What would it be?  Would it be a lot of pilot farms?  Would it be launching your own satellite?  
**[0:57:35-0:57:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:57:35):**  Probably not.  Would it be, what would you build?  What would you invest in?  I think, as a data scientist, of course, I'm biased.  I see the data as a golden resource.  
**[0:57:46-0:57:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:57:46):**  And so there's a lot of data.  The problem is this data gap.  So I look at, for example, DeepMind, a Google company, and they are amazing people there.  And they have computing, they have a budget, I don't know, 50 million a year.  I don't know the number, I'm just guessing.  
**[0:58:01-0:58:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:58:01):**  So they have all these resources to play games, more or less.  On the other hand, we have no idea what's happening with the soils in tropics in the  world.  We even have estimates of soil carbon, the plus minus, I don't know, some crazy uncertainty.  We also like, somebody asked, what is this regenerative agriculture and land restoration?  
**[0:58:23-0:58:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:58:23):**  People can only read papers and things.  It's not on the level that the high school kids know it.  So as I told you, I noticed I like education, so I would absolutely invest into technology  and knowledge transfer to make really, so only positive management, but Shani said,  like increasing soil carbon, making a boosting like ecosystem services of soil, of land.  
**[0:58:48-0:58:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:58:48):**  Any example in the world that people develop that works, and I'm talking, these are maybe  like, I don't know, 1% of people, I want to scale it up to 98%.  That's what I will put my 1 billion probably.  So whoever helps that, fastest upscale.  And you, Ish?  
**[0:59:05-0:59:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:59:05):**  Well, I would say that this is a really difficult question.  I would say that to me, I mean, I would look at ecosystem services and monetization of  those.  So same area I'm looking at now, actually.  But to me, money is a virtual agreement.  
**[0:59:24-0:59:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:59:24):**  We all agree it has a value.  And ecosystem services are not virtual.  It's the thing that allows us to eat, to breathe, to exist.  So I would put probably most of it towards trying to make like a clearinghouse to facilitate  transactions for ecosystem services.  
**[0:59:47-0:59:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=0:59:47):**  Like somewhere that you can actually scientifically rely, like a scientific, yeah, scientific  stamp that says, no, this number is as best as we can make it within these error margins.  Because nature doesn't lie, right?  If a country doesn't report all of its methane emissions, as we've seen in the news recently,  those emissions are still out there.  
**[1:00:09-1:00:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=1:00:09):**  That extra warming is still there.  And just because we don't have it on our books, yeah, it still exists.  So I would go in that direction to go really, we need just basic fundamental accounting,  like geo-accountancy globally.  So how you turn that into a business, I don't know.  
**[1:00:28-1:00:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=1:00:28):**  I'm expecting a stream of people to pitch to me how that is to be a business.  That's someone else's problem.  That's someone else's problem.  You're on the best store side now.  So that's someone else's problem.  
**[1:00:38-1:00:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=1:00:38):**  Yeah, yeah, exactly.  I don't have to worry about it.  And then yeah, probably actually really boring stuff like small scale hardware.  I would go for like decentralized food processing, preservation equipment, handheld sensors,  soil water sensors, like to get it in the hands of people, not to make it an exclusive  
**[1:00:58-1:00:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=1:00:58):**  item.  If this is going to work, it can't be exclusive.  It has to be common and everyday.  So that's probably what I'd go for.  And I like the teaching side and the knowledge transfer, but that was Tom's answer.  
**[1:01:10-1:01:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=1:01:10):**  So let's leave it to the other part of the family office.  Yeah, we need to specialize also.  We need to specialize.  And then last final question for both of you.  You can take it whoever wants to take it first.  
**[1:01:21-1:01:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=1:01:21):**  If you had a magic wand, so no longer an investor at the moment, but if there's one thing and  you only get one Tom, not 10 or like what if you could change one thing, anything in  the sustainability or regeneration space, what would it be?  Could be global consciousness, could be education, could be literally anything.  But what would your magic wand do?  
**[1:01:41-1:01:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=1:01:41):**  Yeah, economy, absolutely.  This thing that when I read about this, that investors, like if they cannot own it, they  don't value it.  And this modern economy we have, I think it has to change.  I will put it as a first priority because it's okay to think in dollars, euros, francs,  
**[1:02:00-1:02:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=1:02:00):**  whatever.  It's okay.  But it's not okay to not to calculate the cost of environmental damage.  It's not okay to monopolize knowledge and things.  It's not okay to like some fossil fuel industry made enormous profit for 40 years and then  
**[1:02:18-1:02:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=1:02:18):**  you estimate the one ton CO2 emission.  They estimate now, I don't know, social damage about $150 or something.  So they came up to the, I don't know if you know, but they estimated in Nature paper that  the total bill for the CO2 we made it so far, it's about 15 trillion.  And so for me, this economy that completely ignores it and the policies that don't care,  
**[1:02:42-1:02:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=1:02:42):**  they ignore that, that, you know, there's all this enormous cost and damages that nobody  pays for, that's absolute priority.  That has to change.  And you, Ish?  Magic wand.  
**[1:02:52-1:02:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=1:02:52):**  Okay.  I would go after the subsidy system for production.  I would say that has to be completely rewritten.  It's a magic wand.  I can do what I want.  
**[1:03:04-1:03:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=1:03:04):**  Okay.  So I'm no longer promoting damaging or health damaging systems for food production and various  other activities to do with the environment and to try to make like what we would call  regenerative food the default.  Because at the moment, the default most convenient is just causing more trouble.  
**[1:03:27-1:03:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=1:03:27):**  And the argument is used that it needs to be cheap for people to, you know, it has to  be cheap.  Otherwise people will go hungry.  I just, we spend so little of our income on the West for our food.  I don't buy that argument.  
**[1:03:41-1:03:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=1:03:41):**  So I would make, I go for the subsidies to change them and then I would make regenerative  food the default option, right?  That in the supermarket.  So I don't have to think about it anymore.  I mean, the subsidies make it the cheapness and obviously the subsidies come from the  
**[1:03:57-1:03:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=1:03:57):**  policy side of things.  Yeah.  I know.  That's why I put them together and that's why it's my magic wand answer.  Because I don't, yeah, it's such a big and powerful outcome of so many lobbies.  
**[1:04:09-1:04:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=1:04:09):**  I need some magic wand.  Absolutely.  And if I can take the stick back just the last round.  Oh, there we go.  Yeah.  
**[1:04:18-1:04:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=1:04:18):**  The greenwashing, greenwashing, it's horrible.  It's a, I don't know.  We need more sanctions.  It has to be more serious.  This greenwashing, I saw it's happening.  
**[1:04:29-1:04:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=1:04:29):**  It will be more and more manipulation, fakes, you know.  And that's also enormous damage because they create this illusion.  Yeah, that's how you do it.  You just, you know, you buy some carbon credits so you can continue doing what you want.  You take some nature science, you say, oh, this guy says you plant one trillion trees  
**[1:04:45-1:04:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=1:04:45):**  so we can continue meeting, you know, it will solve the problem.  So we need to stop the greenwashing and anybody manipulating it.  It has to be in legislation, has to be more serious, you know, the same way as like, I  don't know, human rights or something.  I think this greenwashing should be at that level that it goes like the people can sue,  
**[1:05:04-1:05:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=1:05:04):**  you know, organizations and companies.  So anyway, I give back the magic stick.  We don't want to waste the window that we have.  You did say magic wands.  Thank you both so much for sharing your time today and sharing your knowledge, obviously,  
**[1:05:21-1:05:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=1:05:21):**  and unpacking a few of the very almost magical things you guys have been doing.  And I really hope to be checking in as soon again to see what you've been building, what  you've been uncovering and what you've been building on top of open data.  Thanks for having us.  Good fun.  
**[1:05:37-1:05:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=1:05:37):**  Thank you for the invitation.  If you found the investing in regenerative agriculture and food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  It's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few seconds.  
**[1:05:54-1:05:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=1:05:54):**  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  join my membership community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on cambrot.com slash investing region egg or in the description  below.  
**[1:06:14-1:06:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ichsani-wheeler-tom-hengl#t=1:06:14):**  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  