### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2017-36-10)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  You're going to listen to an interview with Ramis Kent, a permaculture expert who has  taught courses all around the world.  
**[0:00:20-0:00:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:00:20):**  He's on a mission to show the traditional finance world that it is possible to restore  large ecosystems and create meaningful returns for society, the planet and financially.  We talked about the differences between a true investor and a gambler, or someone who  is just speculating, and his involvement in the ecosystem restoration camps, who started  this year in Spain but are already expanding.  
**[0:00:41-0:00:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:00:41):**  Enjoy!  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture, Investing as if the  Planet Mattered, a podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and  agriculture space to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil,  people, local communities and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  
**[0:01:03-0:01:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:01:03):**  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  
**[0:01:22-0:01:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:01:22):**  Before we get started, I've been recording these interviews next to my day job and I  will definitely continue to do so and release about an episode a month.  But at the same time I would love to take this further, share more interviews, there  are many more stories to share on investing in regenerative food and agriculture, more  depth, improve the quality, maybe even doing some video series.  
**[0:01:42-0:01:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:01:42):**  So I started a Patreon community which makes it easy to support creators like myself.  If these podcasts have been of value to you and if you have the means, I invite you to  support me and make this happen.  For more information please find the link to my Patreon account in the description below.  And now, without further ado, the interview.  
**[0:02:02-0:02:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:02:02):**  Enjoy!  Welcome to Investing in Regenerative Agriculture, Investing as if the Planet Mattered.  I'm Kun van Zeyen, your host, and in the podcast of today I'm joined by Ramis Kent.  Ramis is a permaculture consultant who has taught courses everywhere including Jordan,  Palestine, Occupied West Bank, Greece, Ethiopia, Yemen and Turkey, and this is only a short  
**[0:02:20-0:02:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:02:20):**  list.  Ramis is also a board member of the Ecosystem Restoration Camps Foundation which we're  going to cover later.  Welcome, Ramis.  Thank you, Komen.  
**[0:02:28-0:02:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:02:28):**  So to start with a personal question, how do you end up on the land in permaculture,  in regenerative agriculture?  How did you get there?  That's a long story, but I'll try to give you the short version.  My formal background is actually in mechanical engineering.  
**[0:02:48-0:02:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:02:48):**  So this seems to be, I think at first glance, a bit incongruous.  But I had worked for a number of years in research development work, mostly with medical  devices.  I did a year of aerospace engineering in the Bay Area and also in New England.  Actually one of my former employers is the gentleman who invented the Segway, Dean Kamen,  
**[0:03:16-0:03:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:03:16):**  who was my first job out of college.  Not very useful on the farm, I think.  There's an off-terrain version.  There is an off-road version.  Yeah, I've seen that.  
**[0:03:29-0:03:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:03:29):**  I haven't ridden it.  I would like to, but I did the normal version.  But they got to a point where I just got tired of working in an office.  And it wasn't necessarily what I saw myself doing.  I think there are definitely aspects of engineering work that appeal to me.  
**[0:03:52-0:03:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:03:52):**  But there was just something else I felt like I needed to be doing.  So I taught a couple of years of high school in Oakland, California.  I worked for about six months on a tugboat on San Francisco Bay, which was interesting.  I always joked that if I knew about that 20 years earlier, maybe I might still be working  on a tugboat.  
**[0:04:12-0:04:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:04:12):**  But I eventually, during the course of my teaching, I was asked to be an administrator  for an Arabic language course being held at the campus of UC Berkeley.  And one of the students in the course, interestingly enough, used to work for Jeff Lawton, who  is the managing director of the Permaculture Research Institute.  She worked for him for about three years.  
**[0:04:39-0:04:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:04:39):**  And it was through her that I became introduced to permaculture.  I didn't even know what it was.  She asked me, do you know what permaculture is?  I said, no.  And then she showed me the Greening the Desert video, which at the time had just been released,  
**[0:04:52-0:04:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:04:52):**  I believe, or at least it hadn't been out for long.  And I said, at the moment I saw it, I said, I have to do this.  And Jeff happened to be coming to the Bay Area probably about a week after she had shown  me that video.  And I went to go meet him with a group of people.  
**[0:05:11-0:05:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:05:11):**  And I came to find out that he knew some old friends of mine.  And there are a couple of other coincidental things that really confirmed for me that I  needed to go and spend some time with him.  So eventually I went down to Australia to his farm, Zaytuna Farm, to take a number of  classes with him and to do an internship.  
**[0:05:35-0:05:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:05:35):**  And then also during that time, I was able to participate in a couple of consultancies,  which my engineering background had helped in that regard in doing the things necessary  to perform some of those tasks associated with consultancy.  And by the time I was heading back to the States, I told him, I want to work with you,  whatever you're doing.  
**[0:06:03-0:06:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:06:03):**  I want to help out.  And since then, I've become a co-director at the Permaculture Research Institute.  And part of the consulting team that Jeff's put together called Permaculture Sustainable  Consulting Proprietary Limited.  And I've since become involved with a number of other efforts, including the Ecosystem  
**[0:06:29-0:06:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:06:29):**  Restoration Camps Foundation, the World Permaculture Association, which was started by one of my  students in Italy, Giuseppe Tallarico.  Also another student from that region, Ignacio Scutini, he went on to start the Medipur Lab  or Permacultura Mediterranea, which is also based in Italy.  There are a number of efforts which have come out of the work that I've been able to do  
**[0:06:59-0:07:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:06:59):**  over the last several years.  It's easily one of the best decisions I ever made was getting involved with this because  there's so much to be done.  And you really feel like you're doing work that matters.  You could have still been on the talk mode, which is also work that needs to be done.  
**[0:07:17-0:07:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:07:17):**  But this is probably for all of us, was a better choice.  Yeah, absolutely.  Yeah, definitely for me.  Yes, absolutely.  Yeah, I can imagine also for humanity as a whole.  
**[0:07:27-0:07:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:07:27):**  But I would like to frame this discussion around, I mean, the series is called Investing  in Regenerative Agriculture.  We've had a bit of a pre discussion on a number of things.  And I would love to dive deeper into that, what you see, you've worked with the financial  world, you're in a lot of conversations with the financial investment industry, etc.  
**[0:07:47-0:07:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:07:47):**  And you're working on the ground.  And I think it's a very interesting perspective to look at both sides and see what's necessary.  And I would love to start and then we also will cover, of course, the camps, ecosystem  restoration camps you mentioned before as a nice example of what's possible and putting  that to work.  
**[0:08:04-0:08:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:08:04):**  But I think we'd like to start with a focused question that we've discussed before.  What is an investor to you?  And if a group of investors is listening to this podcast, who should be considered investor?  Who should they consider themselves as investor or not?  What for you does the word investor in this modern world and in the agricultural world  
**[0:08:24-0:08:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:08:24):**  of the future mean?  Well, I mean, this is a very complex question, very complex issue, very multifaceted.  And I mean, this is something that I first started looking at several years ago.  I mean, I had the good fortune of becoming involved with a group called TBLI, Triple  Bottom Line Investment or investors.  
**[0:08:53-0:08:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:08:53):**  I was headed up through with Rubenstein.  Yeah, right.  Okay.  So several years ago, I was introduced to Robert.  And this, interestingly enough, came from a connection with the Mazda City project in  
**[0:09:10-0:09:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:09:10):**  Abu Dhabi.  And during the time that I spent in Australia, Jeff had received a call from a large consulting  entity that was competing for a part of the one of the contracts connected to the development  of that project.  And I had helped in getting some material together that eventually won the contract  
**[0:09:33-0:09:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:09:33):**  for the company that had called on Jeff to lend some help in putting together some ideas.  And what had occurred to me then was, you know, well, the people that won the contract,  like this is not the type of design work that they are accustomed to doing.  Like this is not an area of expertise for them.  And essentially, the way they won the contract was they took the information that was given  
**[0:09:57-0:10:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:09:57):**  to them and they kind of dressed it up in a nice front end package.  Nice PowerPoint.  Right.  Nice PowerPoint, renderings, all the rest of it.  And what I said to Jeff was, we really need to see about trying to put together a consulting  
**[0:10:12-0:10:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:10:12):**  outfit that can compete for that kind of work.  This is an indication that there is a niche in the consulting market that is not being  filled by the current players that are out there.  So this is back in 2009 when we first started talking about this in particular.  And so the involvement of TBLI kind of came out of that experience.  
**[0:10:41-0:10:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:10:41):**  And what we were attempting to do when I went on an investor salon tour in 2010 to try to  speak to investment people about this opportunity of doing ecosystem restoration work, or what  I had called at the time, earth repair work.  And that by investing in trying to recover portions of the globe that are effectively  no longer functional, that this is a way to be able to provide added value.  
**[0:11:12-0:11:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:11:12):**  Like for instance, during the time of the real estate boom, when people would buy dilapidated  properties, they would invest in the refurbishing of a house and then you would sell the house  for many times what it was that you had bought it for.  In this instance, you're seeing a very similar principle, similar idea at work where you're  taking land that's no longer functional, you sort of fix it, and then you could put it  
**[0:11:37-0:11:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:11:37):**  back on the market either for an increased value or you're able to reap the benefits  of the services that are provided by these functional landscapes again.  This was something that I thought had a very high degree of attraction and great market  potential because-  Really see the land as the product.  
**[0:11:59-0:12:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:11:59):**  Where the land is the product, not what's produced from the land.  But the actual land is-  Underlying asset.  Exactly.  It's sort of the primary asset from which the derivatives, what's produced from land  
**[0:12:13-0:12:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:12:13):**  are made possible.  And so this is something that John Liu, for instance, this is one of the great commonalities  that we had in terms of the interest, the common interest that we had seen when we met  one another was this idea that land is sort of the primary, most important asset that  we have.  
**[0:12:32-0:12:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:12:32):**  And that it's a logical fallacy to believe that the derivatives, the things that are  actually produced from land has more value than the land itself.  And that is presently the way that I think most investment people, that this is the way  they look at the world is that you're almost, you're essentially cannibalizing the body,  if you will, sort of harvesting the organs of the body, the terrestrial body and placing  
**[0:13:01-0:13:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:13:01):**  value on the organs and completely disregarding the body.  And if you are removing too many of the vital organs from the body, you eventually kill  the body.  So you're an extractor, not an investor or an entrepreneur.  Right.  
**[0:13:17-0:13:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:13:17):**  You're an extractor, not an investor.  You're basically making, you're making money from harvesting organs.  Almost wildly wild harvesting instead of properly farming or instead of making sure that the  body between brackets that you're taking it from has the capacity to regenerate.  Right.  
**[0:13:34-0:13:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:13:34):**  Exactly.  I mean, what we really should be encouraging is a type of husbandry.  You know, and husbandry is really about partnership.  You form a partnership, something that is mutually beneficial.  And really, you're doing this out of a sense of an enlightened self-interest, realizing  
**[0:13:53-0:14:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:13:53):**  that if the moment you diminish the functional capability of landscape or an ecosystem or  some sort of ecological infrastructure, you diminish yourself because you are a part of  that system.  You are a part of that infrastructure and that, you know, you're literally pulling the  rug out from underneath your feet.  
**[0:14:16-0:14:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:14:16):**  And so if that understanding can be inculcated into people that have the capital, which enables,  you know, the economic activity that dictates the world within which they live.  Just to be clear, the financial capital.  Exactly.  So in particular, the financial capital and that financial capital is being used to enable  
**[0:14:38-0:14:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:14:38):**  certain types of activity with regard to our interaction with living capital and natural  capital or ecosystem capital.  And if you can use financial capital to regenerate those things or to make them better as opposed  to making them worse, then you're able to prolong your ability to be able to have some  sort of regenerative, beneficial economic activity that is not predicated on extraction,  
**[0:15:08-0:15:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:15:08):**  you know, which eventually you just get to the point where there's nothing left to extract.  And at this point in history, you know, we're living on a planet with, again, a limited  number of resources that are becoming less and less available and viable by the day.  And unless we change the way in which we think about how we invest in things and how we generate  economic activity, we don't change that in relatively short order.  
**[0:15:34-0:15:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:15:34):**  There's going to be nothing left to extract.  And so if that's the way people make money, how do you make money when the source of your  ability to make money is no longer available?  And have you seen since you started talking with TVLI in 2009, 2010, have you seen a change  in the amount or the number of investors that are seeing this, maybe the way they're investing?  
**[0:16:02-0:16:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:16:02):**  Has that changed in the last eight years?  And if so, how?  I think some of the language, I think the way people are talking about these kinds of  things is changing.  However, I think the direction in which investment is being directed and the degree to which  
**[0:16:24-0:16:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:16:24):**  investment is being directed as far as the financial capital is made available, it's  still not ending up in the places that it needs to end up in order to affect the type  of ends I think people in our camp have in mind.  And I think a great deal of this has to do with the nature of the investment cycles that  most people, most investment people are used to dealing with.  
**[0:16:50-0:16:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:16:50):**  There's certain markets or there's certain ways in which investors are accustomed to  being able to realize financial returns.  They're just vehicles that they're used to dealing with.  And the investment cycles, which are often connected to some sort of intellectual property  or proprietary technology, some sort of discrete product that can be financialized, that's  
**[0:17:15-0:17:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:17:15):**  not necessarily what we're talking about when we're discussing things like ecosystem restoration  or land restoration or rehabilitation or earth repair work.  Instead of investment cycles that are along the lines of several months or sometime maybe  within a year or a couple of years, we're really looking at one to two decades that  we need people to stay engaged.  
**[0:17:47-0:17:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:17:47):**  Most long-term funds are seven to 10 years and you're lucky if you can add one or two  extra so you're at 12.  Then you're just getting started.  Then you're restoring ecosystems.  So you're just getting in the game as far as what most people would think of as quote  
**[0:18:06-0:18:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:18:06):**  unquote long-term investment, as you said, seven to 10 years.  When we look at the Common Land Foundation, which we had been discussing earlier and the  work of Vilham Fawurta, he's been, Vilham's been talking about and whenever he has contact  with potential investors and supporters, he says, I need you to stay engaged in this process  for at least 20 years because ultimately that's the kind of timescale that you need capital  
**[0:18:36-0:18:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:18:36):**  or the people that hold or have access to the types of financial capital that enables  the work.  That's what we need.  Those are the lengths of time or the time windows that we need people to stay engaged  because that's really when you begin to see the recovery and the benefits that are produced  
**[0:18:57-0:18:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:18:57):**  from engaging in this kind of work.  That's when you really start to see the benefits manifest.  The problem is that that financial people are not known for their patience necessarily.  No, and they're also always asking for track records, which of course, if the work takes,  let's say at least 15 years to really show itself and this movement of large-scale ecosystem  
**[0:19:20-0:19:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:19:20):**  restoration isn't that old and there are not so many examples where you can show that because  a lot of projects started maybe five years ago or if we're lucky eight.  We still need to wait quite a bit before we can show you.  Let's see, there's almost a portfolio of examples, but most of them are still very underdeveloped  yet, but they're on the way.  
**[0:19:41-0:19:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:19:41):**  You cannot see too much.  No, exactly.  The funny thing is in some cases, it's not even necessarily a matter of even the work  that is being called for taking 20 years necessarily.  If you look at one of the better large-scale examples, which would of course be the Los  
**[0:20:02-0:20:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:20:02):**  Cueto Watershed Rehabilitation Project that John Liu has done a lot of media work on,  that's a project that it's seen great results.  Rehabilitating returns within a decade, but I think the key to the success of that project  was number one, having a sizable amount of capital be made available at the beginning  of the project and of course, there were certain aspects of the governance and the management  
**[0:20:31-0:20:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:20:31):**  of the area that was being worked on that facilitated its ability to produce the results  that we saw.  But if you break down the amount of investment per unit area in the Los Cueto Project, it's  embarrassingly small.  If you look at that project, it covered roughly 3.5 million hectares.  
**[0:20:57-0:21:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:20:57):**  The amount of money that was put up by the World Bank Rural Development Agency was half  a billion dollars, it was $500 million over the course of 10 years.  If you break down $500 million over 3.5 million hectares, that's roughly $143 per hectare  over 10 years.  So that means per year, it's roughly $14.30 a hectare for 10 years.  
**[0:21:28-0:21:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:21:28):**  And for that money, they were able to take 2.5 million people out of poverty in the four  poorest regions of China.  They were able to cut the rate of poverty from about 59% to 27%.  And they tripled the incomes of the farmers in that area.  And in the process of doing that, they were able to remedy all of the problems they had  
**[0:21:49-0:21:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:21:49):**  with famine, drought, flood, dust storms, the silting of the Yellow River and a number  of the other kind of waterways in the region.  But they brought back this entire, the ecological health of this entire region and revitalized  the economy at the same time.  So what that tells you is that they were able to identify kind of the acupressure points,  
**[0:22:16-0:22:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:22:16):**  which revived that entire terrestrial body, not only in terms of the ecosystem health,  the ecosystem function, but also the economic health and the economic function and all the  other things that are connected to that.  So these things are not operating in a mutually exclusive manner.  They're very much linked.  
**[0:22:36-0:22:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:22:36):**  They're very much connected, but you have to identify the right pressure points so you  get that optimization or that maximizing of benefit by investing in the right place.  And if that one has been such a success and it's been financed by partly by the World  Bank, why haven't we seen more?  Because it's been a few years.  
**[0:22:55-0:22:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:22:55):**  Well, that's a good question.  I mean, I think part of it is, I think part of it is ignorance.  And I think a lot, I think there are many people outside of a relatively small group  of folks that, you know, operating in certain, you know, certain areas of activity that even  know that a project like this even exists.  
**[0:23:19-0:23:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:23:19):**  And I know when I talk to people, I mean, especially, you know, anybody that's involved  in finance or investment, they don't know anything about, you know, about this project.  And a question should be, how can I invest in that?  How can I put money to work?  Because this was a World Bank grant, right?  
**[0:23:35-0:23:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:23:35):**  It wasn't an investment.  Absolutely.  I mean, the funny thing is if you take that project and you, you know, you use the same  figures in terms of the amount of investment per unit area and you were to scale that up  to the amount of land that is characterized as being either degraded, desertifying or  
**[0:24:00-0:24:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:24:00):**  desertified, which is approximately 2 billion hectares globally, and that number is growing  according to the UNCCD, it's growing at a rate of about 10 to 12 million hectares per  year.  If you take that same figure, the investment numbers from the Los Plateo and you were to  apply it to that area of degraded land, you could recover, theoretically, you could recover  
**[0:24:29-0:24:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:24:29):**  all of that land for a fraction of the annual defense budget for the United States.  Which would probably also save a lot on the defense budget.  Right, which would ultimately save a lot on the defense budget, which admittedly, you  know, the US Department of Defense...  Is quite well advanced in thinking on this part.  
**[0:24:48-0:24:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:24:48):**  Yeah, I mean, even the, you know, the US Department of Defense and other, you know, military and  intelligence agencies have admitted that environmental issues are among the most important, if not  the most important national security issues to be faced at present.  So it's not like this isn't on the radar of the folks who see this as being, you know,  a type of enlightened self-interest and understanding that, you know, this is going to impact not  
**[0:25:24-0:25:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:25:24):**  only the people that are, you know, would be characterized as being sort of tree huggers  or, you know, environmentally minded, but just sort of the nuts and bolts, basic, you  know, security minded people see this as being of prime critical importance and worthy of  attention.  And they should.  
**[0:25:45-0:25:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:25:45):**  Yeah.  So let's recap.  I'm an impact investor.  I'm listening to this.  I don't have $500 million in my back pocket, but I do have money to invest and I'm in the  
**[0:25:54-0:25:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:25:54):**  mindset of looking long term.  I'm not scared anymore for the 20 years.  And also the 20 years doesn't mean just to be clarified that your investment is locked  up for 20 years.  I mean, many of these ecosystem restoration projects have multiple different types of  
**[0:26:12-0:26:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:26:12):**  investments, different types of returns, different types of cycles, et cetera, but it takes about  20 years to restore an ecosystem normally.  So I'm used to that thinking.  Where do I start and what do I set as goals as an investor that wants to put his or her  own personal wealth to work?  
**[0:26:27-0:26:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:26:27):**  Yeah.  Well, I mean, I think that there are a number of publications that in recent years that  I think do a pretty good job of identifying ways in which investment dollars can be mobilized  or can be placed to be able to put investors in a position to realize a healthy return  while producing a lot of good.  
**[0:26:51-0:27:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:26:51):**  I mean, one of the more valuable publications or references was actually put out by the  United Nations Environment Program.  The UNEP put together something called Dead Planet, Living Planet, Biodiversity and Ecosystem  Restoration for Sustainable Development, a rapid response assessment.  What they did was they tried to assess, number one, the financial impact that paying attention  
**[0:27:28-0:27:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:27:28):**  to the loss of ecosystem services, the impact it has on the economy.  So for one...  Is that where the famous number of 40 billion comes from?  No, what was it?  40 trillion?  
**[0:27:40-0:27:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:27:40):**  Yeah.  So basically, just reading a portion of the introduction of that document says, biodiversity  and ecosystems deliver crucial services to humankind, from food security to keeping our  waters clean, buffering against extreme weather, providing medicines to recreation, and adding  to the foundation of human culture.  
**[0:27:58-0:28:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:27:58):**  Together, these services have been estimated to be worth over 21 to 72 trillion US dollars  every year, comparable to the world gross national income of 58 trillion US dollars  in 2008.  So in attempting to provide some sort of valuation of what is lost when we don't pay attention  to these issues, providing this estimate was obviously supposed to be a way of attracting  
**[0:28:35-0:28:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:28:35):**  people's attention, or drawing their attention to this issue, and then using a financial  incentive to get investors to put more money into this particular area of activity, of  recovering ecological systems, recovering degraded landscapes, restoring areas that  have become heavily degraded.  The economics of the TEEB report that had been published in, I guess it was 2009, a  
**[0:29:08-0:29:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:29:08):**  great deal of what was contained in those documents, that's what ended up in this publication,  this UNEP publication.  So they did a lot of, I think, really great work in trying to estimate the value of, for  example, farmland that is managed in a way that would be considered acceptable for the  sale of organic produce as opposed to conventional.  
**[0:29:35-0:29:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:29:35):**  The fact that you're able to get a much higher market price, for instance, the ecological  benefits of adopting agroecology.  So there's that report that had come out from Olivier de Schutter, the UN Special Representative  on the Right to Food.  All of the benefits, I think, have been very well documented.  
**[0:30:00-0:30:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:30:00):**  So I think those are not in question.  I think the problem is we haven't done a very good job of communicating that to people who  are not familiar with these things.  So I think there's a certain kind of cognitive mapping that finance people and investment  people are familiar with and they're accustomed to looking at the world via that mapping.  
**[0:30:32-0:30:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:30:32):**  That lens, yeah.  Right, through that lens.  And they're not quite able to get their head around what's being discussed here.  So I don't think it's necessarily a matter of the information isn't available.  The information is available.  
**[0:30:49-0:30:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:30:49):**  It's just that these are people that are not accustomed to looking in the places in which  this information is available.  And so how do we bridge the gap?  How do we do a better job of marketing and of communicating this opportunity to people  who may very well be interested in it if they knew that it was available?  
**[0:31:16-0:31:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:31:16):**  And if they understood the mechanisms by which they can put their money in and then eventually  be able to see the returns come back.  And again, very healthy long-term returns.  And do you see a lot of those mechanisms?  Because that would be probably the next question of an investor who has read all of these documents  
**[0:31:36-0:31:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:31:36):**  has seen, sees of course in his personal or her personal surrounding the effects of non-sustainable  land management.  And then the question, okay, what's next?  How can I, what's my call to action?  How can I get busy and start investing?  
**[0:31:53-0:31:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:31:53):**  And then you need vehicles or you buy a lot of land yourself and start developing that  as sustainably as possible.  But you probably usually run out of funds pretty quickly.  How can you sort of indirectly put money to work in the sector?  Well, again, I think the problem, and again, as we were discussing before we started recording  
**[0:32:14-0:32:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:32:14):**  was I think the investor's mindset, number one, has to change from one that is essentially  a gambler's mindset or a speculators mindset.  Which is not even an investor.  We call it before, like it's a gambler instead of an investor.  Can you distinguish the two?  
**[0:32:39-0:32:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:32:39):**  Right.  Yeah.  An investor is someone who I think is in reality and in actuality, they are looking to produce  more benefit than simply being able to make a lot of money by finding a way to make the  quick buck.  
**[0:33:00-0:33:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:33:00):**  They're actually looking for opportunities that produce more benefit than simply making  fast money.  I mean, if it's just a matter of making fast money, I mean, really, this drive to make  fast money, it doesn't distinguish investment people from thieves.  Thieves can make fast money by picking people's pockets.  
**[0:33:23-0:33:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:33:23):**  Drug dealers can make fast money by selling a narcotic to an addict.  Bank robbers can make fast money by sticking up a bank.  But nobody would call them investors.  Right.  But that's not what investment is.  
**[0:33:39-0:33:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:33:39):**  That's just that's making that's hustling.  That's what that is.  I think what investors do is they are able to take capital and they understand that there  are many more types of capital other than that found in finance.  So we had talked before about the work of some colleagues of mine, Ethan Roland and  
**[0:34:08-0:34:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:34:08):**  Gregory Landler, who have written this book on regenerative enterprise.  And in the course of writing the book and presenting the ideas of the book, they talk  about there being eight forms of capital.  Among them, there's intellectual capital, there's cultural capital, there's financial  capital, natural capital, living capital, spiritual capital, social capital.  
**[0:34:34-0:34:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:34:34):**  Again, there's all of these other forms of capital which forms the basis of our lives.  And ultimately, I think what an investor is trying to do is take whatever capital they  have in place or they have access to and they are looking to produce as much benefit as  possible not only for themselves.  Right.  
**[0:34:58-0:35:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:34:58):**  They are able to create this extended concatenation, if you will, of beneficial outcomes from identifying  ways in which to employ finance, for instance.  And then they are able to create this long-term extended benefit for circles outside of their  immediate sphere of influence or operation.  They are able to see how they can contribute to the creation of this creation of some sort  
**[0:35:33-0:35:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:35:33):**  of great civilizational outcome through the employment of their capital.  And I think enabling people to be able to live a dignified existence, that's what I  see an investor as being, as someone who produces that outcome.  They are able to create more benefit than harm through their employment of their management  of capital.  
**[0:35:58-0:36:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:35:58):**  And that's for me, that's what an investor is, is someone who does that.  Anything aside from that, that's just solely interested in making a lot of money through  admittedly employing some sort of skill and I think a great deal of it is luck and being  able to flip $1 and make it into $5 somehow.  I mean, that's artifice.  
**[0:36:25-0:36:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:36:25):**  You can extract money or you can extract some sort of selfish benefit out of a broken system.  And essentially, that's what we see happening is people are very good at doing that.  But ultimately, you're going to have to face not addressing some of those critical items  that we now see confronting us in the world today.  And that this idea that I'm safe if you're safe, I'm taken care of if you're taken care  
**[0:36:56-0:37:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:36:56):**  of, I'm in danger if you're in danger, unless that sensibility is adopted by people that  are in the realm of investment, in the world of investment, unless that's a reality for  people, then I think we're in for a very difficult time for the foreseeable future.  Yeah, definitely.  And to switch gears a bit, we've mentioned them before, but I don't think we've put enough  
**[0:37:23-0:37:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:37:23):**  attention to them, to the camps.  So what are the ecosystem restoration camps?  It's relatively new.  There's one getting up in Spain, but can you explain a bit more on that?  Well, I think the ecosystem restoration camps, interestingly enough, I believe is a product  
**[0:37:40-0:37:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:37:40):**  of an attempt to try to bring what we were just discussing to the fore.  This idea of being able to take land, land that's degraded, land that is in particularly  good shape, and employing certain strategies and techniques that are replicable.  You're showing how you can use these ideas and these approaches to bring back damaged  landscape and then training people in how to use them.  
**[0:38:14-0:38:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:38:14):**  And then going somewhere else in the world where you have a very similar condition, and  you repeat what you were able to do at the camp.  And so the first example that we have, the first camp is on a farm of a family that was  interested in participating in the project.  It's a farm that's in southern Spain, on the Altiplano, and a lot of southern Spain is  
**[0:38:45-0:38:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:38:45):**  in pretty bad shape in terms of land degradation.  A lot of southern Spain is like North Africa.  And because it was seen that there's a need for this kind of work to be done, these were  folks that were willing to give us a base from which to work, to be able to demonstrate  the idea, have it be documented, give people a place to be able to come and participate  
**[0:39:14-0:39:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:39:14):**  in this, and then eventually be able to deploy this in various regions of the globe that  are in need of the same work.  And I think by means of this, we're able to show not only how we can produce a great outcome  from bringing back landscape and restoring its ecological function, but also seeing how  economically this is something that can produce a great deal of benefit, not only in terms  
**[0:39:40-0:39:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:39:40):**  of the productive capabilities of landscape, but how it can employ a huge number of people  potentially and give them meaningful work to do and provide a really robust economic  engine that can be transferred to anywhere and everywhere.  And the first one is up in Spain, I think since a few months.  I mean, it's very new.  
**[0:40:10-0:40:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:40:10):**  I saw a lot of things on Twitter.  Where the next plant or that depends on the people that come and then take it back home  basically or taking to the landscapes that they're working or wanted to work in?  Yeah, so if you look at, you know, one of the main participants or one of the main supporters  of the project is Common Land Foundation.  
**[0:40:29-0:40:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:40:29):**  And so they're currently behind this effort to an extent, but they also have sort of similar  work that's operating in a very similar vein in South Africa, in Western Australia, and  also another area in southern Spain.  And so, you know, we can, and these and those efforts are actually specifically oriented  towards agricultural businesses, you know, that are looking to use more regenerative  
**[0:41:02-0:41:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:41:02):**  methods to, you know, to do what they've been doing.  But obviously the regenerative methods are meant to be able to produce more benefit because  they're using techniques and strategies that are much more amenable to being on landscape  for an extended period of time.  It's able to produce a more multifaceted benefit, not only in terms of, you know, economically  
**[0:41:25-0:41:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:41:25):**  speaking for the folks that are on land, but also, you know, you're able to see how in  terms of the ecosystem function, the ecological functioning of that landscape, it's producing  benefit as well.  So you know, the camps right now, the first one is in Spain, although we have talked about  the possibility of extending this.  
**[0:41:46-0:41:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:41:46):**  For instance, I have a colleague in Tasmania who I had suggested using his place as a site  to be able to establish a camp because a great deal of what it is that we want to get set  up in Spain, he already has going at his site.  It's a colleague named Paul Ringo Keene, and he has a business called Tiger Hill Permaculture  in Tasmania.  
**[0:42:11-0:42:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:42:11):**  And I would invite everybody to look up what he's been doing.  But I think there are a number of other potential sites that could also serve as, you know,  in a similar way as to what we have happening in southern Spain.  It's just a matter of getting everybody sort of networked, being able to get the word out  to people that are interested in becoming involved, to get the word out to people that  
**[0:42:39-0:42:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:42:39):**  may be interested in financially backing what it is that we're doing.  Because right now, you know, this is largely financed through the contributions of the  donations that are being put in by people that are becoming members of the project.  So we're asking for 10 euros a month, about 120 euros a year to become a formal member  of the ecosystem restoration camps.  
**[0:43:06-0:43:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:43:06):**  And this is, you know, largely what is financing the, you know, the present functioning of  those camps, the provisioning of those camps.  Extremely, extremely interesting.  I want to end with a final question to you.  What's next for you?  
**[0:43:22-0:43:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:43:22):**  What's next for the...  I mean, you're traveling a lot through or for permaculture and regenerative agriculture.  From now on, basically, let's say until the end of the year, what are you most excited  about?  What do you want to share?  
**[0:43:33-0:43:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:43:33):**  What can you share about what's coming up for you?  Well, again, a lot of my work is centered on, you know, mostly the sort of the dry lands,  the arid climate regions of the globe, so Middle East, North Africa, the Gulf, Southern  Europe.  And so I have a number of projects, you know, some of them are design courses and some of  
**[0:44:00-0:44:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:44:00):**  them are, again, are, you know, setting up similar types of project work that we see  happening in Spain.  Some of them are consultancies.  So I'm continuing to do what I've been doing, you know, elsewhere in the region over the  past several years.  
**[0:44:20-0:44:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:44:20):**  But I think, you know, ultimately, you know, the goal is always to try getting some variety  of large-scale, long-term restoration work, you know, to be established.  And again, get the proper backing, the proper financial backing and resourcing of those  projects so that we have bigger and better examples to bring to the table.  And you know, success breeds success, which is what I like to always say.  
**[0:44:54-0:45:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:44:54):**  And I think it's just a matter of having, you know, bigger and better, well-documented  examples of the work to show to people so that, you know, they have the assurance that  fine, if they're being asked to get behind this work, that, you know, it's something  that is going to net them a return.  They actually see that this is turning into something that's worth getting behind.  
**[0:45:22-0:45:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:45:22):**  And you know, a lot of what I'm doing is just simply trying to contribute whatever I can  to that end, is to, you know, bring more attention to what it is that, you know, we're hoping  to bring to the mainstream, if you will, mainstream consciousness, is understanding that this  is a possibility for us, that we can bring back these degraded areas of the globe.  And ultimately, that is what is going to provide the type of stability and security I think  
**[0:45:52-0:45:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:45:52):**  many of us are concerned about, you know, we're concerned about establishing.  To bring back hope, if I can summarize it.  Yeah, I mean, really, that's ultimately, I think, the goal is that, you know, it is possible  for all of us to live in a world where we can live a dignified existence.  And it doesn't have, you know, we don't have to be in a place to where, you know, you have  
**[0:46:18-0:46:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:46:18):**  a very small number of people that are living high on the hog, if you will, and everybody  else is, you know, living this, you know, this decrepit, dystopian, depressing life,  you know, at the expense of, you know, the small number of people that are just, you  know, taking more than they really need.  And it doesn't have to be that way.  
**[0:46:43-0:46:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:46:43):**  And I think if you really have a concern, not only for people, but just, you know, if  you have a concern for the, you know, the world that you live in, you know, and you  want to think about more than simply yourself, this is something that I believe is a very  real possibility in terms of providing that potential to create that world to where everybody  has enough, have more than enough.  
**[0:47:11-0:47:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:47:11):**  And, you know, we all can live a good life.  With that, I would like to thank you and end this interview, I'm sure we'll be checking  in regularly and share the process of your amazing work.  Thank you so much.  Thank you for having me.  
**[0:47:26-0:47:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:47:26):**  You just listened to an interview with Ramis Kent, permaculture expert and consultant.  We've discussed many things in this interview, from what's the difference between an investor  and a gambler, the short time mindset of most investors, and his involvement in ecosystem  restoration camps, which just started in Spain this year.  Thank you for making the time to listen to this podcast and making it all the way until  
**[0:47:47-0:47:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:47:47):**  the end.  I hope you enjoyed it as much as I did.  If you found the investing in regenerative agriculture and food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  
**[0:48:00-0:48:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:48:00):**  It's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  join my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or in the description  
**[0:48:24-0:48:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:48:24):**  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  
**[0:48:50-0:48:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:48:50):**  Why are we doing this course?  After a hundred interviews and more than a hundred hours of audio asking the question  how to put money to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011  and recording these podcasts since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  
**[0:49:08-0:49:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:49:08):**  How have we built our decision-making framework, what to focus on with the podcast, how have  we picked interviewees and what questions should you ask, what is happening in the space,  what should you read, what should you listen, what should you watch, how to approach this  space.  For whom is this course?  
**[0:49:26-0:49:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:49:26):**  You, the soil builders and investors in the space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management, consultants, etc.  People that are building soil at scale.  
**[0:49:45-0:49:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:49:45):**  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  No.  
**[0:50:00-0:50:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:50:00):**  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  that among the listeners of this podcast we have people with very different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  
**[0:50:20-0:50:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:50:20):**  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to write along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  
**[0:50:35-0:50:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:50:35):**  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  
**[0:50:56-0:51:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:50:56):**  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  
**[0:51:10-0:51:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/08/21/rhamis-kent/#t=0:51:10):**  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  