### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2022-00-25)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  Finally after a year and a half, even more, after the summer of 2020 an update with Benedict  Beuzel, one of the leading farmers applying regenerative practices, at scale in Europe.  
**[0:00:25-0:00:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:00:25):**  Farming over 3000 hectares of which 2000 forestry and 1000 organic grain in a very very dry  area east of Berlin.  We talk about what has changed and how the on-farm experimentation even in the forestry  part has simply exploded and what were the crucial elements to have this crazy growth.  And we talk about where are we in this regenerative evolution and how we really really don't know  
**[0:00:50-0:00:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:00:50):**  anything.  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture, Investing as if the  Planet Mattered.  A podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  
**[0:01:09-0:01:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:01:09):**  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat and it's time that we as investors, big and small  and consumers start paying much more attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  
**[0:01:31-0:01:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:01:31):**  In March last year we launched our membership community to make it easy for fans to support  our work and so many of you have joined as a member.  We've launched different types of benefits, exclusive content, Q&A webinars with former  guests, ask me anything sessions plus so much more to come in the future.  For more information on the different tiers, benefits and how to become a member check  
**[0:01:51-0:01:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:01:51):**  gumroad.com slash investingregenegg or find the link below.  Thank you.  Welcome to another episode today with my good friend Benedikt Boezel who's back after the  series we did and we just looked at when we released the last one which was in the summer  of 2020 and so much has changed.  
**[0:02:09-0:02:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:02:09):**  So we're checking in with one of the most interesting regenerative farmers or farmers  using regenerative practices on a large scale farm and forestry farm actually east of Berlin  and I'm so happy to have you back here and to check in.  It's going to be a full episode.  There's a lot to discuss so let's see if we can squeeze it into an hour or a bit less  
**[0:02:28-0:02:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:02:28):**  and otherwise we do another one in six months or so because it seems like the speed of change  has only picked up so there's so much to unpack.  Welcome Benedikt.  Hi Koen, thank you so much for the invitation.  Good to see you.  
**[0:02:40-0:02:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:02:40):**  And I mean it's horrible to say but can you give us a brief overview, it's not brief,  but let's say the summer, if you're thinking back on the summer of 2020, we just came out  of the first lockdown, we had no idea of COVID, how long that was going to take, etc.  And now you're feeling now we're talking let's say the middle of winter or the end of winter  in 2022, what's the biggest feeling of change?  
**[0:03:03-0:03:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:03:03):**  How do you feel most different?  I mean private is another story but definitely around the farm.  What's your biggest shift or what's your biggest change that you feel somebody put you there  and said okay you have five words to answer that?  That's a tough one.  
**[0:03:17-0:03:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:03:17):**  I mean really there's no private life and farm life, it's all just one big thing I guess.  So I would have to say the birth of my daughter in May last year definitely had by far the  biggest impact.  So all the farming changes are disappearing compared to family expansion, which I think  most people can agree on.  
**[0:03:42-0:03:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:03:42):**  And when you look at the farm or the land or the farming company, what do you see has  shifted in that year and a half, which seems so long ago if we think about it.  Yeah it's incredible to think about, I mean one and a half years is really not that long  but like I can't really think back to it anymore.  I think what's the biggest shift is that the energy that I was carrying around in my heart,  
**[0:04:09-0:04:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:04:09):**  in my head is now actually starting to become real outside because we've just been able  to grow the team so strongly and just have the most incredible people with us that I  just have the biggest respect and love for them and what they do outside is just incredible.  And to see that happen is quite touching to be honest with you.  It's still hard work and a tough life but it's beautiful to see what can happen if you  
**[0:04:39-0:04:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:04:39):**  just stick with it and take some risks I guess.  And so let's unpack that a bit.  How were you able to grow the team because of course you had a farming team back in the  day when we talked but not so much on the regenerative side and now there's a full suite.  So walk us through how many people are there now on the farm and you say grow the team  
**[0:04:59-0:05:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:04:59):**  it could also be from one to two and that's a huge growth but in this case we talk about  a slightly different growth and how did you, were you able to bring them to the farm and  how did you find all these people?  Yeah that's a good question.  It's always to be kind of difficult to make sense of it looking back.  
**[0:05:13-0:05:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:05:13):**  Most of the time it always makes sense when you look back but in this case things just  happen naturally I think.  I think that's one of the things that I found if you're lucky enough to find what you are  supposed to do in life which I was looking for 15 years of my life doing finance and  all the other stuff and if that is in line with what's needed at that point in your context  
**[0:05:36-0:05:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:05:36):**  and this is for me agriculture in a very dry environment then I think there's something  like energy of the universe that helps you.  If you do shit of course then it's not going to help you hopefully but if you have a good  path that makes sense for the context and the environment then there's some weird form  of support, serendipity all over the place.  
**[0:05:58-0:06:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:05:58):**  It's just really, I don't know.  But yeah I mean back in the day, I mean we already had a few in the regenerative team  I guess but quite a few of them were just interns and back in the day we'd had no financial  means, we were extremely struggling with the forest company, with the agriculture company,  we had been in a drought for two or three years in a row, we couldn't do any investments,  
**[0:06:26-0:06:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:06:26):**  we had bad liquidity.  And it still is just insanely tough in this environment, in this region to do agriculture  or forestry especially if you want to do it in a let's say healthy way.  And what made us strong back in the day was that I had the people that were doing an internship  and they had no pay, they didn't get any food, they were just with us because they believed  
**[0:06:50-0:06:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:06:50):**  in what we were doing and what we were believing and I guess they trusted me that I can somehow  find a way to finally also maybe pay them something.  So I think we were just a few, a handful at that time that believed that there is something  that we should push and keep doing because I mean when we started planting the first  trees in an agroforestry system and I swapped my cow against the cows, I always thought  
**[0:07:17-0:07:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:07:17):**  before the money runs out I'll find people who understand why we do what we do and also  understand why it's important to do it.  Therefore will start to support us and as always in life things take a bit longer and  are a bit more expensive than you expect them.  You mean that it took a bit longer before the money ran out?  
**[0:07:34-0:07:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:07:34):**  No, the money didn't last that long unfortunately but yeah, so I guess they were sticking with  us or we were all believing in us making the next step and luckily towards I think the  end of 2020, yeah of course, I met a guy, Julius, from a company called Follow Food which  is like one of the most sustainable food brands in Germany and they started this Follow Fish  so you have basically traceable means of seeing where the food comes from and we met actually  
**[0:08:07-0:08:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:08:07):**  on the day where we got some more cows which was very exciting and he's just been the  most incredible human.  He said, look this is exactly what we're looking for, you're doing it, we want to  support you and they didn't do this because they wanted an equity stake or they didn't  do it because they want to brag about it, they just said, look we want to support stuff  
**[0:08:32-0:08:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:08:32):**  that you do and that's why we support you and he stepped up, if it wasn't for him we  wouldn't be here right now, I wouldn't be talking to you and you know this and probably  quite a few listeners who are trying to start something know this also, when you have an  idea and you have a vision and you have some energy to put that to life, you'll meet hundreds  of people that tell you how great they think you are and how great it is what you're doing  
**[0:08:58-0:09:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:08:58):**  and they're like, yeah I'm going to do this, I'm going to do that, but nothing's going  to happen, right?  If they have to sign a paycheck, suddenly it's all not that great anymore, right?  And so there I have to say, if it wasn't for him in that moment, that was a huge step for  us because that allowed us to actually continue, start to actually employ some of the interns  
**[0:09:17-0:09:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:09:17):**  that had believed to stay with us and that was sort of the first step and then shortly  thereafter we actually won a prize with a brand called ECOVA, they do like sustainable  washing soaps and this kind of stuff and they had been quite successful through Corona and  said, okay we want to give this back to nature-based solutions and I couldn't sleep at one point  and saw the advertisement and thought, why not apply?  
**[0:09:42-0:09:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:09:42):**  And then I totally forgot about it, I just wrote like something about holistic transformation  of a forest because we're here in Eastern Brandenburg have like 74% pine monoculture,  which is a ticking time bomb if you want, right?  So you think it's forest, like when you hear these numbers of the forest cover in Europe  has been growing, yeah there are trees, but if you drive through them and have been there,  
**[0:10:04-0:10:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:10:04):**  it's yeah, it's factory farm trees or it's like you say, biodiversity and life isn't  really active in that place, to say the least.  Yeah, it really is a ticking time bomb, like it's not able to withstand what's coming  and this is a fact, right?  But it's of such a great magnitude that people are not, like the politicians are not daring  
**[0:10:25-0:10:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:10:25):**  to say because we have this, I mean this is a different discussion, but we have the same  problem in agriculture as we have in forestry, like we have things that we actually do and  contribute with regards to climate or rural development activities which are not paid  for which of course, that money would be used to transform what we have to do in order to  withstand, whatever, you know the drill.  
**[0:10:47-0:10:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:10:47):**  Just out of in terms of context, your farm or the farm you manage and hopefully will  pass on to the next generations is 1000 hectare organic grain and now mixes and there are  trees coming to that as well, but 2000 hectares of forest.  So the forest piece is a big chunk of the farm, let's say.  Yeah, for sure and potentially of course, also such a big part of the economic feasibility  
**[0:11:11-0:11:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:11:11):**  of an area like this, but for that to happen, you have to invest for a long time and transform  the whole setup of the forest.  So you decided to write this for this prize on the forestry part, on this tick time, because  you were still half sleeping or because you thought let's not write about the farming  part, you thought this is a perfect nature-based solution.  
**[0:11:31-0:11:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:11:31):**  What made you write that piece on that and not talk about, okay, I would like more animals  and more electric fences?  Well, to be honest with you, because at that point we already kind of knew in which sort  of directions we want to go with regards to all the on-farm research and development as  far as agroforestry and specifically centropic agroforestry is concerned.  
**[0:11:52-0:11:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:11:52):**  We already were planning and thinking and talking about silvopasture models and so I  thought also something I learned in school.  I always spend time trying to understand the exam and the teacher to know what kind of  thing he's going to be asking for and in that sense also, I mean, I think there was five  different areas where you could apply for agriculture or land use was one, but there  
**[0:12:14-0:12:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:12:14):**  was one forest one and I thought, nobody's going to do forest.  The competition in the forest is going to be less big, so let's go for forest.  That's probably what I went looking for the shortcut.  But yeah, and at the same time, it is a huge problem for us and something that is just  above my head waiting to fall down.  
**[0:12:33-0:12:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:12:33):**  So it is something that is also…  You forgot about it and then you won.  So you basically suddenly out of nowhere you got a phone call, you got an email, what happened  there with that competition?  Yeah, suddenly I got this email and like, congratulations, you were in the finalist  
**[0:12:47-0:12:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:12:47):**  round of XYZ and I was like, I couldn't really remember because it was like three  to two months or whatever ago and the application to get into that space was just really, really  short.  I did it in like, I don't know, half an hour and then we were invited to actually  do a proper casual statement and a proper description and then we actually went into  
**[0:13:06-0:13:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:13:06):**  the planning progress and then had a presentation in front of the jury and all that.  And in the end, we were one of three projects that were selected out of 760 something, I  think.  And so that was another huge thing for us, which would basically enable us not only to  get started on the whole planning and the process of bringing that project to life,  
**[0:13:31-0:13:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:13:31):**  but of course we as a team knew, okay, the story continues at least for a bit.  And so that was basically then the next big step for us and now we're already in 2021  and there was then pretty much, let's say the most, the last piece of the puzzle, so  to say, to bring us on the stage where we wanted to be because we met people, incredible  people again, that basically I was telling my story in the sense of, you know, I've  
**[0:14:01-0:14:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:14:01):**  done this before and then I took over the farm and I realized technology as we know  it now is not the solution.  We have to focus on ecosystem health, soil health, and then looking at different models  all over the world and then deciding I want to bring them all to a place where it's just  incredibly difficult to do agriculture or forestry in the first place, to then test  
**[0:14:19-0:14:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:14:19):**  and develop on our fields, to gather the data and develop software and technology in order  to scale it on areas where we might add some value through this work.  And I said, look, but this is the thing is that you can't get any grants for this.  No one understands that innovation, system innovation, ecological innovation is just  as important as technological innovation.  
**[0:14:40-0:14:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:14:40):**  And then those guys was like, interesting, because these are the kind of projects that  we finance that don't get any other money.  And I was like, no, really?  Okay.  But you must have heard that before as well.  
**[0:14:51-0:14:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:14:51):**  And in this case, they actually followed through.  Like that's a...  Exactly.  I mean, yeah.  I mean, if you ask me what's the most and maybe the most important thing looking back  
**[0:15:01-0:15:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:15:01):**  or the most unique experience, it's just about the people.  Everyone's just chatting and everyone's just...  It's always about the people.  You need to find the right people.  It doesn't really matter what's the topic.  
**[0:15:13-0:15:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:15:13):**  It's just the people, right?  And this is for your team.  This is for your supporters.  This is for your partners.  This is, you know, just have people, great people around you.  
**[0:15:23-0:15:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:15:23):**  Anyway, so yeah, and that then enabled us to actually found a foundation together with  them that now we can actually use to do really the sort of professional scientific monitoring  and analysis and data gathering and all of that, which actually then builds on having  Syntropic Agroforestry Systems, different ones out on the field.  Because the idea is always to not only gather the data as far as, you know, how is the process  
**[0:15:50-0:15:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:15:50):**  of actually, let's say, designing an agroforestry system and what are the investment costs and  the harvest costs, as I say, or maintenance costs, but also what are the potential yield  estimates, right?  So how can I actually find an investable economic model?  This is one part of the coin, but the other part of the coin is what does really happen  
**[0:16:11-0:16:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:16:11):**  with carbon beneath agroforestry systems?  What does really happen with biodiversity?  What does really happen with the wind speed, the soil temperature, and all these things  that today we just talk about and we know they're relevant, but we don't include them  in the discussion of systems.  
**[0:16:25-0:16:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:16:25):**  You know they change, but we don't know how much, which direction do they change as a  benefit or not.  And this is all research and development.  And I think that we reached that conclusion at the end of this series as well.  And I invite everybody obviously to listen to it.  
**[0:16:40-0:16:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:16:40):**  I will put the link in the show notes that we can talk all about transition finance models,  but unless the business models of farmers improve, it's all empty talk.  And so we really got, and we'll unpack that a bit further in this conversation as well.  We need better off-take agreements.  We need better contracts.  
**[0:16:56-0:17:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:16:56):**  But before we even talk about that, we need to actually have agriculture models that work  with limited input, that work in the difficult context, that work in any context.  And for any context, in this case it's Brandenburg, someone needs to figure out what is the model,  what's the recipe.  And when you're figuring that out, you need grand capital, unless you have very deep pockets  
**[0:17:13-0:17:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:17:13):**  yourself and then you're financing your own grand capital, but you need research and development  and you need to be able to, because nobody will teach you how to do these models unless  you have a very advanced few farmers around you that have been doing this for 30 years.  If you're one of the first, you're going to pay the research and development costs.  And a few grand euros and dollars can go a very, very, very long way, but it is grand  
**[0:17:36-0:17:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:17:36):**  capital.  I mean, it might come back in some ecosystem services somewhere in the future, but you  need to figure out what syntropic agroforestry model works for you.  What is the integration of animals in this specific context, et cetera, et cetera.  People often forget, like, oh, let's finance all of it.  
**[0:17:51-0:17:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:17:51):**  I mean, this is a podcast talking about investing, but before we can invest, there's a lot of,  I mean, if you look at the rocket space, the electric car space, if you look at the electronic  space we're using to record this, it's all been financed by research and development,  partly private, partly public.  So let's not step over that fundamental piece of grand capital there or research and development  
**[0:18:11-0:18:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:18:11):**  very patient capital that can help enable people like you to find the recipes at work.  And then we can talk about scale and financing it and all of that.  Yeah.  I mean, I couldn't agree more.  It's so beautiful to see all the attention that agriculture now gets and of course, specifically  
**[0:18:29-0:18:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:18:29):**  regenerative agriculture gets, but like, I think we put a lot of pressure on the farmers  that are in really different situations to what we believe regenerative agriculture can  be as a key and solution to everything.  And I truly believe that it of course can be, but we can't forget that most farmers  are stuck in a system.  
**[0:18:47-0:18:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:18:47):**  They have been forced, not forced, but they have been-  Natched.  Asked to produce as much as they can for the cheapest price for many, many years.  And this system has been supported by billions and billions and billions.  And now we turn to the farmers to say, oh, by the way, can you maybe do a bit more for  
**[0:19:07-0:19:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:19:07):**  animal husbandry?  And why not do a bit more biodiversity?  And you're like, sorry, what?  And then I was like, okay, well, let's invest in regenerative agriculture.  Well, before we invest in anything, we need proven business models.  
**[0:19:20-0:19:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:19:20):**  We need calculation and data that we can actually use to assess if it makes worth to do X, Y,  Z in a regenerative sense.  And there's so much work that still needs to be done and data still needs to be gathered  and also technology and software that needs to be changed.  And specifically, we have to look towards politics and companies and all of those big  
**[0:19:40-0:19:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:19:40):**  decisions that are not down at the farmer's level, but in the European gap and so forth.  And it's always easy to say, oh, let the farmers do it.  No, it doesn't work like that.  Let's change some of the really big questions that we hardly ever talk about in that sense.  Scientific community, education, access to land, access to finance, all these things.  
**[0:20:01-0:20:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:20:01):**  You of course talk about a lot, but I don't as much.  We're niche in a niche.  And so let's unpack a few of those.  In terms of the conclusion we reached at that point, in terms of offtake agreements, how  has that changed over the last year and a half?  
**[0:20:16-0:20:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:20:16):**  Has that changed?  First of all, let's ask the question, are you still in the organic commodity market?  Is that something you're working on?  What's been there?  I mean, are we going to see your face on a package anytime soon of flour and milk with  
**[0:20:31-0:20:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:20:31):**  your grain, like your smiley face with your hipster face with your hat?  What's the progress there?  Well, I have to disappoint you with that.  But yeah, I mean, we have been working on that and we have been trying to see what is  possible, but it's, you know, the world is not waiting for you in a sense.  
**[0:20:50-0:20:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:20:50):**  Like there has to be, you know, you have to have a really good strategy.  You have to have a good idea.  But I mean, the main product that we are currently producing is grain and flour, for example,  is not for most a product that is specifically sexy with regards to, I don't know, an old  wine from a certain age that, you know, X, Y, Z.  
**[0:21:10-0:21:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:21:10):**  Like of course you can go into that and take it for that quality and tell that story.  And you have a special stone mill and you have, you know, the starch breaking down in  a different sense and then it's beautiful and tasty and all that, for sure.  But communicate that on a package where someone takes maybe one or two seconds to look at  and they also going to look at the price like 100%.  
**[0:21:36-0:21:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:21:36):**  So it's a tough product.  It's an incredible product.  I think it has an insane potential also because it's as a staple, it can carry that message  so beautifully.  So it's definitely something I'm still figuring out, thinking about, talking about and seeing  
**[0:21:54-0:21:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:21:54):**  where we can go with it.  But it's not something that you just do and then it works.  Create a brand.  No, no.  I don't think it will be out now, but at some point we'll be interviewing Wildfarmed, which  
**[0:22:05-0:22:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:22:05):**  is an interesting, Wildfarming, two different companies in the UK working a lot on flour  and direct seeding and integration of animals.  And they have built that connection to the bakeries, et cetera.  So there's that pool because without that, yeah, you're going to be just the next package  on the shelf and probably very expensive compared to, but actually the right price, but very  
**[0:22:25-0:22:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:22:25):**  expensive compared to the others.  And that's just not going to fly.  And the amount of time it takes to create a brand is something that will happen, but  maybe not now.  So let's talk about on the farm, what has happened.  
**[0:22:36-0:22:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:22:36):**  There were some animals on the farm, there were definitely some cows, there were some  chickens during the series, I think we recorded.  But if you had to give an overview now of the different experiments or what's the craziest  experiment that's been going on for the last year and a half, if you had to pick one.  Yeah, so I mean, as far as the team is concerned, you know, we have now grown to a solid team  
**[0:22:57-0:23:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:22:57):**  of well, all together throughout the different companies, we have more than 25 full time  employees.  And we have an average between five and 15 interns basically.  And then on special, let's say planting occasions, a lot of people, which is great, because you're  quite remote and having energy around you, I think for many farmers is what keeps them  
**[0:23:19-0:23:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:23:19):**  going.  And I think that's the case in your case as well.  Yeah, I mean, 100%.  You know, I think this is what where I take so much power and energy from is to see like  the people that come here and you know, they are just, they're just incredible people.  
**[0:23:31-0:23:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:23:31):**  They are gifted, they are smart, they are hardworking, you know, they have their their  hearts at the right spot.  And you know, they believe in what we do.  And they believe that also, there's hope, you know, like, I think that is something  that is so crucial, like, what is just so hopeful is that these people that come here,  
**[0:23:48-0:23:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:23:48):**  you know, they could earn three times, two times, four times what you can pay as a farmer.  But what they have realized is that agriculture is simply put, like the biggest instrument  to overcome some of the biggest problems of our time.  You know, it's not just primary production, it's health, it's climate adaptation, of  course, it's biodiversity, it's development of rural areas, it's culture, it's education,  
**[0:24:12-0:24:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:24:12):**  it's all of it, right.  And that's what we need to understand globally, and it has to start politicians, but it goes  beyond that, of course.  Because if we understand that this is what agriculture is, we of course, would look at  it differently, we would see it differently, we would finance it differently, the scientific  
**[0:24:27-0:24:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:24:27):**  community would go into different direction, the focus on machines and technology and software  would go into a different direction.  But it's not yet happening.  But you know, this is really what has to come across.  So I mean, our team now, we have two people, Hosea and Renke that are heading our agroforestry  
**[0:24:42-0:24:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:24:42):**  system, our agroforestry team, Jojo's who's heading the tree nursery, Lawrence who's  doing the compost, Berger who's doing the holistic grazing, Max who's in charge of  the whole scientific data gathering, Lea with, I mean, the list just goes on, you know, and  we are just incredibly lucky to have these most incredible people that, yeah.  Show it out.  
**[0:25:06-0:25:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:25:06):**  I'm just really, yeah, I'm just emotionally touched by being here in this space and having  them with us, around us.  And also us as a team with people that have been here for many years, from the agriculture,  from the forestry or in the office, now starting to grow together so much more and having more  time to actually speak about that shared vision and that shared idea yet being so differently.  
**[0:25:30-0:25:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:25:30):**  How's it going?  That integration of the old squad basically that has been there for many, because you  as a large farming company, also before you started on the whole regenerative journey,  obviously you employed a lot of people, I think over 20.  And then you come bring this young bunch in because the people you just mentioned are  
**[0:25:49-0:25:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:25:49):**  not over 40, let's say, and they come with all these crazy ideas about integration of  trees and animals and life and mycorrhiza and compost and et cetera, et cetera.  How is that integration or has it happened?  Like how is that symbiotic relationship going and is that really tough?  Because it's a thing that many people see.  
**[0:26:06-0:26:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:26:06):**  I mean, it's nice to come in with new energy, but it can also hit a wall because you might  have come in with too much energy and are trying to disturb systems that have been going  the same direction for a long time.  Is that a worry?  Is that going well?  
**[0:26:20-0:26:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:26:20):**  What's your experience there of these two, almost two different worlds?  That's a really good question.  And it's one that I haven't figured out particularly well for quite a few years, but now really  working on it, this is really my focus now.  And to be honest with you, I think what makes us as a group here in Madlitz strong is that  
**[0:26:39-0:26:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:26:39):**  we are exactly what you described, so diverse.  We have people with different experiences, different backgrounds, different visions and  philosophies and that is really so crucial for the work that we do.  Because I mean, what we are essentially focusing on is to gather data and information and wanting  to find ways that we can then scale regenerative agriculture models and instruments on huge  
**[0:27:04-0:27:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:27:04):**  areas, not only in ours, but make that data accessible to other people.  And in that process, it's important to not drift off in your little eco warrior bubble,  but you have to be on the ground.  You have to understand the worries and the stuff that goes through farmers' heads.  You have to understand why they might emotionally have a problem with one of the things that  
**[0:27:27-0:27:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:27:27):**  you're trying to do.  You just need to be there.  And having that group that is so diverse and having that tension sometimes and the discussion  sometimes about certain things and ways and philosophies is what keeps you being aware  and on the ground.  
**[0:27:44-0:27:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:27:44):**  So I think that is really, really making us very strong.  And it's also beautiful because if you manage to put that together in a room and if you  manage to establish communication lines where they can actually share and also respect themselves  or each other, good things come from that.  That's how creativity is happening, I guess.  
**[0:28:03-0:28:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:28:03):**  And for me, I think there's many ways to bake a cake.  For me personally, we were struggling with the companies for a good few years, and it  was not a nice time for me.  It was really, really tough.  And we started with all, let's say, the first regenerative ideas and things that we did  
**[0:28:26-0:28:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:28:26):**  outside.  And back in the day, of course, we didn't have much to show for, right?  It kind of grew and started to grow.  And then suddenly there's some interns and some people also there.  And then of course, it's difficult and different in the beginning.  
**[0:28:41-0:28:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:28:41):**  But we have, of course, come quite a far way and now can actually show a lot out there.  And so having gone through all of that and having actually established now, let's say,  an organization set up that allows us to look to the future and to actually build on that,  which we weren't able to at all in the last four years, now was the time for me actually  to say, okay, now is the time where I bring them together and we focus more on communication  
**[0:29:09-0:29:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:29:09):**  and we focus more on certain ways that we want to do and be with each other and live  and learn from each other, which before that I just had no time to.  It's my fault in the end of the day, the fish starts smelling at the head.  I don't know how you say that saying in English.  But no idea, but it sounds good.  
**[0:29:32-0:29:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:29:32):**  It's not easy for sure.  And it's a process.  And you're not ever going to make everyone happy at the same time.  That's not how people are.  There's going to be people who are annoyed.  
**[0:29:43-0:29:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:29:43):**  There's going to be things that don't go well.  And that's part of life.  And we are trying to transform 3,000 hectares of agriculture and forestry.  Anyone who thinks that that process is beautiful, that within that transformation phase, all  the communication is going well and everything is going well and everything is always clean,  
**[0:30:06-0:30:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:30:06):**  no, it's not going to happen.  A startup who is in a certain phase is not going to have perfect processes also.  It's part of what we have to do.  This is why it is also hard.  It's very messy.  
**[0:30:18-0:30:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:30:18):**  And that has to fit.  That has to fit.  And for sure it doesn't fit for everyone.  And that's OK.  There's no hard feelings there.  
**[0:30:26-0:30:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:30:26):**  So let's talk a bit about what's happening on the ground, in the ground, above the ground.  I saw some crazy pictures on Instagram of a lot of fallen trees or cut trees.  What's been happening there in the forest?  Did you get a very specific, very concentrated wind blow going around?  I have to say, I was there yesterday or two days before and I haven't been there for a  
**[0:30:44-0:30:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:30:44):**  week or one and a half weeks.  And I'm just in awe what they've again pulled out of the pocket.  So actually, this is the forest transformation project that I was referring to earlier from  eCOVA, where we basically have identified five different plots of between one and a  half and 2.1 hectares each within a very homogeneous pine monoculture forest that we own.  
**[0:31:12-0:31:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:31:12):**  And those five we have then designed in different transformation styles.  So one is basically just like the zero plot.  So we just put a fence around it, don't do anything just to see what would happen if  we don't do anything, basically.  And then all the other plots are starting from quite easily scalable because it's not  
**[0:31:30-0:31:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:31:30):**  very difficult to do.  It's quite cheap to do, like the transformation cutting down some trees, let's say, to become  more and more specialised, more and more diversity, more and more labour intensive to then actually  end in the last and the most incredible transformation plot where we bring in all the knowledge of  centropic agriculture into forest transformation.  
**[0:31:52-0:31:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:31:52):**  So Renke, our head of agroforestry, works very closely with Ernst Gutsch in this project,  for example.  They've been in contact back and forth, like how we should transform it, what should we  do and which seeds and which trees and grass and this and that.  So that's really what those pictures that you saw where we have like this plot.  
**[0:32:11-0:32:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:32:11):**  Just describe it visually.  I will put photos if I can find them on Instagram.  But if not, just visually take us on how does that most extreme plot look like now and how  would it potentially look like in the future?  But make it visual because we are on audio.  
**[0:32:27-0:32:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:32:27):**  You're much more gifted in this than I do.  But basically, if you think of the pine monoculture, right, you just see it's actually kind of  beautiful in a weird, disgusting sense.  But you just have flat soil and you have all the trees which are just like really, really  straight.  
**[0:32:44-0:32:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:32:44):**  And the canopy at the beginning, at the top, is touching each other.  So basically, it's kind of dark underneath.  And so you see down the tree lines for miles, like you can see so far down there, right?  Because they're all straight.  They're all planted.  
**[0:32:57-0:32:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:32:57):**  They look the same time.  They're all planted in the same rows.  And there's nothing underneath, obviously growing.  And everyone is unique, but they all look the same, if you know what I mean.  Anyway, so within that monoculture tree structure, we just go in and take out like a square,  
**[0:33:11-0:33:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:33:11):**  so to say, or identify a square.  And within the centropic transformation of that pine monoculture, we take out a third  100% of the trees.  So we take them all down.  There's only one birch tree still standing there.  
**[0:33:26-0:33:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:33:26):**  And from those trees that have been taken down there, actually around 40% we take out  of the forest and will sell.  But 60% of the trees that we took down have then been aligned, basically in lines, left  and right, of prepared seed beds.  And the seed beds then have either a very diverse mix of different trees and shrubs  
**[0:33:52-0:34:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:33:52):**  and bushes and a few other things planted in there, or also, of course, proper trees  and shrubs, which are not only seeds, but also actually visible as such.  And so in that, let's say reorganization model, we basically then plant through seeds  and trees an incredibly diverse mix of forest.  And all of that is basically prepared by mulching the trees next to those seed beds.  
**[0:34:23-0:34:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:34:23):**  So if you stand in there, you just see basically no tree around.  And you have these weird lines where you have really big tree chunks lining up left and  right, left and right.  So it's really incredible because your eye has never seen something like that.  So if you stand in there, you're really irritated in a sense.  
**[0:34:39-0:34:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:34:39):**  But then if you have Henke telling you exactly what's happening where your mind is just blown  off because there's just so much thought he put in it.  And Ernst, of course, is from another planet when it comes to designing those kind of ecosystems,  right?  And then from there, if you turn around 108 degrees, you still have some tree structure,  
**[0:35:02-0:35:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:35:02):**  but where we only took out 60% of the trees.  So you still have some trees there and the canopy is still there, but it's much more  lighter.  And underneath the same thing, you also got those rows which have been prepared with this  preparation tool and then seeded and mulched again left and right.  
**[0:35:19-0:35:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:35:19):**  So it's just insane what work went in there.  And the next years are going to be so interesting because we have all of these projects are  scientifically monitored and really strongly analyzed through different senses, of course,  as far as the soil.  The soil is concerned, of course, the soil biology, but even more sort of water relevant  
**[0:35:45-0:35:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:35:45):**  topics, the whole biodiversity side of it, the economic analysis of it.  So it's really an outrageous project and we're just very much looking forward to see it in  a few years because of course it will change over time.  And there's so much valuable info that we need actually to assess forest transformation  techniques and also put a price tag to values that forests can take with regards to biodiversity,  
**[0:36:11-0:36:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:36:11):**  with regards to cooling effects, with regards to water storage and carbon storage and all  these things.  Today we talk about it a lot, but we can't really put a price tag on it.  So that's part of what we're doing.  And then on the agriculture side, we have established a few more systems.  
**[0:36:28-0:36:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:36:28):**  We've actually started in 2021 with our own sort of syntropic tree nursery where Jojo has  basically from scratch built the most amazing, beautifully shaped tree nursery where we've  done roughly nearly 2000 different fruit trees, specifically like apple and pear and plum  and those trees that he started to develop.  In the beginning of last year, we've actually planted in our first key line syntropic agroforestry  
**[0:37:00-0:37:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:37:00):**  system towards the end of last year.  So we have now a beautiful key line system that's on roughly 3.5 hectares.  We have planted a large silver pastoral syntropic agroforestry systems on six hectares where  we only have five meters between row and row.  We've done a very interesting syntropic seed agroforestry system where we actually just  
**[0:37:22-0:37:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:37:22):**  plant the underlying growth parts of the fruit trees that later we will put together with  the fruit variety.  So that is very, very interesting with regards to having a system that is really, really  location and climate adapted because it kind of grows here from the very start.  That's really interesting.  
**[0:37:42-0:37:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:37:42):**  Our whole composting facility is just going wild, Lawrence.  I remember visiting in October and Lawrence was saying you were doing some trials around  seed coating and the grain seeds that just went in the winter grain, if I'm correct,  with a fermented compost extract, if I'm correct.  The effect that you saw in a couple of weeks, I don't know if it carried through through  
**[0:38:09-0:38:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:38:09):**  the winter, was already, of course, there was to be scientifically backed up.  But the visual effect in terms of root growth, like three weeks after you coated the seeds  was stunning.  And of course, you have to see how it harvests, how it's, etc., etc.  But just for the dummy, like me, seeing that root growth, that difference in three weeks  
**[0:38:27-0:38:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:38:27):**  between the control piece of grain and the plot that was, or most of the other that was  coated with this crazy fermented compost extract was just stunning to see the potential there.  This was just the first year.  And I'm imagining the amount of experimentation there is just going to go through the roof.  Yeah, I mean, absolutely.  
**[0:38:45-0:38:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:38:45):**  The whole, I think as far as the compost is concerned, it's so obvious that, you know,  with every day and every thing you learn, or you try, or maybe even understand a bit  more, you realize that you don't know anything.  Like you are just in a universe of knowing nothing, basically, right?  And that is really the beauty of it.  
**[0:39:08-0:39:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:39:08):**  Because like, there is just, you know, we're just scraping the surface of what's possible,  right?  And I am 100% convinced that we don't need anything as a farmer.  We just need to understand much more of the complexity of the ecosystem and the interdependencies  of different components in ecosystems and all the potential that we can gather through  
**[0:39:32-0:39:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:39:32):**  all the old knowledge that we already had.  I mean, it was all there.  And I think if we come back to that, you know, I think that's really one of the biggest,  yeah, steps for us to become independent farmers again.  And you know, everything today out there makes us dependent.  
**[0:39:48-0:39:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:39:48):**  And like, that's the worst that can happen.  Like, it's really the worst that can happen is more dependent farmers.  And also to see Lawrence who started as an intern, you know, he is an auto-detective  compost expert now.  I don't think there's many that he's like a sponge, you know, like a sponge from microbes  
**[0:40:08-0:40:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:40:08):**  and fungi.  I would argue there are not many at that level in Europe.  Of course, I'm going to get emails about this.  I mean, I don't know anything.  So I can easily say that, right?  
**[0:40:18-0:40:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:40:18):**  I don't know anything either.  But it seems like, I mean, there are not many that are able to absorb and play between brackets,  but play in the best sense of word at this scale.  And that combination plus, of course, the rest of the team makes a very powerful combination.  Like this is not, I'm doing a few plots here and that's it.  
**[0:40:35-0:40:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:40:35):**  I'm actually able to, in all of these, to take it to a scale that hardly anybody in  Europe can simply because of the context.  And in this case, you can, you will, and you have to as well.  And so it's very, and to finalize, are you organizing, I mean, I would say to people,  go and visit farms.  
**[0:40:52-0:40:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:40:52):**  Are there tours coming up this year?  Can people go and come and experience in a structured way?  Don't always just show up at Benedict's.  He's very busy, but are there going to be structured ways for people to experience these,  the composting, the animals, the centropic fields, the crazy forest experiments, et cetera?  
**[0:41:09-0:41:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:41:09):**  Well, I mean, let's say we're working on it.  I mean, we, of course we do have like farm tours and people that come and come and visit,  which hasn't always been easy through Corona and so forth.  And that's something definitely that we want to do more because it's just also really beautiful  to see people react to this kind of stuff.  
**[0:41:29-0:41:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:41:29):**  Because you know, you hear so much shit out there and everything's going bad and like,  climate change and, you know, there's just not many good news out there.  But so I think people are really longing for some hope and they're longing for just to  see some, I don't know, a place where there's just people who are really happy and most  of the time, I guess, but who are just doing something because they really love it and  
**[0:41:54-0:41:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:41:54):**  they do it because it has an insane potential.  And that's the spirit I think that you can also experience here.  So I love doing it.  You know, if I have people coming around and sometimes on the weekend, I'm like, okay,  let's go and we jump on the mule and drive around.  
**[0:42:10-0:42:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:42:10):**  So you know, it's with all the shit that you also have doing it, this is some of the upside  that you have that people are just really happy to see it.  And that's some form of payback, but yet, of course, it gets more and more and then  it becomes more difficult to manage that.  So actually, we are in the process of thinking how can we find a certain, as you said, like  
**[0:42:30-0:42:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:42:30):**  structured way of doing it, but we're definitely working on it.  And the last question on I always say last question and never is on the scientific side,  like the data collection.  How has that changed?  I mean, it changed dramatically.  
**[0:42:42-0:42:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:42:42):**  You mentioned it a few times, but just for people to understand that this is a giant  experiment or many experiments, but actually being followed quite closely by many people  and over the next years even more.  What's been happening on the data collection side with all these experiments you're running  basically on the cloud?  
**[0:42:58-0:43:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:42:58):**  I think what's really incredible also to see is like the interest in the scientific community.  When I started really like, I don't know, 2018, 2019, I asked around, of course, and  I wrote like grant proposals and stuff like that.  And no one ever was interested like they were just like, no, okay, well, yeah, you can pay  for it, not really.  
**[0:43:19-0:43:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:43:19):**  And now the same kind of institutes and organizations and universities are like, oh, wow, you're  doing that?  Oh, great.  Can we like, we'd love to monitor and gather the data and stuff.  So you can really see how it has just picked up.  
**[0:43:33-0:43:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:43:33):**  It'd be like something that used to just be looked at as I don't know, something eco,  whatever.  Now they're like, ah, yeah, it really makes sense.  Like there's also there's an economic rationale behind trying to understand complex ecosystems.  So yeah, perfect.  
**[0:43:49-0:43:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:43:49):**  Let's go.  So that's really beautiful.  And I'm actually really, really grateful and happy for the partners that we have, the  KTBL, the New School Institute, Enlightenment Institutes, there's really, you know, just  great partners that help us gather some of the information and the data.  
**[0:44:05-0:44:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:44:05):**  And to be honest with you, even more so like, we have so many initiatives now in Germany  who do very similar things that we do, and they also gather the data.  So I think that's really great because it's not just us, it's like a lot of different  cool and progressive initiatives in Germany that are looking in the same kind of philosophies  and bringing different universities and different institutes into it also.  
**[0:44:30-0:44:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:44:30):**  So I think there's a huge momentum also in the gathering of data.  And then of course, which is like for us, like a really strong focus is the question  of what do we do with the data?  Like we need the data, of course, but then, you know, we still live in the 21st century.  So where we really bring it together is when we now use that to actually develop software,  
**[0:44:51-0:44:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:44:51):**  to actually develop machines, to actually develop all of the things that we need in  order to do scalable agriculture.  I strongly believe that in the future, there will not be less people on the ground, there  will be more people on the ground, just because of us realizing what agriculture actually  is.  
**[0:45:11-0:45:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:45:11):**  But we still need to find ways that makes it economically feasible.  We still need to find ways to have that being a work that is good for your health and not  if you have a bad back after 20 years.  And so the machines and the technology is a potential to, of course, help us immensely.  But it's not to keep perversing on an exploitative ecosystem, only thinking blindly about yields.  
**[0:45:40-0:45:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:45:40):**  It's about understanding the complex ecosystems and what we need in a specific area, in a  specific context, to produce food that is not only good for the people and the people  that work producing it, but also kind with the animals and good for the ecosystem, and  thereby actually increasing the soil and growing biodiversity and just being beautiful.  And it tastes good.  
**[0:46:03-0:46:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:46:03):**  It tastes good, yeah.  And I think that's really also the next big step, people stepping in that are gifted in  different areas and saying, OK, well, OK, I see a complex, syntropic agroforestry system  where we also do grain between the tree rows and then the cows come in and then the chickens  come in and then we harvest berries from the systems.  
**[0:46:23-0:46:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:46:23):**  OK, that's the system I need to develop a technology for, a software for.  OK, perfect.  Do you have some data?  Yes.  All right, let's go.  
**[0:46:30-0:46:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:46:30):**  I think, you know, that's it's going to be beautiful.  I think it's a perfect place to end, Vanne Dijk.  I want to thank you so much for your energy and all the work you bring to the space and  also for taking an hour this morning to, in your very, very busy day, you have to go to  a TV shoot after this, to talk to us and update a bit on what has been happening.  
**[0:46:49-0:46:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:46:49):**  So thank you so much.  And we'll be checking in hopefully soon again.  Yeah, thank you so much also for your very kind words, which I really not, you know,  I'm just the clown that talks about it, but it's really the people out there and many  others that should get the praise.  
**[0:47:03-0:47:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:47:03):**  But likewise, I want to thank you for all the work that you've done in the space and  the amazing people that you bring together.  I think that energy is going to get us quite far.  So thank you very much.  I hope so.  
**[0:47:15-0:47:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:47:15):**  If you found the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  It's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  
**[0:47:34-0:47:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:47:34):**  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  join my membership community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on gumroad.com slash investing region egg or in the description  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  
**[0:47:59-0:48:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:47:59):**  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to put money  
**[0:48:18-0:48:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:48:18):**  to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011 and recording  these podcasts since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework, what to focus on with the podcast, how have  we picked interviewees, what questions should you ask, what is happening in the space, what  
**[0:48:40-0:48:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:48:40):**  should you read, what should you listen, what should you watch, how to approach this space.  For whom is this course?  You, the soil builders and investors in the space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  
**[0:49:00-0:49:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:49:00):**  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management, consultants, etc.  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  
**[0:49:20-0:49:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:49:20):**  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you.  And I'm very aware that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very  
**[0:49:33-0:49:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:49:33):**  different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  
**[0:49:44-0:49:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:49:44):**  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides.  So you don't have to write along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  
**[0:50:08-0:50:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:50:08):**  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  
**[0:50:24-0:50:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:50:24):**  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  
**[0:50:39-0:50:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/benedikt-boesel#t=0:50:39):**  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  