### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2022-00-05)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  What if every restoration project, which could be a farm, a forest or a wetland, is registered  on a science-based open data platform and thus the progress, or lack of it, is made  
**[0:00:23-0:00:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:00:23):**  transparent for all of us to follow?  We covered what satellite data can already tell us and what is coming in the future and  why Clara is so interested in bioacoustics and biodiversity.  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture.  Investing as if the planet mattered.  
**[0:00:43-0:00:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:00:43):**  Podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  
**[0:01:03-0:01:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:01:03):**  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we, as investors, big and small, and consumers, start paying much  more attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  In March last year we launched our membership community to make it easy for fans to support  our work and so many of you have joined as a member.  
**[0:01:21-0:01:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:01:21):**  We've launched different types of benefits, exclusive content, Q&A webinars with former  guests, ask me anything sessions plus so much more to come in the future.  For more information on the different tiers, benefits and how to become a member, check  gumroad.com slash investing region egg or find the link below.  Thank you.  
**[0:01:41-0:01:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:01:41):**  Welcome to another episode.  Today with Clara Roe, the CEO of Restore.  Restore is a science-based open data platform to support and connect the global restoration  movement.  Welcome, Clara.  
**[0:01:52-0:01:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:01:52):**  Thank you.  Thanks for having me.  And to start with the personal question I always like to ask, how did you end up in  the restoration movement and why are you focusing on restoration of soil and also obviously  of other places, but how did you end up in the restoration movement?  
**[0:02:08-0:02:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:02:08):**  Great question.  It's been a whirlwind year since I started at Restore.  So it's always fun to kind of look back and remind myself how I got involved in the first  place.  Before I was at Restore, I worked in sustainable supply chains.  
**[0:02:23-0:02:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:02:23):**  So I worked for a nonprofit that supported companies who were trying to figure out how  to get deforestation and exploitation of people out of their supply chains, palm oil and cocoa  and soy.  I worked mostly in Latin America.  And what I started to see was that over time, in addition to the no deforestation commitments  
**[0:02:43-0:02:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:02:43):**  that companies were making, there was more and more interest in figuring out how to integrate  their forest and ecosystem related commitments with their climate commitments.  And ultimately what that means is restoration of nature of some sort within supply chains  on farms.  And so when Tom Crowther, the founder of Restore, reached out to me over a year ago to say that  
**[0:03:07-0:03:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:03:07):**  he was starting this organization and would I like to come on to lead it, it felt like  a perfect transition in terms of being able to approach restoration from a different perspective.  From a science-based and tool-based and digital perspective.  And so, I mean, I described it in a sentence or a sentence and a half, but what is your,  I hate to say elevator pitch, but like Restore in a few sentences or a few more sentences,  
**[0:03:32-0:03:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:03:32):**  how would you describe it to your grandparents, your children or anybody that is interested  but doesn't really have the background?  Right.  So for me, whenever I talk about what Restore is, I always have to start by talking about  what restoration is, what nature restoration is.  
**[0:03:48-0:03:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:03:48):**  And as we think about it at Restore, restoration is really a continuum that ranges from sustainable  agricultural practices and agroforestry to protecting existing ecosystems to restoring  in some form or another wetlands and peatlands and forests.  And so it involves many, many ecosystems.  I think often we just think about planting trees, but there are of course many other  
**[0:04:14-0:04:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:04:14):**  native ecosystems to protect and to restore.  And it involves many different kinds of intervention.  So it's not just putting a seedling in the ground.  It's also often just fencing off an area and allowing it to restore itself.  And there's this huge potential in that range of nature restoration, one, to be able to  
**[0:04:34-0:04:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:04:34):**  draw down carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.  So restoration of forests alone has the potential to draw down about 30% of carbon emissions  and it has the potential to prevent about 60% of expected biodiversity loss.  And it could improve food security for over a billion people around the world.  And so fundamentally Restore's mission is to unlock this potential of nature restoration  
**[0:05:01-0:05:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:05:01):**  for biodiversity and for climate and for people.  And we're doing this by bringing together every nature restoration project around the  globe on a single open access platform.  Believe it or not, there's actually nowhere you can go today to find all the restoration  work that's happening.  
**[0:05:18-0:05:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:05:18):**  You know, whether that's at a large scale or a very small scale, there's just no one  single place.  We don't know where it's all happening.  And so we are bringing those projects together.  We're offering free standardized ecological data to these projects to help them with their  
**[0:05:33-0:05:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:05:33):**  decision making.  We're offering best in class satellite monitoring, which allows them to track progress.  And also, you know, it brings transparency to these restoration efforts around the world.  And by bringing projects together, we're also allowing them to learn from each other and  to gain visibility, you know, whether that's to funders, to other projects, to technical  
**[0:05:54-0:05:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:05:54):**  tools who might be able to provide them support.  So in a way, you can think of us sort of as a Google Maps for restoration, you know, really  putting restoration together on the map.  What has been the biggest surprise over the last year or general, but what has been your  biggest surprise once you started leading restore in terms of I mean, the attention,  
**[0:06:15-0:06:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:06:15):**  let's say, has exploded for restoration, regeneration, restoring things in general, but that's maybe  not a surprise that maybe we were just waiting for it.  But what has been your biggest surprise over the last, let's say, 12 months?  You know, I think that for me, the incredible positivity in this space has been surprising.  In, you know, compared to the negative energies in climate in general.  
**[0:06:38-0:06:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:06:38):**  Yeah, well, yeah, you know, there's, there's a lot of reasons to be worried about the direction  that the planet is going.  But restoration is this very positive space, right?  It's not focused on simply protecting what's there and watching, honestly, a lot of what's  there disappear.  
**[0:06:56-0:07:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:06:56):**  It's focused on how can we not only keep what is there today intact, but also grow back,  right?  And so there's just a lot of excitement.  There's a lot of potential.  We hear because we're bringing together all these restoration projects, we get to hear  
**[0:07:12-0:07:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:07:12):**  from people all over the world.  Some people who are just doing this as a hobby in their backyard and, you know, communities  who have been doing this for decades and are excited to connect and to share the work that  they're doing.  So it just feels like a very positive, buzzing place to be.  
**[0:07:28-0:07:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:07:28):**  And what is, I think investors always like to ask the question of why now?  Like what is it that this moment in time, apart from all the attention, and that's,  I mean, biodiversity finally gets attention, soil gets attention, etc, etc, trees get a  lot of attention.  But why, let's say from a technology perspective, or why is this the moment to launch something  
**[0:07:48-0:07:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:07:48):**  and to build something like Restore?  Well, we're running out of time to be able to fight the climate crisis, to be able to  fight global poverty as climate also compounds that, to be able to prevent species extinctions.  And technology can be an enabler.  And for me, enable is that key word, right?  
**[0:08:09-0:08:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:08:09):**  Restoration is the center of what we do.  We're just simply trying to, through technology, enable that to happen more efficiently, more  effectively, more responsibly.  There's a lot of money on the line.  There's a lot of money that needs to be invested in order for restoration and nature-based  
**[0:08:27-0:08:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:08:27):**  solutions more broadly to be able to contribute what they need to contribute to address the  climate crisis by 2050.  I've heard a lot of numbers thrown around, but 8 trillion is what is estimated is needed  to be able to unlock the potential of nature-based solutions between now and 2050.  And so we need to do that, as I say, efficiently, effectively, responsibly.  
**[0:08:52-0:08:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:08:52):**  And that requires transparency.  And at Restore, that's what we're trying to bring to this movement right now.  And what do you see your role as a restore to, let's say, the financial world, the world  that wants to put money to work in an investing way, is not necessarily the grand side of  things.  
**[0:09:09-0:09:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:09:09):**  What can you bring already now or like investors that are listening, but what are you also  planning to bring in the near future?  Yeah.  You know, today we're making visible many, many projects that never were visible in the  past.  
**[0:09:22-0:09:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:09:22):**  Some of the restoration projects on our platform already have funding.  Some of them are seeking ongoing funding.  Sometimes they're seeking philanthropic contributions, but sometimes they're open for investment.  And so if you are an investor interested in contributing to nature restoration in some  way, again, across that continuum that I described, Restore is a place that allows you to start  
**[0:09:44-0:09:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:09:44):**  looking for where you might be able to invest and also guarantee that there's transparency  in the long term about what's actually happening on the ground where investments are occurring.  And as we build, we want to make that easier and easier and easier for the transparency  piece for searching, right, for projects to support really building kind of a smart infrastructure  for the way that restoration projects can be connected to funders and that real accountability  
**[0:10:12-0:10:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:10:12):**  happens between that in terms of progress made.  There's a lot to unpack there.  And in terms of technology, like how do you make sure that transparency is there?  Is that a big part?  And maybe that's why it's happening now, like the satellite part of it, that you make sure  
**[0:10:27-0:10:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:10:27):**  like you cannot choose to not be covered by a satellite, like you will be followed in  a good way or a bad way, but in a good way.  In this case, is that the core of that?  Like we can transparently follow these projects, even if the projects itself or the companies  or the farms, etc. don't supply data?  
**[0:10:43-0:10:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:10:43):**  It is.  That's a really core piece of it.  So when projects join Restore, they have two options.  They can join publicly or they can join privately.  So if they join privately, the Restore data is really just for them.  
**[0:10:56-0:10:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:10:56):**  And no one else can see the boundaries of their project.  But if they join publicly, which many, many projects are doing now, anyone can see the  boundary of the work that they're doing.  And therefore the satellite imagery that we have compiled that is available globally is  available to be able to compare with the boundaries of that work.  
**[0:11:15-0:11:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:11:15):**  And there's a number of different sources of satellite imagery that we use.  But perhaps the most impactful in terms of the visual progress is the Maxar imagery that  we're hosting.  It goes back to 2011 and there's updates every few years.  And that's half a meter resolution.  
**[0:11:32-0:11:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:11:32):**  So 50 centimeters in some areas, actually 30 centimeters resolution, which essentially  allows you to see every tree.  And that's an incredibly powerful tool from a transparency perspective.  And just to give people perspective, that's something that's relatively recent that you  have access to, that we as society have access to this kind of level, or is it something  
**[0:11:55-0:11:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:11:55):**  has been around for a while?  Or was it very expensive?  Like, why is this happening now?  So I mean, the satellites are getting better and better, like almost every day, it feels  like right, there's launches of new satellites with higher resolution.  
**[0:12:09-0:12:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:12:09):**  Is that difficult for you or not to keep up?  It is.  Because so much seems to be happening?  Or is it amazing?  I mean, both.  
**[0:12:17-0:12:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:12:17):**  We have a geospatial team who is responsible both for making sure that we're bringing in  the best available global satellite data, and also that we're building analytics so  that you can actually derive meaningful insights at scale.  So I mentioned this half a meter resolution visual imagery, for example.  That's terrific if you're willing to take the time to look at any given place on Earth.  
**[0:12:43-0:12:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:12:43):**  But if you wanted to have an automated report that tells you how has the land changed here,  or how many trees here, you need to do additional analytics on top of that.  So our team is working with external partners as well to figure out how can we bring the  ability to delineate individual tree crowns, for example, to this high resolution imagery.  How can we take that imagery and estimate diversity of the area based on the structural  
**[0:13:10-0:13:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:13:10):**  diversity that's visible in terms of forest cover?  So that's another key piece is, you can show as much as you'd like to show, but until you  can actually say something meaningful about what that means to a restoration effort, it  has limited utility in terms of the scale that it can reach from a decision making perspective.  Yeah, it's what is often referred to.  
**[0:13:33-0:13:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:13:33):**  I mean, I think the amount of terabytes of data coming to decision makers, to farmers,  to land stewards, etc, is theoretically enormous.  And practically as well.  I mean, many people are flying drones that collect so much data that basically will blow  up a hard drive in a second.  
**[0:13:48-0:13:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:13:48):**  Exactly.  But then the question is, what do you do with that?  How does it translate into doing something or not doing something?  And how does that work?  And that there it's where it seems to be where the real juicy part and the magic happens.  
**[0:14:00-0:14:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:14:00):**  Exactly.  And that's a real midterm priority for us is the way that we integrate existing data  that projects might already have and provide meaningful analytics.  So drone imagery is a good example.  You know, being able to allow projects to upload drone imagery and get simple analytics  
**[0:14:18-0:14:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:14:18):**  in terms of, you know, coverage, in terms of spectral diversity, perhaps.  We've been thinking a lot about how we can also help with the bottlenecks in terms of  bioacoustic data processing, which could have huge potential in terms of the ability to  monitor biodiversity.  But again, big kind of data storage and analytic challenge.  
**[0:14:38-0:14:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:14:38):**  So we would really like to be able to make it so that anyone on Earth can upload some  standard data formats and get useful information from RESTORE about what's happening in their  area and that we can then use that to bring additional transparency to what's happening  everywhere.  And just for anybody, how would you describe bioacoustics?  
**[0:14:57-0:15:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:14:57):**  Because I know more or less what it is, but I'm really, why is it so promising and why  are you so interested in it?  Yeah.  So, you know, bioacoustics are basically just the sounds that are coming from nature.  And I think there's been a lot of focus on, for example, being able to identify birds  
**[0:15:15-0:15:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:15:15):**  and estimate bird biodiversity, but also you can do that for insects.  You can actually do it for abiotic, right?  For living factors like water and the sounds that water picks up.  So basically when you put together all of those sounds, you know, you get this sound  steep, which you can then use to estimate, you know, how much this area has recovered  
**[0:15:34-0:15:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:15:34):**  in comparison to an intact area.  And the reason it's so exciting from a scalability perspective is that in theory, this could  happen through a phone, right?  And anything for me, anything that could happen with a handheld device that many, many people  around the world have access to is something that we should really invest in.  
**[0:15:53-0:15:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:15:53):**  And to be clear, it's not perfect yet.  We can't just take any phone and get a perfect idea of the biodiversity in an area, but there  are more specific recording devices that when used with proper protocols can do that.  And we can imagine a path to scale through cell phones.  Yeah.  
**[0:16:13-0:16:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:16:13):**  So basically we would be able, maybe with a little add on on our phone or with a really  good phone, and of course with the GPS built into that and the proper app with the right  protocols to make sure that we record a standard, but phones are relatively cheap and they can  store etc.  So you can imagine a cheaper way or a much easier way to record a lot of audio from ecosystems  
**[0:16:35-0:16:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:16:35):**  that then could be analyzed when they're uploaded and things like that.  That's exactly right.  Which, you know, provides an incredible compliment to the information that we can derive from  satellites, which starts to give us a richer and richer perspective on what's actually  happening in these areas that we're trying to restore.  
**[0:16:54-0:16:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:16:54):**  And I'll just emphasize, you know, bioacoustic biodiversity.  It's a very key dynamic as we think about the future of restoration, especially in the  next 20 years when there's so much focus on carbon sequestration.  And that's of course incredibly important.  But if we only think about that, right, we lose many other dimensions of what makes an  
**[0:17:15-0:17:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:17:15):**  ecosystem whole.  And so the ability to have scalable ways to measure biodiversity and not just carbon is  something that we're really interested in helping to bring to the table.  And how is Restore itself organized as an entity itself?  Like what's your quote unquote business model or what's your founding path in that sense?  
**[0:17:36-0:17:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:17:36):**  Yeah.  So we spun off from the Crowther Lab, a science lab at ETH Zurich in Switzerland at the end  of 2020.  So we're about a year old now.  And we were basically set up as a company that is owned by a charitable foundation.  
**[0:17:55-0:18:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:17:55):**  So right now, 100% of our shares are owned by the Restore Foundation that was set up  in order to be able to protect and restore Earth's ecosystems.  And that means that we operate in a nimble startup fashion.  We grew our team last year from one to 12 full-time people and a lot of part-time people  spread around the world as well.  
**[0:18:18-0:18:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:18:18):**  But we fundamentally have a mission to do good.  And any profit that we generate in the future will be reinvested into the work that we're  doing with restoration projects around the world.  And we're still working on our business model, but essentially, we have a core platform which  we intend to keep free forever.  
**[0:18:40-0:18:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:18:40):**  And we're going to be building digital services, for example, the ability to monitor restoration  projects across many sites and compare the ability to select sites for investment and  create portfolios around those sites to be able to generate revenue and cover cost over  time.  So we're eager to experiment in 2022 with partners around the digital services that  
**[0:19:02-0:19:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:19:02):**  we build and ensuring that we're really adding as much value as possible to the broader restoration  ecosystem as we do that.  I think the setup by being owned by a foundation is extremely interesting.  We've had Armin Storjnagel of Purpose on the show actually quite a while ago, we should  check in.  
**[0:19:20-0:19:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:19:20):**  But how to preserve or protect the mission of mission-driven companies is obviously a  very hot topic in the investment and impact investing movement.  But do you see a role for investors at some point in restore?  Is that too early as you've been basically a year old so far?  Yeah, I think it's early for us to decide.  
**[0:19:40-0:19:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:19:40):**  I think, of course, the key balance that we want to strike is maintaining our core focus  on our mission, but having the capital to be able to grow.  There's not a lot of time to do the things that we need to do in terms of the piece that  nature restoration can play in the broader fight against climate change.  So we know that we want to be able to scale quickly.  
**[0:20:04-0:20:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:20:04):**  So for us, this year, we'll be doing a lot of learning in terms of our ability to both  attract additional philanthropic contributions through the foundation in order to grow our  work, our own ability to generate revenue through digital services and grow that way.  And that will help us evaluate the space for investors in the impact that we're trying  to have.  
**[0:20:25-0:20:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:20:25):**  And what do you see as a more general role for investors in this restoration movement  and space?  You mentioned, of course, a few projects are looking for investors, etc.  But what I imagine I usually like to say, I mean, we're in a digital space now, but  let's say we're recording this in a theater and we're sitting on stage and the room is  
**[0:20:46-0:20:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:20:46):**  full of smart impact investors.  They've read the books.  They've read the nature based solutions, documentaries, etc.  And they want to get involved, obviously without giving investment advice.  But what would be your pointers like where to look or where to dig a bit deeper or where  
**[0:20:58-0:21:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:20:58):**  to get involved if people want to start getting involved also with their investment amounts?  Yeah, I think it's a great question.  I guess in no particular order, I would say I'll reiterate kind of my message about thinking  beyond carbon.  So as investors are thinking about investing in climate change solutions, thinking about  
**[0:21:19-0:21:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:21:19):**  the way that those solutions are also thinking about people and are thinking about biodiversity,  remembering that restoration, regenerative agriculture, it's not a silver bullet from  a carbon perspective.  And I think often it's something that I talk a lot about when we talk about restoration  because I think kind of a common concern about forest restoration, especially as a solution  
**[0:21:45-0:21:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:21:45):**  in the climate world is that we will only focus on that and we will forget that we also  will use that as an easy way out.  And we won't focus on the investments needed in renewables and the changes in behavior  that are needed and the changes in government policy.  So it's a long way of saying if a project is promising that they are the solution to  
**[0:22:07-0:22:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:22:07):**  climate change, you probably want to look a little bit deeper because it's always just  going to be one piece of the solution.  Look for science-backed initiatives as much as possible, I think is really important.  What is the tie to the scientific community?  But on the other hand, what is the social focus that projects are bringing?  
**[0:22:27-0:22:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:22:27):**  Because this is really key to the long-term sustainability of work.  Yeah, I think they're both very, very good points.  We often see in the space people coming with the solution to everything and it could be  an input company.  Like if you spray this, then everything grows better.  
**[0:22:42-0:22:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:22:42):**  And it's like if we only would do this, then we'll be fine, et cetera.  And at the same time at the science piece, it's very difficult, I think, to filter there  because there's so much noise and a lot of things look and sound like science and not  necessarily are the way we've had a very interesting scientist turned farmer on the regenerative  egg piece, Jonathan Lundgren in the US that left the scientific world, but not necessarily  
**[0:23:06-0:23:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:23:06):**  he set up a farm and does a lot of research there with the scientific world, but says  in terms of region egg, he says the most interesting things currently are happening on farms.  The problem is we, as many university scientists have no longer farmed or haven't farmed in  a long time.  So we don't see either what's happening or it sounds impossible.  
**[0:23:24-0:23:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:23:24):**  Like this is, you cannot do this according, but he says we have to set farms up again  and then be in deep science work and write the papers and do the work and not the other  way around because otherwise we miss this movement, unfortunately.  So there's that tension, but that doesn't mean obviously that we should, I mean, the  scientific principles are extremely important there.  
**[0:23:44-0:23:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:23:44):**  Yeah.  No, I'm so glad you brought that up though, because it is, it's about holding that tension  of the knowledge of actually doing right practitioner knowledge, local knowledge, indigenous knowledge,  and the ways in which we scale that.  One of the paths to scale is through the scientific process and understanding common principles  
**[0:24:06-0:24:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:24:06):**  and thinking about how to bring that elsewhere.  So it is a tension to pay attention to and not something I think to be taken lightly  in terms of science providing all of the answers.  Yeah.  And especially many things might sound impossible and many things are, but some of them actually  
**[0:24:24-0:24:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:24:24):**  are not and our common knowledge in five or 10 years and we all look back and thought,  of course now we know that the trees communicate to each other.  And of course now we, but at that time the person, and I wouldn't say discovering that,  but the person really banging the drum and writing the papers was put away as a complete  idiot.  
**[0:24:42-0:24:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:24:42):**  And there are many examples of that.  The problem is figuring out which one actually makes sense five or 10 years down the line  and we don't have that time.  So it's a very interesting tension to not underestimate the seemingly impossible, which  we have a lot of things like that in regeneration and restoration.  
**[0:24:56-0:25:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:24:56):**  I mean, we get promised the moon and the stars of stabilizing climate, bringing back rivers  and all of that.  And some of it might be true and some of it probably is true, but not all.  So what would you do if you would be in charge of a large investment fund?  Could be a billion dollars.  
**[0:25:12-0:25:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:25:12):**  I used to say a billion dollars, which was a lot of money until billions started flying  around everywhere, but let's say a lot of money.  What would you prioritize if you had to put that to work?  That's such a good and hard question.  I think big picture, you start with dividing your values, setting policies.  
**[0:25:31-0:25:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:25:31):**  And I mentioned that I used to work in the sustainable agriculture world and the supply  chain world.  And there are a lot of good standards that exist out there around no deforestation, no  exploitation, respect for indigenous and local communities and including smallholders and  supply chains.  
**[0:25:49-0:25:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:25:49):**  And so I think starting there and saying, what is the baseline?  What are the values that I want to hold as I'm thinking about investment is really important.  Mapping enabling conditions, government policy, where are subsidies, what is incentivizing  or disincentivizing regenerative agriculture around the world.  And then thinking about a diversity of approaches, both geographically in terms of farm size,  
**[0:26:17-0:26:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:26:17):**  bottom up versus top down.  You can think about going through a giant supply chain, corporate supply chain and reaching  farmers that way through their buyers.  Or you can think about starting at the grassroots.  And I would want to think about testing several of those different approaches and really building  
**[0:26:37-0:26:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:26:37):**  a diverse portfolio in that way.  And what do you see as most underrepresented or under, I wouldn't say funded or under  invested, but most overlooked in the conversations you have, let's say, with the financial world?  Is that the biodiversity or is that beyond carbon piece or the other pieces?  Maybe it's the oceans or the mangroves or the insects in general.  
**[0:26:58-0:27:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:26:58):**  What do you see as most neglected in this phase at the moment?  I mean, you've mentioned a lot of key ones.  I do think that the...  If you had to pick one.  Yeah, if I had to pick one.  
**[0:27:09-0:27:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:27:09):**  Like your favorite neglected pet.  Yeah.  I mean, I would say biodiversity and people from the restore perspective, we have more  to bring to the table in terms of bringing biodiversity into the conversation and ensuring  that that isn't overlooked.  
**[0:27:25-0:27:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:27:25):**  But it's equally as important to think about people and who owns land, who has traditionally  managed land, how do they contribute?  And so for me, those are things that are beginning to enter the conversation more and more.  There's often a lot of lip service and then perhaps not the follow through in terms of  funding.  
**[0:27:44-0:27:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:27:44):**  But I think that there are steps being taken down the path to center the biodiversity and  people part in addition to the carbon part.  And I hope that we continue to take those steps really purposefully and that investors  are a really important piece of making that path really walkable in the longterm.  And what do you see the role?  
**[0:28:06-0:28:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:28:06):**  I mean, how much are you already asking those questions when projects are registering and  filling out the data, etc.  On the people side, are you asking those questions already?  And if not, how would you do that?  Or when will that come?  
**[0:28:19-0:28:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:28:19):**  Yeah, so we have some required and some optional self disclosed information that include social  aspects around land tenure, around ownership and management of particular projects.  And we want to make it both easier for projects to fill out that information.  That's really just a user experience challenge from our perspective so that we are collecting  that data from more and more projects, but also incentivize the sharing of that information.  
**[0:28:53-0:28:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:28:53):**  So we've been thinking about how we might include transparency ratings, for example,  rather than a quality rating, which is not such an easy thing to compare when you have  an agroforestry project next to a massive forest restoration project.  So we think that an important piece of what we're building is ultimately making it more  and more desirable to share more and more information, which allows us to be clearer  
**[0:29:18-0:29:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:29:18):**  and clearer about how the social aspects as well as the other pieces of restoration are  visible.  Yeah, because especially land ownership can be very sensitive, very interesting, but I  can also imagine maybe prohibitive of people sharing if they have to fill it out.  But yeah, how do you still tease it out?  
**[0:29:38-0:29:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:29:38):**  Because it's such an essential piece of the restoration movement, and a very often overlooked  one.  Exactly.  So right now we haven't required land ownership as a prerequisite for putting a project on  Restore for a few reasons.  
**[0:29:54-0:29:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:29:54):**  One is simply the practicality of being able to verify that and the reality that there  is so much land tenure conflict in many parts of the world.  But the other is often restoration projects are really the coming together of many different  actors, right?  There might be a larger landscape with many small farmers who are brought together through  
**[0:30:13-0:30:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:30:13):**  cooperatives and then you have NGOs and government agencies who are funding.  And so there's no one quote unquote manager of that project.  It's a big collaborative effort.  And so right now, really on an ad hoc basis, we've addressed particular concerns that have  come up about projects that have been put on the platform without perhaps the knowledge  
**[0:30:34-0:30:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:30:34):**  of one of the actors.  And we've made it easy for projects to have multiple managers so that you can really bring  in that multi-stakeholder effort, that as we grow, we will have to continue to formalize  the way that we address any potential concerns around the ownership and management of a particular  site.  
**[0:30:52-0:30:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:30:52):**  And this might be a good segue to a question I always like to ask.  If there was one thing, it might have to do with land tenure, maybe absolutely not.  But if there would be one thing you could change overnight, so you have a magic wand  and you've only one wish, unfortunately, what would that be?  Could be in the restoration movement, could be anywhere else as well.  
**[0:31:10-0:31:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:31:10):**  But what would you change?  Thinking about your work and your space in the regenerative agriculture movement, it  strikes me that farmers are risk averse, right?  And for good reason, because implementing change at the farm level takes time.  I think if I could wave a magic wand, I would take away the risks that farmers face so that  
**[0:31:39-0:31:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:31:39):**  behavior change could come more quickly.  And parts of that is just funding that transition, right?  From going from traditional agriculture to regenerative agriculture.  And some of it is about opening up, I think, farmer minds to being able to think about  change.  
**[0:31:57-0:32:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:31:57):**  And I say that with deep respect for decades and centuries of farmer knowledge that have  built practices.  But that's a piece that I keep coming back to is how do we help with this transition  that is so complicated from a management perspective and from a behavior perspective?  And in terms of restore, and let's say the agriculture side, what are you most looking  
**[0:32:20-0:32:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:32:20):**  forward to bring on where the beginning of the year, like this year in 2022, on the agriculture  side, are there any exciting things coming or anything to you, obviously, if you're comfortable  sharing things that you're looking forward to, let's say on the ag piece?  We've had some exciting conversations with, and I won't name specific names, but organizations  and companies who are connected to many, many small farmers and who are trying to support  
**[0:32:48-0:32:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:32:48):**  farmers and bring better wages, better compensation to farmers for their environmental and social  practices.  I'm really excited about working to get larger groups of farmers onto the restore platform,  both so that we can think about the ways in which perhaps additional compensation through  carbon credits or others could supplement income that they have today through the sale  
**[0:33:12-0:33:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:33:12):**  of the products that they're producing.  And also so that more broadly, we all, and I use we very broadly here, can learn from  the work that's happening in the farmer space and we can inspire more and more farmers to  change the way that they're practicing.  So I know there's a little bit of vagueness there, but ultimately, as I say, restoration  
**[0:33:34-0:33:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:33:34):**  includes sustainable agriculture and the umbrella that that represents.  And so the more we can highlight that and make that visible and also reward those farmers  who are doing that work, the better for all of us and the more we can expand what we think  of as the restoration movement.  And do you see that the vision that sometimes I feel that that's quite clear on like the  
**[0:34:00-0:34:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:34:00):**  restoring nature movement and let's say the regenerative or agroecology or sustainable  agriculture movement, they don't always seem to talk.  Do you see that often in the projects you work with, or as they're often landscapes  or larger pieces that often they include both?  Or is it a very divided space?  
**[0:34:20-0:34:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:34:20):**  The restoration one, like one side is growing food and the other side is trying to restore?  Yeah, I do think that it tends to be divided or it has historically been divided.  And there's many, many reasons for that.  There's sort of traditional Western views of what conservation and kind of restoring  to a quote unquote natural state look like.  
**[0:34:39-0:34:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:34:39):**  And those are often in contrast to what it means to have restoration in the context of  producing food and supporting people.  And so I think that those historical divides have meant that there's sort of different  directions and the broader restoration space.  I do think, you mentioned landscape scale restoration.  
**[0:34:59-0:35:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:34:59):**  I think that that really helps to bring together a bigger picture of how these things connect.  And I hope that by bringing these many different kinds of projects together in one place, that  as Restore we can help raise awareness about both the interconnectivity and the nuance  and the great diversity of what it means to be able to restore and the many, many different  reasons why restoration is important for climate, for people, for biodiversity.  
**[0:35:27-0:35:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:35:27):**  And if there was one thing you could wish for, like in terms of technical ability, would  that be a special satellite or be a really good data set on biodiversity, like on the  restore perspective, what would really help you?  What isn't possible yet or maybe completely unaffordable?  What would you wish for if you could choose something in the shop with that pay?  
**[0:35:46-0:35:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:35:46):**  I would love to be able to, I guess, skip over all of the development work that I mentioned  bioacoustics.  So it's on my mind that if we could skip over all of the development work that still needs  to happen and we could simply say, OK, with your existing smartphone, download this app,  stand out here, record, put it on restore, done.  
**[0:36:06-0:36:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:36:06):**  If we could kind of skip the development that's still needed, I think that would just be an  incredible gift to the restoration movement.  Yeah.  And I think it's I've seen I have to look there's an American artist on the soundscaping  side that has done some very interesting and of course, the name doesn't pop into my mind  
**[0:36:25-0:36:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:36:25):**  now, but as I put it in the show notes below, some very interesting work on showing the  soundscapes basically of forests, intact ones, even some of them have selectively been cut.  And the difference in sound like the forest seems the same, but the difference in sound  is stunning, like the quantity, the quality, the diversity, et cetera.  You can hear the difference, but not see the difference, which is very, very interesting,  
**[0:36:47-0:36:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:36:47):**  obviously, from an investor perspective as well.  Yeah, exactly.  And there's so much incredible work, right?  That's already happened in this space.  And so really, it's about figuring out what are the pieces that we can pull together to  
**[0:37:00-0:37:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:37:00):**  make it accessible, to make it scalable, to overcome the hurdles around the analytics  of all of it.  But it's not like we're starting from zero.  No, luckily not, luckily not.  And then of course, we have to map and compare and baseline and all of that.  
**[0:37:14-0:37:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:37:14):**  So that's an extremely... and do you feel we're close to that?  Like if we have this conversation in a year from now, have we made a lot of progress with  the acoustic side of things and the biodiversity side?  I do think so.  Yeah, we're going to be piloting, I mean, again, many people around the world are doing  
**[0:37:31-0:37:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:37:31):**  this work, and we're trying to just build upon the incredible work that's already happened  so far.  We'll be piloting that work with a number of projects this year, we'll be piloting the  integration of that onto the Restore platform.  So I think that by the end of the year, we'll have the beginnings of what it looks like  
**[0:37:48-0:37:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:37:48):**  for anyone to be able to upload an audio file and get some basic information from Restore  about what that area looks like.  Wow, that's extremely exciting.  I'll definitely be checking in.  And I want to thank you so much for your time and for sharing this early journey.  
**[0:38:05-0:38:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:38:05):**  I mean, it's a year, which is a lot and nothing at the same time, going from one person to  12, obviously.  But it seems like there's a lot of momentum behind it.  And I'm very much looking forward to follow it over time.  And also what this means for agriculture, for agroforestry, for ocean farming, and then  
**[0:38:22-0:38:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:38:22):**  all of the pieces of this globe that have to be restored.  Well, thanks so much for having me, Koon.  Yeah, I'm very, very excited about continuing to bring together these narratives of more  traditional forest nature restoration and, you know, agroecology and the agriculture  space.  
**[0:38:38-0:38:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:38:38):**  And I think that these kind of conversations are a really terrific opportunity to help  bring those worlds closer.  Yeah, they're definitely not separate as we, we, I'm saying in the global north, have thought  for a long time that's nature in one corner, big fence around it, and it will be okay.  And agriculture somewhere else and cities somewhere else.  
**[0:38:55-0:38:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:38:55):**  It's all a flux and a continuum.  If you found the investing in regenerative agriculture and food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  It's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few seconds.  
**[0:39:13-0:39:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:39:13):**  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  join my membership community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on cambrot.com slash investing region egg or in the description  below.  
**[0:39:33-0:39:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:39:33):**  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  
**[0:39:57-0:40:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:39:57):**  After a hundred interviews and more than a hundred hours of audio asking the question  how to put money to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011  and recording these podcasts since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework?  
**[0:40:16-0:40:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:40:16):**  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  What questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  
**[0:40:25-0:40:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:40:25):**  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  You, the soil builders and investors in this space.  
**[0:40:34-0:40:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:40:34):**  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management consultants, etc.  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  
**[0:40:54-0:40:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:40:54):**  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  
**[0:41:08-0:41:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:41:08):**  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  
**[0:41:27-0:41:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:41:27):**  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to ride along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  
**[0:41:47-0:41:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:41:47):**  invest in and what kind of co investors you could find or what kind of investors you could  find if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  
**[0:42:06-0:42:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:42:06):**  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately, that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  
**[0:42:18-0:42:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/clara-rowe#t=0:42:18):**  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  