### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2022-00-08)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  We need to decarbonize our society ASAP and still remove about 10 gigatons a year to keep  most of our planet livable.  
**[0:00:21-0:00:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:00:21):**  How do we do that at scale and at speed?  Of course, soil and trees are key, but only as permanent as the farm management.  So we also need to look at things like biochar and enhanced rock weathering, which could  by the way also replace much of the farm chemical inputs, like chemical fertilizer and other  things.  
**[0:00:38-0:00:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:00:38):**  So much more research is needed about the application and the impact, and luckily our  guest of today is doing exactly that.  Research but not in academia, but at a huge scale financed by carbon credits sold to companies  like Stripe.  I love checking interviews and this is no different.  
**[0:00:54-0:00:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:00:54):**  It's so great to have Jim Mann of the Future Forest Company back on the show.  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture, Investing as if the  Planet Mattered, a podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and  agriculture space to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil,  people, local communities and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  
**[0:01:19-0:01:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:01:19):**  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  
**[0:01:37-0:01:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:01:37):**  In March last year, we launched our membership community to make it easy for fans to support  our work.  And so many of you have joined as a member.  We've launched different types of benefits, exclusive content, Q&A webinars with former  guests, Ask Me Anything sessions, plus so much more to come in the future.  
**[0:01:52-0:01:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:01:52):**  For more information on the different tiers, benefits and how to become a member, check  gumroad.com slash investing region egg or find the link below.  Thank you.  Welcome to another interview today, a check in interview with Jim Mann, the founder and  CEO of the Future Forest Company.  
**[0:02:09-0:02:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:02:09):**  And just as a disclosure, we're a very small investor in this company.  I'm so happy to have Jim back.  It seems like a long time ago, and actually, it's only June last year, so 2021.  But so much has happened in the space and so much has happened with the company.  So I'm very much looking forward to unpacking so many things we discussed last time, the  
**[0:02:26-0:02:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:02:26):**  biochar to enhance weathering, how to 10x the carbon potential, or maybe even more of  reforestation, regeneration in general, COP, everything that has happened in this crazy,  crazy year.  So welcome back, Jim.  It's great to be back.  
**[0:02:40-0:02:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:02:40):**  Thanks for having me.  Because you're in crazy growth mode, basically.  But for the people that didn't listen to the interview, and of course, I will link it below,  if you had to present now, what is the Future Forest Company and how would you present it  in a couple of sentences?  
**[0:02:53-0:02:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:02:53):**  So we're a carbon removal company, we started off with looking at reforestation.  And we've moved more and more towards sort of what I talk about is holistic carbon removal  solutions to taking natural processes and accelerating them.  So the biochar and enhanced rock weathering.  And we previously when we've spoken, we've talked about the three being co deployed and  
**[0:03:17-0:03:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:03:17):**  all being part of a holistic solution.  We now sort of think about them and are disentangling them a bit.  So we can deploy them together, or in pairs or individually, depending on how suitable  the location is and feedstocks and things like that.  Very much, we're trying to scale carbon removal.  
**[0:03:40-0:03:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:03:40):**  And if you're saying a holistic approach that suggests there is a non holistic approach  to carbon removal, or to natural carbon removal, what would you describe as a non holistic  one?  And what's the big difference between that and a holistic approach?  Yeah, sure.  
**[0:03:53-0:03:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:03:53):**  So I think of something like DAC, where you have an engineered process.  What is a DAC for anybody?  Direct Air Cap Shocking?  So where you have these big fans that are taking CO2 straight out of the air, and then  storing it either as a as mineralization or into deep wells, so into old oil wells, for  
**[0:04:11-0:04:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:04:11):**  example,  which got a lot of attention last year, and this year as well, like a lot of money have  been raised a lot of fuzz and excitement around it.  But I think issues I mean, why is it a non holistic approach?  Is it the cost?  
**[0:04:22-0:04:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:04:22):**  Is it where to go?  No, I mean, it just doesn't have any additional benefit, you know, the so it removes carbon,  it does what it says on the tin, the storage looks good and permanent.  And particularly when it's mineralized, but deep wells also shouldn't leak.  But there's no there's no benefit beyond the process.  
**[0:04:41-0:04:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:04:41):**  So when we look at biochar, there's a soil amendment, particularly in dry land agriculture,  for example, as a water retainer and a nutrient retainer, it can buffer runoff of chemicals  from land.  If you look at enhanced rock weathering, the you've got two things going on, you're releasing  bicarbonations, which is the store of the carbon from the atmosphere.  
**[0:05:06-0:05:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:05:06):**  And you're also releasing cations and you and I would think of cations as fertilizer.  So you've got a two way relationship, you're you're not just removing co2, but you're doing  something beneficial with the output.  So so we sort of look at the engineer solutions as this is route one, this is real, you know,  straight line, grab the co2 lock it up.  
**[0:05:26-0:05:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:05:26):**  Very linear.  Yeah, very linear.  And then if you look at the other end, you've got the nature based solutions, where we're  trying to reestablish ecosystems.  And and we have some concerns with that.  
**[0:05:37-0:05:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:05:37):**  And we talked about this last time, I think about the forestry and concerns certainly  I have around forestry and planting the wrong tree in the wrong place or in places where  at two degrees of warming, the trees won't be stable or won't be removing co2.  And then we're sort of in this in between space where we're taking natural processes,  you know, biochar is just a charcoal production, which you get from forest fires and acts as  
**[0:06:02-0:06:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:06:02):**  a store in soil.  And rock weathering is the biggest natural sink on the planet anyway, just in nature.  And we speed that up by by taking rock at smaller particle size and spreading it out  so it can get to get more more access to co2, more access to water and the reaction happens  a lot quicker.  
**[0:06:23-0:06:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:06:23):**  So but you get the additional benefits because that's how soils built soils built from rock  weathering that's your minerals in the soil come from that process anyway, if we take  the right type of rock and speed it up, not only do we get that soil building process  and the plant nutrition that comes with it, but we also remove co2 at the same time.  Yeah, and it is permanent or because that's one of the big, let's say doubts people have  
**[0:06:45-0:06:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:06:45):**  about the nature side of things or the natural solution side of things.  Because when we have these big machines with a lot of vans turning and sucking up air and  taking the co2 out and storing it in an old gas oil well, it seems quite permanent.  In this case, we need to be able to show that that's permanent as well.  So how and then we'll talk about what is enhanced rock weathering because I think we have to  
**[0:07:05-0:07:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:07:05):**  describe it visually to people like okay, what does it actually mean?  But this is a very permanent biochar side of things we know it stores a lot and it stores  it I wouldn't say forever, but pretty much forever.  And on enhanced rock weathering, the co2 is also bind and combiner basically is I think  the last time we said something like 10 or 100,000 years, or at least also forever long  
**[0:07:25-0:07:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:07:25):**  enough to have a significant impact.  In human terms, enhanced rock weathering is permanent.  Yeah, the challenge that we face with enhanced rock weathering, and the thing where we've  been investing very heavily is on the science and on the ability to measure it.  And it when you say it, what?  
**[0:07:40-0:07:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:07:40):**  So the carbon, the carbon removal.  Yeah, so you want to measure so it's taking rocks, which is a natural process anyway,  that rocks break down in smaller, smaller particles get exposed more to air, bind with  the carbon with the co2 and then release the fertilizer, which is great, because it's how  soil gets built, and also store this carbon.  
**[0:07:57-0:08:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:07:57):**  And when you say we have to the science part of the it is how much that happens or how  much is being sucked out, because of course, you cannot see it.  And you can't capture it.  So the nice thing about something like direct air capture is you can put a meter on it,  you know, you get a liquefied co2 product that you're going to pump into an oil well,  
**[0:08:12-0:08:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:08:12):**  you can put that through a meter, and you can meet her and say, we know that x liters  or x tons has been then put into this oil well, and it's going to stay there.  With with something that's working in an ecosystem, you've got a lot more challenges in measuring  it particularly as these are water soluble ions by the very nature.  So to the process, if we go back to the sort of process you've got and co2 absorbed into  
**[0:08:35-0:08:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:08:35):**  rain, so it's a mixes with rain to create a weak carbonic acid.  And that has a chemical reaction with the rocks, and then formed by carbonate ions,  which are soluble, some are soluble, some are some are carbonate rock, so you get the  particles in soil and some of it just washes off in solution.  And so you've got two pathways.  
**[0:08:54-0:08:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:08:54):**  And then you've got all these cations being released that you again, are hard to measure,  because plants are taking them up.  So actually, the best systems where you want this to happen is where you've got plants  growing, because they're taking up the cations, which improves the rate of the reaction.  But at the same time, if they're taking up those cations, how do you measure them?  
**[0:09:11-0:09:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:09:11):**  You lose them sort of.  Yeah.  So there's real scientific challenges in properly quantifying this.  You can see that you've put the rock down, you can measure and meter the rock going down.  But you can't, you've then got a leap of faith to the actual carbon.  
**[0:09:28-0:09:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:09:28):**  And that's what we've been bridging.  So we now have a science team and a carbon team who are working together on this.  And we think we've got solutions for how to quite accurately now monitor the process.  Yeah, because it's not something you would do in a lab.  Like it's a living system.  
**[0:09:45-0:09:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:09:45):**  But I mean, we've been struggling with that in agriculture for a long time to show certain  things that we've seen on land, and sort of don't reproduce because we take a single piece.  And in this case, it is a full ecosystem that responds to the rain.  So it's very important.  The water part of this or the rain part doesn't mean it's mostly, I mean, you're working a  
**[0:10:01-0:10:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:10:01):**  lot in the UK, but it doesn't mean it's mostly relevant in, let's say, wetter areas, you  need that bridge between let's say the CO2 in the air and dust clouds and rain to bring  it down.  Or does it also work with like less humid places?  Yeah, it will.  
**[0:10:16-0:10:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:10:16):**  And so it depends on your a lot on your soil type.  So we model out various factors, all of your environmental factors, your rainfall, your  ambient temperatures, etc.  We also look at the soil type, and these various factors then that still are slightly beyond  scope and things like the bacterial and fungal activity.  
**[0:10:38-0:10:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:10:38):**  So bacteria, microbes will break this down quicker.  They will also increase the concentration of CO2 in the soil.  So you have more CO2 in the soil, then you've got a higher concentration of CO2 and the  reaction will happen quicker.  Fungi actively break down rock and work in a symbiotic relationship with certain trees.  
**[0:10:59-0:11:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:10:59):**  So this is one of the reasons we started off with with forest because you've got those  symbiotic relationships going on.  So the fungi actually speeding up the weathering process.  Now that again adds challenges, adds complexity, because how fast are they doing that?  How much is it accelerated?  
**[0:11:14-0:11:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:11:14):**  And as soon as you take this out of the field and put it into a lab, you've got rid of all  those factors.  And we know they accelerate it.  We just can't easily quantify how much.  But we also can't always quantify very well in the field how active they are.  
**[0:11:33-0:11:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:11:33):**  So you can start from the geochemical data, which you can do in a lab, and then you know  that it's going to speed up from there, but you don't know how much.  And that's what we're trying to demonstrate is in which environments does this speed up  and how much does it speed up by?  And therefore, how much carbon are we removing over what period of time?  
**[0:11:55-0:12:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:11:55):**  And they're the critical elements that are still kind of unknown to a degree.  But we're getting closer.  Yeah, it almost sounds like applied science, like in a company, which is fascinating.  I think we're in the climate space.  We're seeing that a lot more because we just don't have the time to wait.  
**[0:12:11-0:12:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:12:11):**  And it also reminds me of we did an interview with Dr. Elaine Ingham on the soil microbial  activity and the life in the soil.  And she discovered and many others as well, is that if you take them because we only grew  certain like we only had a certain growth medium in labs.  So we only saw certain soil biology because they were growing because of that growth medium.  
**[0:12:30-0:12:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:12:30):**  And we missed like 99.9% of the soil life in the we never saw that in the lab because  we didn't have the full ecosystem there to observe.  And suddenly this whole sort of world opened up like there are 70,000 species or whatever  the number is.  And we saw five, something like that, because they did well on that growth medium.  
**[0:12:46-0:12:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:12:46):**  So it's, yeah, it's very limited, let's say.  And what I think in this case, it's also like, as you're doing sort of applied scientists,  and it's not all science, it's not all certain yet are your customers because they're buying  the credits, the carbon credits, the removal ones, as long as the customers are fine with  sort of financing the process and not having one certain number that we can just put a  
**[0:13:06-0:13:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:13:06):**  meter on and we're fine.  As long as that's okay, it's not such a problem that it's not super, super certain yet as  long as the uncertainty is being reduced.  How are your customers dealing with that?  So we've got the early adopters like stripe who have backed us to not only by buying some  
**[0:13:20-0:13:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:13:20):**  of the carbon from us, but also by putting a grant towards the science so that we can  advance the science.  And you know, that we've obviously put money alongside that as well.  But it means that we have postdoc scientists now working as part of our research team to  help us to really dig deep into these issues and try and resolve them.  
**[0:13:41-0:13:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:13:41):**  And then, you know, you can argue the same about nature based solutions.  You know, we don't measure exactly how much carbon is stored in in a forest, we tend to  take a handful of trees in that forest, we take a proxy and we go, well, they've grown  pretty well and this looks okay, we've got these these data tables we've produced over  many, many years.  
**[0:14:00-0:14:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:14:00):**  And so we know that this forest will have stored X million tons of carbon.  And so we can take the same sort of approach that that geochemical data that I'm talking  about, where it's in lab without the microbes, without the fungi, and gives us a baseline.  So we know that in certain environmental conditions, this is the rate of and with a certain particle  size on some particle size distribution, and there's multiple variables that go into into  
**[0:14:23-0:14:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:14:23):**  how we model this, and it gets quite, quite complicated.  But as you go through that, you can say we've got good confidence that this, this will weather  over this amount of time.  And over this amount of time, this is when the CO2 is removed.  Now what we really need to demonstrate for this to be scalable and adopted across carbon,  
**[0:14:47-0:14:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:14:47):**  the carbon platforms onto things like Vera, is we need to demonstrate that more more robustly  in the field.  And that's that that's the challenge.  And we need to get to the point where, where forests are, and which we're pretty much at  the point now, I think, where where forests are, and but we'd like to get it further,  
**[0:15:06-0:15:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:15:06):**  we'd like to get it closer to where DAC is, and where we can almost meter it and you can  put down the rock dust at a certain particle size, you know, the mineralogy, you know,  the local conditions, you know, the crops being grown, you can put all of that into  this this, the software package that we're building out in this this model, and it will  give you an accurate weathering curve for that location, then you monitor over time  
**[0:15:28-0:15:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:15:28):**  to inform that this is happening as you'd expect, and that the credits can be released  over this schedule, like with trees, you know, you plant a tree, and and you your credits  will be released over the next 5080 years, depending on where in the world you are.  It's the same sort of thing within enhanced rock weathering, we put the rock down at a  certain particle size, here's the weathering curve and the credits will be released over  
**[0:15:49-0:15:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:15:49):**  time.  Yeah.  And so let's walk through a process because we still didn't talk about how you actually  do this.  Like you take a piece of land, you buy a lot of the land or most of the land, or maybe  
**[0:15:58-0:15:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:15:58):**  all the land.  I don't know if that has changed since last year.  So let's walk us through a case study.  How do you assess which methods to use?  We're talking about crops and trees and biochar and enhanced weathering.  
**[0:16:08-0:16:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:16:08):**  And then let's unpack a bit how it actually works at scale, because this is not you with  a hammer hitting some rocks until there's powder, or you making a small biochar pile  like this is we're talking different scale and different acres and hectares.  Like how much land are you currently managing?  And then let's walk through a case study.  
**[0:16:23-0:16:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:16:23):**  Or let's walk through a concrete one.  Good question on land, I think more or less, yeah, I think we're approaching 5000 hectares  of land under management.  Most of that is selected because it's suitable for ecological restoration, which means it's  very degraded, or it has okay, like circumstances, what makes it suitable for?  
**[0:16:41-0:16:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:16:41):**  So typically, it's degraded, what I would class as degraded as an as an ecologist, we'd  look at it and say it's degraded it to somebody else, it might be might be both grazing land,  farmland.  And typically, we don't want arable land.  And we're looking for for lower grade agricultural land.  
**[0:17:00-0:17:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:17:00):**  And that has historically been forested, because of the price or because you cannot do something  on the airboards not there yet, we can but typically arable land is feeding people and  we don't want to become competitors for for land.  And this is where we originally looked at our models to ensure that we could be just  as productive.  
**[0:17:18-0:17:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:17:18):**  And that's where we have the the woolly pigs, the three range pigs out in the forest once  it gets above a certain age.  And they're, you know, keystone species in a wild boar, a keystone species.  So bringing that into the forest, as long as you keep them on a good rotation is good  for the forest.  
**[0:17:33-0:17:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:17:33):**  So we try and work with nature on these things.  So you take the slightly less fancy land, let's say it could be hilly, which used to  be forest or it has been for back back back in the day or some kind of savanna and degraded,  which can still be a current forest as well.  But it's just very degraded, it could be very degraded forest, maybe, like a Lehman would  
**[0:17:54-0:17:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:17:54):**  look at it and say, but it's actually a forest.  And you were saying about actually, there's a huge potential here.  It's typically not forest land that we're looking for, because of us being able to generate  carbon credits from reforestation.  So we're typically looking at land that was deforested, you know, even hundreds, thousands  
**[0:18:08-0:18:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:18:08):**  of years ago, but is suitable to be returned to forest and is relatively unproductive from  an agricultural point of view.  We don't want to take productive land, arable land, for example, and turn that into forest.  So some kind of extensive grazing, typically, yes, with very few trees, etc. that have been  not super productive, like underperforming ecosystems, I think the head of Savory, the  
**[0:18:31-0:18:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:18:31):**  Nordics would call that.  Yeah.  And if you sort of think of it, often it's land that has been sustained by the EU subsidies  model, and really isn't as an economic model.  The farming on that land doesn't make any money without the subsidies.  
**[0:18:46-0:18:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:18:46):**  And so it's economically...  And size wise, like normally you buy, it's not a few hectares, like you want.  What's the minimum just to have, like to make sense to bring in some machinery to bring  in the biochar, etc.  What's the minimum you normally look at?  
**[0:19:00-0:19:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:19:00):**  So we won't always do the biochar.  So this is where we've decoupled the model since you and I last spoke.  So we'd looked at sites where we could produce the biochar on site and things like that previously.  We're now in some cases looking at where that feedstock sits.  So working with people who've got waste material.  
**[0:19:16-0:19:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:19:16):**  So we are locating our first big biochar plant alongside a sawmill, where they've got waste  wood, for example.  Then we've got land where we can deploy the biochar.  So we're looking at different models for decoupling these now we've got further forward.  But with the land, yeah, so the land becomes one sort of component.  
**[0:19:40-0:19:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:19:40):**  And the other component of that will be peatland restoration, which is not financially that  attractive, but it's something that we will do if it's alongside land.  And often in Scotland, you get a bundle or a package of land.  So you end up with different scenarios in different parts of that land and forming a  nice mosaic ecosystem.  
**[0:20:03-0:20:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:20:03):**  But typically, we won't look at anything usually under maybe 100 acres.  So what's that?  50 hectares, something roughly maybe 40 hectares, that would be very small.  We'd look ideally look for something larger.  And we have taken smaller areas where they're adjacent to an existing site, and you just  
**[0:20:27-0:20:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:20:27):**  bundle them in so the operating costs don't scale up.  But we're typically looking for larger, larger tracts of land for that.  And then what happens?  You should visually imagine this is an overgrazed, hilly landscape, let's say, maybe with some  pockets of trees still somewhere, there might be some water features, etc.  
**[0:20:47-0:20:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:20:47):**  And then what happens?  How do you approach it from there?  We will then put a plan together for how we would reforest it, how the different aspects,  different climatic conditions are suitable for different trees, put together a mixed  planting scheme and lots of talk of native trees.  
**[0:21:03-0:21:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:21:03):**  We don't specifically stick with native trees.  And the reason for that is they're not resilient.  Which is an interesting concept to begin with.  We had a long discussion, I think, with Philippe Passani on centropic agroforestry.  Probably the whole native thing is interesting, let's say.  
**[0:21:18-0:21:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:21:18):**  The whole weed thing is interesting as well.  But I will link the interview below if you want to go deeper into that.  But the concept of native, non-native is interesting in the changing world, or has always been  interesting.  Yeah, it's always been blurred.  
**[0:21:29-0:21:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:21:29):**  And it doesn't hold quite as true as people would like to think.  But then also, in terms of resilience, if we go to two degrees of warming, which we're  almost certainly going to then what would be suitable today on that land?  And what will be suitable at two degrees of warming could be completely different.  So you make a planning for that?  
**[0:21:46-0:21:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:21:46):**  You model out, okay, what would a forest land?  What would the landscape look like with two degrees in this specific place, etc.  And the difficulty is we don't always know.  So we could see things like the Gulf Stream and North Atlantic currents weaken or move  further south.  
**[0:22:05-0:22:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:22:05):**  So we're actually planning for cooler climates as well as warmer climates.  And almost certainly wetter climates on the west coast of Scotland.  But certainly climates that will, and the reason we like the west coast of Scotland  is not just because it's beautiful and a great place to live and bring up children, but it's  also going to support trees or in all scenarios, all predicted scenarios, will support a good  
**[0:22:29-0:22:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:22:29):**  forested ecosystem well into the future.  So from a forestry point of view, that's why we try and pick countries.  And we've stuck with Scotland so far and the north of England.  So our thesis, if you like, there is high quality, if you're going to do high quality  carbon from trees, and there's lots of lots of disputes as to what's quality from trees  
**[0:22:50-0:22:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:22:50):**  and what's not quality.  But from our point of view, we want to know that that forest will be in place in 100 years  time.  So we look for a stable social and political system and stable economic system, good rule  of law and climatic conditions that we can be confident will support trees into the future  
**[0:23:11-0:23:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:23:11):**  with all scenarios well into the future.  So you plan for this reforestation and you bought the land, then how do you finance the  reforestation?  Because that's I mean, you need to get the trees, someone needs to plant them, then maybe  the other models on top as well, if they make sense there, how do you finance the transition  
**[0:23:27-0:23:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:23:27):**  of that land, which has been supported by subsidies?  Yeah, yeah, there is some there is there is sometimes subsidies for the tree planting.  So we will get some some government investment into that tree planting scheme.  But we also do tree sponsorships.  So we have things like a scheme called Trees Not Teas, where we try and replace raised  
**[0:23:49-0:23:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:23:49):**  t shirts.  So a waste product, which is which is very polluting with a tree instead, and we'll send  a PDF certificate to people so they still get the sponsorship logos on there, they still  get and they often get shared on social media, they'll get a feel good factor and a tree  gets planted rather than a t shirt, which is quite polluting.  
**[0:24:06-0:24:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:24:06):**  And there's quite a lot of information on the trees not tees website about that, you  know, how polluting a t shirt is, and how bad fast fashion is.  And effectively, that's what's happening with with races.  Now I run long distance.  So I'm used to seeing lots of these t shirts given away and everybody who runs and has  
**[0:24:24-0:24:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:24:24):**  jaws full of these free t shirts that are given out to races.  So it's something that we really need to stop.  But we also do tree sponsorships to companies.  I'm not sure which names I can say.  Don't mention it.  
**[0:24:37-0:24:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:24:37):**  You work with companies.  Yeah, I'm just gonna stop there.  Yeah.  So we work with big companies who want to do good.  And that can be them come from a tree planting day, as well as some of its education, some  
**[0:24:49-0:24:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:24:49):**  of its feel good, and some of its team building and things like that.  Yeah.  And some people just want to have done have done something good.  So you get the planting supported, sponsored, to a certain extent, that supports the planting.  And then we actually hold on to the carbon credits associated with it, but we'll put  
**[0:25:08-0:25:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:25:08):**  it through a carbon, a carbon scheme.  So we've got a future asset in the carbon.  And you hold on the land like you're not planning to sell or flip the land at all?  No.  And we're now doing our first to make that more scalable.  
**[0:25:19-0:25:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:25:19):**  We're now doing our first experiments with other landowners.  So what we've found is it's actually quite difficult for the landowners to do this, you  know, we've built a significant expertise, this is a team with ecologists, forestry  specialists, peatland specialists, and a whole range of skills in that team now.  And so we're also looking at how we work with other landowners, because some of this land,  
**[0:25:46-0:25:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:25:46):**  particularly in Scotland, is locked up in family funds and has been for generations,  they have no wish to sell, they wouldn't, they don't want to sell it, it's a family  heirloom to them.  And so how, but there's a new generation coming through who will be responsible for that land  who want it put to a climate use.  
**[0:26:05-0:26:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:26:05):**  So we're trying to work out how we work with those partners right now, where we can bring  all the skills and help them develop that land into a better ecosystem, bring back nature,  and at the same time, do something around the carbon asset that we're creating and sharing  that upside that we create for them.  So that's ongoing, we don't have a clear, a clear proposition there yet.  
**[0:26:32-0:26:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:26:32):**  And but it's coming.  It's coming.  Yeah.  And how important is the ranching or you mentioned the pigs as a keystone species, almost as  a quote unquote tool in the forest.  
**[0:26:41-0:26:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:26:41):**  We talked last time, I think also a bit about a lot of these places are overgrazed.  And he said, Yeah, we take some time to take these properties, concentrate the grazing  and the rest we let we work on the reforestation part, not we let reforest, we actually actively  reforest.  Is that still the case?  
**[0:26:55-0:27:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:26:55):**  Like or have you in terms of said, I don't want to compete on producing food, like is  our animals in rotation or in some cases, are they part of the regeneration in this  case?  Or is that something you have not done?  Yes.  
**[0:27:10-0:27:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:27:10):**  So yeah, no, no, we have we've moved now.  So for instance, the site on the island mole, we've changed the species to be more suitable.  So we've moved to Highland cattle, which are gorgeous, beautiful and fluffy cows for anybody  who's not familiar with them, with big horns, but a very placid, very gentle cows.  And so we've introduced a small herd of Highland cows there, and that we that we use for for  
**[0:27:34-0:27:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:27:34):**  regenerative, regenerative grazing.  So basically almost going to a silver pasture system, like the tree and the animal, or is  that a goal at some point?  Like because if we look at the drawdown models, and like that's I wouldn't say the top, top,  top, but it's definitely up there in terms of carbon potential is that integration of  
**[0:27:49-0:27:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:27:49):**  animal and trees, which is not always easy.  Let's not underestimate that.  But if you do it well, it can be a very powerful symbiosis.  Yeah.  And it's a long it's a long process as well, because you need you know, the pigs we can  
**[0:28:02-0:28:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:28:02):**  introduce after we think about seven years in new forest.  And that's something we've been experimenting with.  Because otherwise they disrupt the growth significantly.  Yeah.  Yeah.  
**[0:28:14-0:28:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:28:14):**  I mean, but there's a lot of factors in that.  So so you can put them in with very young trees.  And if if the grazing pressure is carefully looked after, and you know, the mangalitza  pigs we have are and they're not deep diggers.  And they will they will dig if they're hungry, but they prefer to graze.  
**[0:28:32-0:28:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:28:32):**  So they won't, we can get them in younger trees, but your your investment into trees,  you don't want that to go wrong.  So you need to be moving.  It's management, which is key.  Yeah, the management is really important.  
**[0:28:46-0:28:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:28:46):**  And it's the same with with with cows, you don't want cows until the trees are big enough.  So you know, you're probably looking 20 years before this woodlands are established enough  to be good for grazing now where there's existing woodland, yes, we will, we will selectively  graze through that.  But we're not really, we're not really farming, we're ecological restoration.  
**[0:29:06-0:29:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:29:06):**  And we're trying to replace those keystone species that are that are missing, you know,  that would be in the landscape, but managing the grazing in a way that nature would normally  have done with top level predators.  So trying to replicate nature when we when we have a livestock there.  Again, the holistic approach.  
**[0:29:23-0:29:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:29:23):**  So this is us trying to move to how we you know, we know how to do reforestation and  ecological restoration profitably, and well, and this is us now moving into a phase of  how do we make this scalable?  Because it's difficult when you're very cash intensive to buy the land to ensure that trees  can be there for a long period of time.  
**[0:29:39-0:29:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:29:39):**  But how do you switch that to being something that's truly scalable and rapidly scalable  is that is the challenge we're grappling with at that side.  The other side, we're scaling much quicker.  And I think that we're getting into that now as well.  And the enhanced weathering or enhanced rock weathering, you mentioned the biochar, we're  
**[0:29:55-0:29:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:29:55):**  putting that we're currently building a larger facility close to a sawmill, etc.  What is enhanced rock weathering?  I mean, you're taking rocks, but it has to fit, you don't want to probably ship rocks  all over the world.  So it needs to be somewhere nearby.  
**[0:30:06-0:30:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:30:06):**  And then you have to get it to the certain size, as you mentioned, to the right size  to enable the water to hit as much as possible and for that carbon to lock in.  How does that work?  So there are certain types of rock we're looking for.  So specific types of rock and they have different different weathering properties, but they  
**[0:30:23-0:30:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:30:23):**  also have different fertilising properties, if you if you if you view the two, the two  is sort of two sides of the same process.  And we what we what we're doing at the moment is we're actually buying quarry waste.  So going to quarries for their waste material.  And we have a there's quite a lot of science before we even will make a purchase where  
**[0:30:45-0:30:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:30:45):**  we are taking samples of the rock.  We're doing mineralogy and chemical testing on it.  We're making sure there aren't high levels of heavy metals.  We're making sure that the CO2 removal levels are high enough to make it commercially worthwhile  for us.  
**[0:31:01-0:31:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:31:01):**  And we're making sure that this fertiliser benefits and that we understand those fertiliser  benefits.  And then we will find farms hopefully nearby, work with those farmers.  There's an education process of what can it do to their land?  What's it going to do to their land?  
**[0:31:19-0:31:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:31:19):**  Because this is on land that you don't own.  Yes.  It's just the scalable part.  So you're working with farmers, then it has to match what they're growing, I'm imagining,  because we're sort of applying fertiliser here.  
**[0:31:28-0:31:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:31:28):**  It's a slower release and not so much.  And that's less of a concern because it's quite slow release.  So we're not going to flood their soil with fertiliser.  And we are going to prevent them needing to put some of the inputs in.  Which is a very big thing looking at current input prices and with the current political  
**[0:31:46-0:31:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:31:46):**  situation, they're probably not going to go down anytime soon.  So if you can replace any inputs, it's huge.  So you're bringing it to them and then you have to pulverise it or what's a rock crusher?  What does that process look like?  So we're actually at the moment we're taking the waste rock from quarries where...  
**[0:32:03-0:32:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:32:03):**  Which is already...  It's already crushed.  So when a quarry is producing, say, a roadstone or something like that, they look for something  like a 40 mil graded rock.  So it's a particle size is at 40 mil that they're going to put down as a base layer  
**[0:32:18-0:32:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:32:18):**  on a road or a topping layer, which might be a 10 mil graded.  And every time you break those rocks apart, you're creating dust and you're creating finer  particles.  Which is perfect for you.  So we will take the finer materials, we'll sieve it down to the size we want and then  
**[0:32:33-0:32:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:32:33):**  we can take that to direct to farmers without us having to put in grinding energy.  That will scale to quite a large scale over time, but won't be...  Ultimately we probably will need to be grinding material.  We're also looking at other sites where people are extracting large amounts of rock sometimes  to get to other things.  
**[0:32:53-0:32:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:32:53):**  And then the farmer, how does he or she spread it and what should we imagine in terms of  what could it replace in terms of fertilizer input or what would be the benefit of the  farmer, apart from that it's fascinating to be part of this cutting edge science, but  what would be the benefit of a farmer to participate in this and work with you?  Yeah.  
**[0:33:12-0:33:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:33:12):**  So the minerals that they're getting are typically phosphates, potassium, so two of your own  PK, calcium, magnesium.  There will be trace elements there that they might be missing, selenium, aluminum, iron  in low quantities, but in the quantities that plants need for enzyme development and things  like that.  
**[0:33:30-0:33:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:33:30):**  So we see farmers around the world having to apply some of these trace nutrients where  they've been growing the same crop year after year.  So farmers will put selenium on, for example, it's there.  It's in very small quantities, but it's there.  And so it can be, depending on the quantity, depending on the rock type, we can be replacing  
**[0:33:51-0:33:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:33:51):**  a lot of those micronutrients into the macronutrients or some proportion of those macronutrients.  So that's the benefit to the farmer.  In terms of spreading it, we are using modified industrial spreading equipment.  So we've done some pretty large scale trials now, tens of thousands of tons of rock being  spread.  
**[0:34:21-0:34:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:34:21):**  So we know pretty well how to do that.  And we can scale that up now.  And then it releases the fertilizer part, or you're saying that's less of a current  benefit for the farmer or that's something we have to see over the years?  Yeah, they'll see that over years rather than.  
**[0:34:36-0:34:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:34:36):**  So because of your particle distribution, and this is where the model gets really quite  complicated because your particle distribution curve is really important.  So you've got lots of very small particles in there going up to some quite large particles.  Those very small particles will weather quickly.  So you'll get an initial faster weathering and then slower weathering of the large particles  
**[0:34:54-0:35:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:34:54):**  because the surface area to volume ratio isn't as favourable.  And as they reduce in size, they'll start to weather quicker as they become smaller  because they've got more surface area to volume ratio.  So there will be an initial release.  It's unlikely to replace all of the farmers' fertilizer needs.  
**[0:35:15-0:35:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:35:15):**  And we're keeping our quantities quite low at the moment because we're the first people.  These are the biggest experiments in the world by a long, long way.  And orders of magnitude larger and we're scaling them up.  It's really important that as we do this, we know rock flowers have been used as a treatment  on agriculture for thousands of years.  
**[0:35:37-0:35:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:35:37):**  But we know that we have to get this right.  We have to monitor everything really carefully.  And that's why we've got the science team, the postdoc scientists working in our team  to do the research and monitoring because we need to understand exactly what's happening  in that ecosystem.  
**[0:35:51-0:35:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:35:51):**  We know what happens in the lab.  We need to now see what happens when you do this at large scale in the ecosystem.  And we need to monitor that and measure that because this is a multi-gigaton solution to  climate.  And we need to be doing this at scale.  
**[0:36:07-0:36:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:36:07):**  But we also need to be checking that doing this at scale doesn't have unintended consequences.  And that's a large element of the work we're doing right now.  And it is on arable land.  And grazing.  And grazing.  
**[0:36:18-0:36:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:36:18):**  Yeah.  And so what is the carbon potential?  You mentioned gigatons, but compared to like reforesting that piece of land, which is maybe  not the best solution at the moment because it could be producing food at the moment and  the farmers doing something else.  
**[0:36:33-0:36:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:36:33):**  Like what are the order of magnitudes we're talking about?  Why are you so excited about this on that hectare compared to slow growing trees, et  cetera?  Like what's the excitement for you and from Stripe obviously on this technology?  So it comes back to the fact that we're not competing for land.  
**[0:36:46-0:36:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:36:46):**  One of the big problems with reforestation and we see it particularly in developing countries.  Carbon anyway needs to go back into the soil in arable, in pasture.  And most of the land we see is very, very low on carbon and it has a lot of other benefits  as well.  Yeah.  
**[0:37:01-0:37:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:37:01):**  So you can codeploy these solutions, which is what we were doing with forestry, but you  can codeploy them on land that you can access very easily for spreading.  Land that is actively managed, that is actively monitored.  Then you can increase the scale quite dramatically.  So and we're still going to want to eat.  
**[0:37:18-0:37:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:37:18):**  So we can't just reforest.  We don't eat trees yet.  I mean, we eat a lot of things from trees, from productive trees, et cetera.  And obviously there's an enormous role for perennial agriculture, but unless we completely  get off arable and it's which we might at some point, but not in the near future.  
**[0:37:34-0:37:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:37:34):**  Yeah, we need to work on those pieces of land as well.  And they're in pretty bad shape.  Typically, yes.  And this is inorganic carbon we're storing in the soil, not the organic carbon that regenerative  ag generally focuses on.  
**[0:37:48-0:37:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:37:48):**  So the two can go hand in hand.  Is this sort of as a Kickstarter?  Is it a Kickstarter for a piece of soil?  Do you need to apply it?  Could you apply it regularly?  
**[0:37:55-0:37:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:37:55):**  I mean, these are all open questions I'm imagining.  But is it like a bit of fuel in the engine to start and the whole soil, I wouldn't say  come back to life, but it helps with that process.  Is that how you see it?  It definitely helps because you change the microbial nature of that soil.  
**[0:38:12-0:38:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:38:12):**  So there are it's early research that suggests that you get a benefit in organic carbon as  a result of the increase in inorganic carbon as well.  So as you feed the microbes, if you like, and storing more carbon, it would appear.  But that's not certainly not something that I think we can claim yet.  Claim is an absolute yet.  
**[0:38:34-0:38:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:38:34):**  So yeah, it does help kickstart it, but it's something that you can repeatedly do.  So we think this can be done like an annual fertilizer application.  But we don't know that yet.  And that's again, comes back to our monitoring and the level that we're applying at the moment  is probably about somewhere between 20 and 40 percent of what we what we think we can  
**[0:39:00-0:39:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:39:00):**  apply on an annual basis.  And we're applying that on a three year basis at the moment.  So we're applying this at less than 10 percent of what we think is the right level to do  it when we do it at large scale so that we can get some certainty around it in our smaller  field trails on our science sites.  
**[0:39:20-0:39:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:39:20):**  And this is the benefit of owning land.  We have a whole whole site dedicated just to science where we've just had our labs completed  in cabins that we can now place on that land.  So we've got science labs on site to do the monitoring and to allow us to do rapid soil  testing and things like that.  
**[0:39:40-0:39:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:39:40):**  And there we can do large scale trials at higher quantities because we control the land,  we control the first order streams that are coming off there so we can monitor the water  that's coming off that land, we can monitor changes in the soil, we can control what crops  are going on there.  And that's a huge benefit where when you're working with farmers, you don't want to impact  
**[0:40:01-0:40:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:40:01):**  upon their normal processes.  We want to allow them to, you know, this has to ultimately fit alongside what they already  do if they're going to adopt it at large scale.  We don't want to be saying to them, no, no, you can't grow that crop or you can't do x,  y, z.  
**[0:40:15-0:40:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:40:15):**  They're going to be fitting around their established cycles.  And the more we can do with this, the more I believe we'll encourage them to move towards  regenerative structures as well because as you repair that soil structure, as you repair  the bacteria, fungi, etc. in the soil, it will increase the rate of weathering.  So it's better for us.  
**[0:40:38-0:40:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:40:38):**  But also potentially this gives the farmers a way of applying fertiliser in a regenerative  setting, which they're perhaps struggling for an alternative to chemical fertilisers  for some of these micronutrients.  Yeah.  And as you are selling these credits and they are in demand, especially to early movers  
**[0:40:55-0:40:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:40:55):**  like the stripes of this world, and I think we mentioned like $200 a ton or something  last time, some of that, if you're saying it would even work better if a farmer is starting  to apply certain practices, like the whole process would go faster.  It might even be sort of a transition finance as well.  Like it could be part of that.  
**[0:41:11-0:41:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:41:11):**  Of course, it's paid for the unasked weathering and to apply this on a yearly basis or whatever  cycle makes sense.  But then if you say actually, farmer, if you also start applying this, this and this or  start not doing that, the whole process just go faster.  That would be I mean, that could be this could be a transition finance piece as well.  
**[0:41:27-0:41:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:41:27):**  And the whole it's going to be a cycle up basically, instead of down, which all in the  future talking, but it does symbiotically work together if a farmer changes his or her  practices together with the weathering.  Well certainly whilst fertiliser prices are so high, and I don't think they're ever going  to come down, and we're providing this free to farmers at the moment where we're working.  
**[0:41:46-0:41:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:41:46):**  So we keep the carbon that's part of our model.  But we have been providing them with free fertiliser, which is a huge benefit to them  right now.  And so I don't know quite how that model will develop.  I'd hope that we don't ever have to be charging farmers for this and when there were farmers  
**[0:42:09-0:42:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:42:09):**  already paying for rock before we came onto the scene.  And so they understand in some circles, certainly in the regenerative circles, they understand  the value of this and how it can replace chemical fertilisers.  And that reduces their input.  So it certainly reduces their carbon footprints because they're not having to put those inputs  
**[0:42:33-0:42:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:42:33):**  in and we know that there's downward pressure coming from supermarkets, particularly onto  farmers to reduce their carbon footprints in a sector that's really hard to decarbonise.  It's not obvious.  It's a tough transition.  Yeah, we spent 160 episodes on that.  
**[0:42:50-0:42:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:42:50):**  And to, I wouldn't say put a number on it, but just for people to imagine, like enhanced  weathering in the current science, the current academia, what is the potential?  Of course, it depends on the type of rock, it depends on the type of soil.  But just like this is a gigaton or gigaton solution.  That's why so many people are getting excited about it.  
**[0:43:08-0:43:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:43:08):**  But just to bring that a bit down to earth, because gigatons sound a lot.  How should we imagine in a context on a farm in Scotland, on a hectare or an acre or somewhere  else?  What do you normally talk about if people just have a rough estimate?  Obviously not a ton, an exact behind a comma.  
**[0:43:23-0:43:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:43:23):**  But what do you say as a rough estimate?  Why should people get excited about this?  So I'm trying to do the maths in my head now.  It can probably, it depends on the size of the particles, depends on where we end up  at the end of the science.  
**[0:43:38-0:43:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:43:38):**  But it's tons of carbon per hectare.  Per year?  Per year, potentially.  Wow, which is a significant amount.  Yeah.  
**[0:43:45-0:43:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:43:45):**  But your cost of doing it is quite high.  Of course, you have to bring it in, you have to sieve it, you have to analyse it, you have  to match it, potentially it's not next door, because not everybody has a query, which is  perfectly suited next door, etc, etc.  I think we'll struggle to stay at that $200 a ton price that we did for Stripe initially,  
**[0:44:04-0:44:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:44:04):**  just by the locked in costs in operating.  I think that will have to go quite a bit higher.  Over time, as you get economies of scale kicking in, it might come back down, but it's not  straightforward and a lot of the demand in the market right now is for immediate carbon  and enhanced rock weathering takes multiple years to weather, depending on the particle  
**[0:44:29-0:44:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:44:29):**  size and depending on what we find out as we get further into the science.  It's not a, well, there are no magic bullets in this case with climate, and this isn't  one, but the potential is 2 to 4 billion tons, we think, per year globally.  That's huge.  We're going to need a minimum of 10 billion tons of removal.  
**[0:44:55-0:44:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:44:55):**  That's assuming every sector decarbonises as best we believe it can.  So this is 10 billion.  On top of that decarbonisation, we need about 10 billion tons a year of actual removal,  and this could be a few tons of that, basically.  It could be 20 to 40% of that, yeah.  
**[0:45:12-0:45:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:45:12):**  Which is significant.  Adding on that this is, apart from the biochar, apart from the trees, apart from holistic  grazing, apart from, I mean, this is just the rock weathering.  And this is permanent removal.  This is long-term lockup.  
**[0:45:24-0:45:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:45:24):**  Now, I am a big fan of grazing and soil storage of carbon.  The problem with it is it can be reversed very, very quickly if you have a change of  landscape.  Yeah, one plough and it's one cut of the tree.  Yeah, it's gone.  
**[0:45:38-0:45:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:45:38):**  This once it's done, it's hundreds of thousands of years, millions of years, it goes into  the rock record, and it is locked up.  So in terms of quality of solution, it's absolute best in class.  Now that doesn't mean that other solutions don't have a place to play.  Anything that stores carbon for a period of time, we talk about biochar is 100 year storage,  
**[0:46:01-0:46:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:46:01):**  how much is stored after 100 years.  But the thing is, if you can produce, there's somewhere in the region of 10 billion tons  of biomass that's wasted each year.  If you can turn that into three to four tons of carbon, in fact, some people think it's  high and that some people think it's as much as 20 billion tons of biomass each year.  
**[0:46:17-0:46:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:46:17):**  Which is burned now, mind you, many places or left to rot, etc. and not burned in the  way that it makes biochar.  No, no.  It's burned in a way that it releases everything.  Yeah, it releases everything or worse still, actually, when it rots, often you're releasing  
**[0:46:29-0:46:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:46:29):**  methane as well, which is far more potent as a greenhouse gas.  So when you look at that over 100 years, if you can store, let's say, four gigatons again  of carbon as biochar and get a benefit in the soil, that's a hugely attractive method.  I'm also a fan of what charmer doing with pyrolysis and producing bio oil, which they  inject into oil wells.  
**[0:46:53-0:46:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:46:53):**  That's permanent storage, but it misses the holistic benefits of biochar.  But it does turn it into permanent as opposed to 100 year storage.  I personally think that we're better to use that on dry land, which needs the water moderation.  As biochar than we are as bio oil, but both approaches have merits.  And again, you multiply that up 100 years by four gigatons, and it doesn't stop at 100  
**[0:47:21-0:47:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:47:21):**  years.  It's not like it all suddenly gets released at 100 years.  But you can store and buffer a huge amount of carbon.  And again, with soil, even if soil were only a 10 year buffer, you can still, there's so  much soil that we could be enriching.  
**[0:47:39-0:47:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:47:39):**  And once it's there, and it will hit a point of saturation point, we think, that's certainly  the evidence suggests that there's a saturation point with soil carbon.  But let's get all the soil saturated because it's at least buying us time.  So I'm very much a fan of the, you know, we need to do everything and some of it will  work really well, some of it will work less well, some of it will be really expensive  
**[0:48:01-0:48:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:48:01):**  like direct air capture.  Some of it will have holistic benefits and some won't.  And this is just such a huge problem.  We need to do everything and figure out what works and probably lots of things work.  And what is the biggest struggle or what is the biggest bottleneck at the moment for you  
**[0:48:22-0:48:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:48:22):**  at the Futureforce company?  Apart from scaling a company to 70 people and growing like crazy, I mean, and time and  sleep and all of that, but that's sort of given in a scale up like that.  Small children are probably the biggest barrier to scaling.  No, I joke, but um, get gyms and babysits and support.  
**[0:48:39-0:48:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:48:39):**  Now he has it.  Yeah.  Yeah.  So I think there are various challenges.  I mean, the scale of growth is always a challenge.  
**[0:48:46-0:48:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:48:46):**  We've gone from, I don't know how many people when we last spoke, I think around 20 or so.  In my mind somewhere there's that number, but it wasn't a lot.  Yeah.  So I think I think it might have been less.  And I think in the last 10 months, somebody was telling me we've gone from 10 people to  
**[0:49:00-0:49:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:49:00):**  70 people.  We've got, I think, 17 open positions at the moment.  So please send people to our website.  Have a look at those roles.  We're looking for good people.  
**[0:49:08-0:49:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:49:08):**  Get it touched.  Yeah.  Yeah.  So that's always a challenge.  We're internationalizing at the moment.  
**[0:49:15-0:49:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:49:15):**  So we're building out a team in the US.  And that's, again, just adds another dimension as you start working across those time zones.  And the will be, finance will become a barrier for us.  We're about to go out and start raising a much larger round of investment.  And we haven't disclosed our funding rounds to date, but we have had quite a lot of private  
**[0:49:37-0:49:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:49:37):**  investment into the company.  And we're now looking at how we scale that up significantly.  We have models in place that can go to millions of tons of carbon removal.  We'd like to think we can be the first organization in the world to facilitate billion ton carbon  removal.  
**[0:49:58-0:49:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:49:58):**  That's our North Star.  On a yearly basis or a cumulative?  On an annual basis.  On an annual basis.  Wow.  
**[0:50:04-0:50:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:50:04):**  And that's, to me, is the scale of thinking we need to be applying to this problem now.  And if you look at the latest IPCC report, I've not had a chance to read all 4,000 pages  of it.  It came out yesterday.  Yeah.  
**[0:50:17-0:50:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:50:17):**  It came out yesterday.  Yeah.  But they're finally saying the things that I think a number of us have been saying for  quite a while, that this is actually, the evidence is that this is far worse and happening  far quicker than the media have previously reported.  
**[0:50:31-0:50:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:50:31):**  And if we want to keep a livable planet, or at least large areas of livable planet, we  need to be acting really quickly.  So we just need to do everything, do everything we can.  And when you've got something that's working for us, we have to focus on that.  Scale.  
**[0:50:51-0:50:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:50:51):**  Thank you so much for your time.  Don't keep you any longer because you have a company and a billion tons to reach on any  of your bases.  Thank you so much for checking in with us, sharing the updates.  We'll definitely point to the job openings and the website and obviously the previous  
**[0:51:04-0:51:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:51:04):**  interview if you want to know more.  And if you want to learn more on all of this, definitely point to the website of the Future  Force Company.  So thank you, Jim, so much for your time and your very busy schedule to come and do a catch-up  of where you stand in the regeneration at scale.  
**[0:51:18-0:51:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:51:18):**  It's always a pleasure.  Thank you for having me back.  If you found the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  1.  
**[0:51:28-0:51:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:51:28):**  Rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few seconds.  2.  Share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  3.  
**[0:51:41-0:51:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:51:41):**  If this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please join my membership  community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on cambrot.com slash Investing Regen Egg or in the description  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  
**[0:52:05-0:52:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:52:05):**  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food.  How to put money to work in regenerating soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while  doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  
**[0:52:19-0:52:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:52:19):**  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to put money  to work in regenerating soils and have been following this space since 2011 and recording  this podcast since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in this space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework?  
**[0:52:39-0:52:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:52:39):**  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  What questions should you ask?  What is happening in this space?  What should you read?  
**[0:52:47-0:52:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:52:47):**  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  You, the soil builders and investors in this space.  
**[0:52:57-0:53:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:52:57):**  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management consultants, etc.  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  
**[0:53:17-0:53:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:53:17):**  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  
**[0:53:30-0:53:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:53:30):**  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  
**[0:53:49-0:53:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:53:49):**  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to ride along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  
**[0:54:09-0:54:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:54:09):**  invest in, what kind of co investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  
**[0:54:29-0:54:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:54:29):**  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  
**[0:54:40-0:54:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/jim-mann-2#t=0:54:40):**  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  