### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2022-00-03)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com slash course, or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  The world of crypto and blockchain is exploding, is attracting an enormous amount of money,  talent, resources, and obviously cowboys, scams, and Ponzi schemes.  
**[0:00:23-0:00:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:00:23):**  So what should we know in the regeneration world, in the finance world about this fascinating,  scary and very confusing world?  Join me today in an episode where we scratch the surface, but hopefully give you some framework,  some questions to ask, some metrics to dig into, to make sense of this, as I said, very  exciting, but also very confusing world.  
**[0:00:46-0:00:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:00:46):**  Enjoy.  Welcome to another episode of investing in regenerative agriculture, investing as if  the planet mattered.  Podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work, to regenerate soil, people, local communities  
**[0:01:03-0:01:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:01:03):**  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small and consumers start paying much more  
**[0:01:21-0:01:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:01:21):**  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  In March last year, we launched our membership community to make it easy for fans to support  our work.  And so many of you have joined as a member.  We've launched different types of benefits, exclusive content, Q&A webinars with former  
**[0:01:37-0:01:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:01:37):**  guests, ask me anything sessions plus so much more to come in the future.  For more information on the different tiers, benefits and how to become a member, check  gumroad.com slash investing region egg or find the link below.  Thank you.  Welcome to another episode today.  
**[0:01:53-0:01:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:01:53):**  I'm very excited to unpack blockchains, cryptos, online communities, community currencies,  and so much more with Gustav, who has been working in the field for the last five years  as a founder on the investing side and also on the impact side.  So welcome, Gustav.  Thank you, Carl.  
**[0:02:08-0:02:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:02:08):**  Nice to be here.  Can you just explain, first of all, how you got into the crypto world and then also where  your interest in like, let's say, a healthy planet or soil comes from?  Because you're definitely not a farmer or a soil expert, but you are very interested  in this space.  
**[0:02:23-0:02:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:02:23):**  You're interested in both, let's say, journeys.  How did you get into the crypto world?  And then we'll unpack the other side.  Yeah, sure.  So I was a student in Copenhagen.  
**[0:02:31-0:02:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:02:31):**  I had a very, very bad concussion.  We were back in like 2015 and cannot do too much.  So I'm really just excited about this new thing I learned about, which was called Ethereum  at the time, which was like a new blockchain.  And via this, I started going to a meetup in Copenhagen.  
**[0:02:51-0:02:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:02:51):**  And via this meetup, I was invited to join the first European Blockchain Summer School,  which was also in Copenhagen, where I was living at the time, at the IT University,  where we had different kind of case companies and the Danish tax authorities and some banks  and Maersk, the biggest shipping company in the world.  And we did some case studies there.  
**[0:03:11-0:03:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:03:11):**  And after this kind of few days, I was sort of lucky enough to get some job offers from  different organizations and I took one which was sort of the most nerdy one, which was  a German development studio in Germany.  And at that time, they had helped sort of as co-developers to build Ethereum, which  is today the second biggest blockchain.  
**[0:03:35-0:03:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:03:35):**  And that's sort of what I found very interesting.  I was interested before a bit because I played a lot of computer stuff in like Bitcoin, but  I didn't see too much the use case other than this kind of small value, this is a money  aspect.  But what Ethereum was at that time and still is, is a generalized computer.  
**[0:03:54-0:03:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:03:54):**  So basically taking some of the basic ideas around this initialization that Bitcoin has  done, but instead of only being a payment network, also sort of utilizing that as sort  of a decentralized computer where you can put programs on.  And I had studied on my bachelor's degree in science and on my master's a bit more  sort of on the business side, from my business school.  
**[0:04:12-0:04:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:04:12):**  And I just saw that, whoa, with these things, you can really address some of the sort of  coordination, governance, funding issues that in various literature has been sort of something  that we spend a lot of time on.  So yeah, and then I got into space, I worked there a few years at that company in Germany  and then eventually moved on to start the company myself with some other guys and developers  
**[0:04:38-0:04:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:04:38):**  in America.  And yeah, since then, I've created other stuff.  I've created the cryptocurrency alliance, which was sort of more on the community, local  currency field.  And that's because the first project that I sort of led in that space was sort of mixing  
**[0:04:52-0:04:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:04:52):**  cryptocurrencies and human currencies.  And yeah, since then, just been very active in space, investing.  Now I work at what you can call a third generation blockchain, what's called Nia, which is sort  of taking the same approach as Ethereum, generalized computer, but trying to make up some of the  sort of shortcomings there around, you know, the energy footprint and the transaction costs  
**[0:05:13-0:05:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:05:13):**  and some other stuff around user and developer experience.  And yeah, now I'm just working there and engaged in this space in various fields, also in some  of the early sort of DOWs.  And DOW is kind of funny, funny word, it means decentralized autonomous organization, which  is not really fitting, I think, because it is sort of just, you know, you can imagine  
**[0:05:32-0:05:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:05:32):**  like kind of having a Facebook group, but not really controlled by Facebook, you cannot  really be shut down, then having other these other things that blockchain offers, like  specific voting systems, funding system, etc, etc.  But basically just operating sort of a Facebook group.  So the DOW sort of choose how they, you know, vote, select specific things, etc, etc.  
**[0:05:54-0:05:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:05:54):**  And yeah, so that's more or less it.  And another topic.  So I mean, I've, I've, as so many other people who've been in this podcast, and in this world,  see what we as a species are doing, humans, destroying, destroying the planet, destroying  sometimes ourselves as well.  
**[0:06:13-0:06:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:06:13):**  And I think it was really when I met Bella from Mustelseed in Switzerland, some years  ago, which I know you also know that I really sort of got diva into it on a conscious level.  And via Bella got engaged with some of the projects that this charity Mustelseed is also  supporting.  And some of them have been on this podcast as well.  
**[0:06:34-0:06:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:06:34):**  So yeah, but I will not in any way say that like the impact retail space, I'm just learning  and I'm probably sort of what I can bring to the podcast is probably more on the crypto  side, then sort of what some of the other experts in the region is also impact.  Yeah, thank you so much for that intro.  Definitely a shout out to Bella.  
**[0:06:54-0:06:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:06:54):**  I will put a link below for anybody that doesn't know Bella had funny, his amazing history  and the must see trust that he is running that actually also supported this podcast.  So and we met actually through them.  And there's so much to unpack there.  But let's start with you.  
**[0:07:08-0:07:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:07:08):**  You mentioned a few things, but one I really want to focus on for a second third generation  blockchains that suggests there are two before that.  And what's the advantage of let's say, let's walk us through the first, the second and  the third and why the third is so, so important, especially I think many people will have an  immediate reaction to block change others.  
**[0:07:27-0:07:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:07:27):**  So energy pollutants, they're extremely polluting in general.  You already mentioned that that's been not taken care of, but being worked on.  But why is that third generation so different than let's say the one and the second?  What happened back in 2008, of course, was a financial crisis.  But there was also suddenly this weird person appearing, or group of people appearing Satoshi  
**[0:07:47-0:07:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:07:47):**  Nakamoto, which sort of put Bitcoin live.  And as you can imagine, it's a few years ago, but you know, this is the first time ever  we saw this technology in the world.  This was sort of Bitcoin and the first generation blockchains.  I think you can think about that.  
**[0:08:03-0:08:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:08:03):**  That's at least how I view it.  Some people disagree that, you know, when I talk with Bella, for example, around the  first computers he worked in, you know, which was like the size of a farm, or it's not a  big house, you know, that's how I view Bitcoin, you know, this was the first time the technology  came out, the first instance.  
**[0:08:20-0:08:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:08:20):**  And this was in itself like a breakthrough technology, which have created this new paradigm  we're in, which we can call the Web3, where blockchain is sort of one of those latest  technologies combined with other sort of technologies.  But that also means that, you know, I'm sitting in a MacBook right now, right?  There's a big difference between the first computers you see at a museum and then a MacBook,  
**[0:08:44-0:08:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:08:44):**  or let's say an iPhone with an app store in, etc, etc.  So that use case of Bitcoin is really to solve what's called the double spending problem,  meaning that before on the currencies that had been sort of before Bitcoin, you would  maybe have digital currency systems, but there's always some kind of trust level involved.  Basically what we want to have with this type of payment system is we want to have, you  
**[0:09:07-0:09:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:09:07):**  know, a guarantee that I'm not sending the same money that I'm sending to you, to, you  know, your friend as well, because then that undermines the whole money system.  So that's kind of what...  Yeah.  And instead of having a sort of a central database that keeps track of that, aka a central  
**[0:09:20-0:09:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:09:20):**  bank, this was fixed with a distributed ledger and all kinds of level of trust without having  one person or one organisation to trust.  Like this was distributed trust, but in a currency.  Exactly.  Yeah.  
**[0:09:33-0:09:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:09:33):**  You can think about it as computers around the world, they are running some client software.  And what that basically does is that they have the same view on some accounting ledger.  It's not much more complicated than that, to be honest.  And that's sort of that new case that now we know, verified by all these computers and  network, that there's not one line, etc.  
**[0:09:53-0:09:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:09:53):**  It also where mining comes into the picture and all this sort of this energy war, they  running against each other.  So that's basically that.  With Ethereum, as I briefly mentioned, and there was sort of other in between, but to  me that's sort of the milestone for the second generation blockchains.  
**[0:10:13-0:10:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:10:13):**  And that's the field I've worked in also a couple of years.  And they basically said, you know, why not turn this power of these computers around  the world to create sort of a decentralised computer so that it's not only a simple payment  use case, but, you know, you can deploy a sort of an organisation on this.  You can deploy a decentralised exchange.  
**[0:10:32-0:10:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:10:32):**  You can deploy, you know, a carbon credit app as well.  And it's maintained by the same sort of security guarantee, censorship resistant and trustlessness  as you mentioned.  So this is sort of the step into Ethereum.  And Ethereum today is also super, super successful.  
**[0:10:49-0:10:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:10:49):**  What has then happened to Ethereum is that it's sort of got too popular in a way so that  you have a lot of costs if you are sort of doing on-chain transactions.  Sometimes you need to spend several hundred dollars to do specific type of interactions  on Ethereum.  And this is just not sustainable, of course.  
**[0:11:09-0:11:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:11:09):**  There are only still only kind of limited million number of users today of Ethereum.  So for this related to scale, large scale, that's maybe not, you know, that is not great  enough.  So, and in the Ethereum space, there are a lot of kind of approaches where you take some  of the things off-chain and you use other primitives.  
**[0:11:29-0:11:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:11:29):**  That's what we call sort of layer two.  Layer one, when we refer to that, it's always kind of a core blockchain.  Then you have layer two, which is things that sort of off-chain, but maybe have some component  on-chain that's kind of scalability solution for Ethereum.  Then you also have what I would sort of call generation three blockchains.  
**[0:11:49-0:11:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:11:49):**  And there they have a loop at Ethereum, which right now is also using mining and also is  maybe a bit more energy efficient than Bitcoin, but not really a lot.  And that's because it still uses this what's called proof of work.  And every time we hear proof of work, this is sort of related to the mining.  Meaning mining, simply meaning many computers running.  
**[0:12:10-0:12:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:12:10):**  Like you have to imagine again, like a farm size or more of servers running 24-7 using  electricity, obviously in places where it's cheap.  So mining in this case is a lot of computers, but go on Google if you're interested or YouTube  and find some videos of this.  This is our massive, massive farms, literally farming these blockchains.  
**[0:12:29-0:12:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:12:29):**  And that's proof of work.  And we've been talking a long time about proof of stake for Ethereum to go to a more efficient  way of doing that.  Is that any way we're near?  Like would they sort of, would then Ethereum become also the third generation or would  
**[0:12:43-0:12:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:12:43):**  they be stuck in 2.5?  What is your view there?  To me, it looks like it's underway well for becoming what we can call a true third generation  blockchain.  The thing is that imagine if you have a system right now with Ethereum, and I don't make  
**[0:12:55-0:12:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:12:55):**  exact numbers right now, but let's say $400 billion, maybe it's worth right now.  It's not something you just migrate.  Yeah, just for people to understand, like there are hundreds of billions of dollars  real money going through the different blockchains, of course, mostly in the larger ones.  But this is a space where a lot is happening.  
**[0:13:12-0:13:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:13:12):**  A lot of money is going around, a lot of infrastructure costs are being paid.  A lot of people are putting serious money into these farms as well.  And there's a lot of space for, let's say, for experimentation.  There's a lot of money around looking for, to build new things, to develop things, to,  of course, risk wise, it's enormous because we're in the super, super, super early stage.  
**[0:13:33-0:13:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:13:33):**  But definitely from an evolution point of view, experimentation point of view, we're  in a very interesting phase of the whole evolution.  And if you're saying Ethereum like $400 billion just for people, that's a four with 11 zeros,  just to understand.  Yeah.  
**[0:13:47-0:13:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:13:47):**  And I would say, yes, they are full on the way.  And I believe they are sort of three steps defined.  So what Ethereum basically is doing is that they are sort of creating a parallel chain,  which is called the beacon chain.  And they are slowly transitioning everything on Ethereum to that thing.  
**[0:13:58-0:14:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:13:58):**  And that thing is running on good state.  But it's sort of a step to go there.  So there is no mistake made on the way because a lot of hackers or people trying to exploit  whatever they can find to extract this money.  That's why it's probably a bit harder process for Ethereum to migrate because they have  
**[0:14:16-0:14:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:14:16):**  a live system.  Whereas what the other third-generation blockchain have done is sort of started this network  from the beginning.  From zero.  And they looked at Ethereum.  
**[0:14:26-0:14:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:14:26):**  They maybe wanted to build an app on Ethereum.  They thought it's not really possible.  It's too expensive.  It's too slow, et cetera, et cetera.  Maybe there are other usability things as well from the developer side or the user side  
**[0:14:39-0:14:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:14:39):**  that maybe do better.  And then they did that from scratch on.  And yeah, so most of those are running different versions then of proof of stake protocols.  When we say proof of stake in opposed to mining, where mining is this, as you say, kind of  computing game where whatever computer can first solve a very complicated mathematical  
**[0:15:00-0:15:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:15:00):**  problem, they get a reward.  That's sort of how the protocol is structured.  That's how someone is in the sort of network competing to serve you by processing your  transaction.  And whoever can do this fastest will get it.  
**[0:15:19-0:15:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:15:19):**  And whoever can do it fastest, it's typically the people with the best hardware.  And that's why it started with something you could do on a very bad laptop.  And now, as you say, this competition has gone so far that it's now these big data centers.  And I mean, I don't know those exact numbers.  If we talk about energy consumption of countries or whatever, it's always debated.  
**[0:15:39-0:15:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:15:39):**  But it's definitely a lot of energy that's spent there, which is kind of ridiculous in  my opinion.  So proof of stake then means that there are different variations here.  But you could kind of say, OK, Kohn, so you would like to stake here.  So maybe you put X amount of tokens.  
**[0:15:55-0:15:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:15:55):**  Let's say on here, for example, where you put X amount of near.  If you are behaving well and just running like a normal kind of cloud server, so not  all this extra energy efficient, sorry, inefficient stuff, then you're going to get a reward.  However, if we catch you trying to do some malicious transaction or try to game the network,  then you're going to lose your stake.  
**[0:16:18-0:16:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:16:18):**  This is basically the kind of the logic behind this consensus algorithm.  So it's only holding my tokens and not I don't have to create them or I don't have to mine  them to with a lot of energy to prove that I have them.  I put them in a sort of holding or I put them in an escrow and then I have to behave well.  And if I do that, I'm fine.  
**[0:16:38-0:16:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:16:38):**  And if I don't lose my stake.  Yeah, exactly.  And that's when you look at these networks, there are people sitting and designing these  things and they look at them.  So what's your cost?  
**[0:16:48-0:16:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:16:48):**  Okay, so you could try to do malicious attack once.  You lose all your money.  You can try again.  You lose all your money.  And at some point it's maybe not going to be worth it for you to try to game the system.  
**[0:16:57-0:17:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:16:57):**  There are also other protocols where someone can point out that Kone is doing this, then  that person maybe get a large amount of the coins that are slashed from you to incentivize  people call like with blowing as well.  So that's how these sort of incentives in these consensus algorithms are.  Trust is built.  
**[0:17:18-0:17:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:17:18):**  Yeah, exactly.  So that's the basic design principle.  There are foundation also have this distributed network where people don't know or like necessarily  trust each other, but they follow the same protocol where these incentives are sort of  baked in and allegedly then being secure.  
**[0:17:35-0:17:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:17:35):**  You see sometimes blockchains that are not as secure as they thought it would be.  So obviously when we talk about like trustless systems, I think that's kind of the sign criteria,  but I certainly don't understand how most of this stuff work myself, right?  So I have people that I trust that say they fully understand it, etc. etc.  So I think it's always going to be trust in my opinion.  
**[0:17:57-0:18:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:17:57):**  I think trust is sort of fundamental of human beings.  So I'm not in that kind of school where I think like no trust at all.  But the system itself should be minimalized as much as possible.  And as the software is open source, you could say sort of, well, maybe not everyone in the  world can have the ability to go and look at the code and understand themself.  
**[0:18:18-0:18:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:18:18):**  But knowing that everyone in the world have the option to do that and everything sort  of on the table, it's very different than say, I would like now to have a balance in  the internet market and see the balance of all banks.  This is just not public information.  So bringing all of this stuff to the public domain and using open source software that  
**[0:18:36-0:18:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:18:36):**  everyone can verify, I think that also helps a lot sort of on the trust side to catch errors  or to like see, okay, we don't just have to take your word for it.  We actually have ways to try to verify.  Yeah, your skin in the game.  And so this sounds extremely interesting, but also relatively, I would say, quote unquote,  
**[0:18:54-0:18:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:18:54):**  far away from the physical world.  But I know there are a lot of points where it touches the physical world, the way you  see in the near future it will touch.  So let's go over a few of those where let's say you get excited where it could touch the  ways of how to create a healthy planet and what you think that the audience in this case,  
**[0:19:13-0:19:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:19:13):**  it might be experts on this or not at all, should really know about what is coming or  what is already there.  What are some, you mentioned DAOs at the beginning, let's unpack those maybe a bit or some other  funding models, like how does it touch the world of farm, soil, trees, et cetera, and  what we should know about this.  
**[0:19:29-0:19:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:19:29):**  Yeah, so we have these type of different like primitives or tools that is increasingly become  much more available for everyone in the world.  And one day, when we say DAO, this is just the type of organisation.  I'm for example part of VC investment fund, we operate as a DAO.  This means that we have pooled our money together into a smart contract.  
**[0:19:48-0:19:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:19:48):**  A smart contract is then a small program we have put in this case on Ethereum blockchain.  And then we can collaboratively make decisions.  Why did you choose Ethereum in this case, as you say, the transaction fees or the like  you need a lot to do transactions or was it the easiest option because it's the most widely  used smart contract blockchain?  
**[0:20:08-0:20:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:20:08):**  At that time, there was not really third generation blockchains alive like two years ago.  And at the same time, maybe it's okay for us to pay 50 or 100 dollars to make transactions  when we do like larger investments, whereas they're not okay to recover coffee.  So it depends a bit on the specific use case.  The use case, of course.  
**[0:20:27-0:20:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:20:27):**  And so this is an investment fund.  So you pooled money like many people might know in, let's say the Silicon Valley way  or others.  They pooled money from a lot of people in this case, not necessarily accredited investors.  They could be anywhere in the world.  
**[0:20:38-0:20:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:20:38):**  They pooled their virtual currencies obviously in one smart contract.  And then what happened?  Like you don't have a fund manager, right?  Like one person that sits on what is it Mountain View or whatever in Silicon Valley deciding  what to do with this.  
**[0:20:51-0:20:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:20:51):**  How is this different?  In our case, we don't have it.  Other investment DAOs might have it.  That depends everything you know, on the legal setup they have chosen, etc.  We are sort of more an investment club as you may.  
**[0:21:01-0:21:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:21:01):**  So there, what we do is that we issue sort of new shares every quarter.  And based on this, we are using different systems to sort of internally assess who have  added value this quarter.  And those people then get higher to get more shares.  And the people who didn't do anything, they get diluted basically.  
**[0:21:21-0:21:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:21:21):**  We see all every time what's in the treasury, there is no person who is like the accounting  person who we have to trust that takes well-care for finances, etc.  We can, everyone can see that.  Then on each investment we are voting on chain with the number of shares we have in the thing.  We then have the same amount of vote in the investment.  
**[0:21:40-0:21:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:21:40):**  If then there are investment decisions that we find it's like very bad and like I'm not  really interested in taking classes anymore.  We could at any time rate quit, which means that we can then sort of at the same time  get out what we actually are entitled to in the investment fund and say, okay, this decision  is too bad.  
**[0:21:58-0:21:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:21:58):**  I want to get out now.  And that's something typically that maybe you don't have the inside ability to do in  traditional investment funds.  So the liquidity is instant if you want and you're very involved, let's say in the day-to-day  running of the fund.  
**[0:22:10-0:22:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:22:10):**  Like you find investments, you do DD, you do a lot of these things and all of that is  visible.  And for all of that, you get, let's say activity points.  You're very active and that means that you get more shares over time of the fund, of  the investment club and people that are no longer active or not active basically slowly  
**[0:22:30-0:22:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:22:30):**  get diluted.  And so it's a constantly evolving almost organism.  Yeah, yeah.  And in turn, then many of the other members, they are sort of representing more traditional  VC funds.  
**[0:22:40-0:22:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:22:40):**  So it also serves sort of as a network between those members where they can actually then  get a new deal lead.  They can get that in and then based on the interest and if it happens, then, you know,  they also get the extra for that.  So that's just like maybe it's not that interesting for this crowd, but it's just like an example  
**[0:23:01-0:23:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:23:01):**  of how, you know, the VC model is being reinvented.  But there are funding wise many types of like these new tools.  Another power I mean is taking, you might say the complete opposite approach.  This is a charity and a sort of association and it's called the common stack which funds  a good infrastructure in this space.  
**[0:23:26-0:23:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:23:26):**  And then we also apply sort of the same.  Of course, we can always choose our own governance.  How should we, what type of voting do we want, etc, etc.  And then we apply that just for another sort of case and an argument with people.  So this is just to show that this is how organizations can operate very efficiently.  
**[0:23:45-0:23:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:23:45):**  There are some doubts which for the group where it's sort of it's not really having  a legal entity or what we call a legal wrapper and it's not, you know, sort of compliant  with general sort of depends on again, the jurisdiction, etc.  And then these two examples I mentioned, they are sort of, they actually just make the entities,  they just use these tools.  
**[0:24:07-0:24:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:24:07):**  So they're fully legal.  They use these tools just for anybody that say, yeah, but what about it's our fully legal  entities and they use the virtual tools, let's say to operate and to make, in this case,  investment decisions or charity decisions, I think is fascinating as well.  You're basically, you bring in charities and you operate a much more efficient.  
**[0:24:25-0:24:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:24:25):**  I mean, we all know the issues with the charity industry and the way of decision-making there  from an office far away.  We know what's good for you in a small village somewhere.  I mean the typical model and in this case it's fully decentralized and it's fully accessible  and open as well.  
**[0:24:41-0:24:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:24:41):**  Like anybody in there can see exactly what's been happening with every single Euro currency  or whatever has been used, which is in itself, the transparency is already revolutionary  for many ways.  Yeah.  And you see, of course, charities are embracing Facebook, etc.  
**[0:24:56-0:24:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:24:56):**  Like rapidly, right?  And that has already like, imagine how many like local groups, grassroots groups, etc.  Like local farming groups have set up Facebook groups.  Well, this is sort of just like a Facebook group and the record headers too, if you don't  care if you use Facebook or not, right?  
**[0:25:10-0:25:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:25:10):**  So you can see what they do care about is like depending where you are, for example,  in Switzerland where I live.  So the tax authorities wants to see like an invoice per transaction outgoing, if it's  like a certain amount, probably KYC.  So you know who you're dealing with.  
**[0:25:25-0:25:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:25:25):**  And then we need a valuation to Twitter, Frank, so we can assess the tax impact as well.  And if there's any, if it's like within Switzerland, VAT.  So as long as you can't give them that, you can, you can utilize the power tools, which  suddenly and of course that depends from charity to charity, but from sort of my small experience  in that world, not that many enable, you know, their members to real time vote and this gets  
**[0:25:50-0:25:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:25:50):**  executed like every week if we want to, you know, actually support this project or not  and have these other incentives that sort of makes this organization larger than just  like top management, etc.  So yeah, I think that's where this offers a very interesting tool.  And I think most organizations in the world within some years are going to operate like  
**[0:26:12-0:26:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:26:12):**  this because it is just very, very efficient and can scale like a lot sooner.  And especially when you, that's what I'm sort of motivating in these words, actually operating  from the identity.  So you don't sort of get into any hiccups afterwards.  Yeah, because we've seen examples obviously there where, I mean, you need to, as you said,  
**[0:26:34-0:26:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:26:34):**  if you want to operate in that way, you need to have somewhere a connection to a physical  country, you need to have a good grip on taxes, you need to have a good grip on invoices,  you need to have a good grip on know your customer.  And of course, because you are dealing with financial assets, which depending on where  you are, are heavily regulated or less heavily regulated.  
**[0:26:54-0:26:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:26:54):**  But there are definitely ways, I think that's the lesson here to do it fully transparent  and fully legal at the same time, which I think five years ago were impossible because  many governments weren't up to speed with many things.  And I'm not saying everywhere it is the case, but you can find places where if you want  to, you can do this fully in the, let's say the daylight.  
**[0:27:11-0:27:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:27:11):**  Yeah, fully.  And yeah, and then what I think it can offer is like different funding aspects and different  coordination aspects.  It's not just like a board meeting one time a year or a newsletter that is sent out to  the members of the charity, for example, or a cooperative, etc.  
**[0:27:25-0:27:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:27:25):**  No, you can actually let people have a say in like decision as they want.  You can have specific like sub work groups, etc.  Of course, it's not like, you know, we have not learned something in terms of organisations  throughout, like human history, right?  There are often reasons why organisations are structured as they are.  
**[0:27:40-0:27:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:27:40):**  That's often in this space, I think that we try to reinvent everything and many things  in like social constructions.  At the same time.  Yeah, exactly.  But still, I think it's very appealing to enable your members or in a cooperative, for  
**[0:27:53-0:27:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:27:53):**  example, to be very active and to have good insights in the reports, because it also means  that now people bring new insights when they actually can see in real time what the treasury  is or how much it's costing, etc.  So that's what I'm seeing sometimes is that then that gives an enormous involvement because  it motivates people a lot as well.  
**[0:28:14-0:28:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:28:14):**  And you can also put incentives so that if they then add extra value and the other members  assess that, we choose what type of incentive tool we want to use to do that.  And the same with voting, like what type of voting do we want?  Is it one vote per person?  Is it like more like we delegate?  
**[0:28:28-0:28:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:28:28):**  Is this more like an liquid democracy?  Are we more sort of conditioned voting where I sort of believe so much in something that  I sort of state on it myself?  So we have all these different versions and obviously for all types of organizations,  there might be different combinations of such that makes sense for that organization.  
**[0:28:45-0:28:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:28:45):**  Yeah, I remember, this is quite a few years ago, I'll put a link in the show notes as  well, but a Brazilian company called Semco that went fully transparent.  So everybody in their organization, this is a large company building factories, mostly  like cookie factories and things like that.  And then distributed into many other things very organically because they took that approach  
**[0:29:04-0:29:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:29:04):**  of behaving like an organism.  And this was without the blockchain.  I'm pretty sure it would have been built on the blockchain if Ricardo started it now,  but it was fully transparent.  Like everybody down to the cleaning woman or man knew could look into the books, but  
**[0:29:19-0:29:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:29:19):**  it was actually trained to actually read them as well because otherwise it's very easy to  say all the books are here, go and have a look.  But if you're not trained in accountancy, you have no clue what to look for.  And that unleashed an enormous amount of creativity.  Most people were in their different teams, also responsible for their own salaries and  
**[0:29:37-0:29:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:29:37):**  were fully transparent on that as well, which unleashed an enormous amount of transparency  and innovation there as well.  Many people left the company, sort of founded another piece, but then within the same group,  many people, whenever there was another crisis in Brazil, managed to find enormous savings  everywhere because they knew exactly what everybody else was working on and what they  
**[0:29:55-0:29:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:29:55):**  were working on and where the money went to.  Nobody ever, when traveling, this is one of those funny examples, they didn't need to  ask for a corporate credit card.  They didn't need to ask for a certain permission.  They were completely free to spend whatever they wanted because they were trusted that  
**[0:30:09-0:30:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:30:09):**  if they were going anywhere on an overseas trip, that they were able to understand what  was fair, if they had to buy a first class ticket or not, what kind of hotel, what kind  of meal.  There were no protocols for that because they were trusted in actually being a human being  and knowing that if they would spend money of the company, that was fine, but they were  
**[0:30:26-0:30:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:30:26):**  partly spending their own money.  Of course, they didn't take it to the next level of ownership as well, but people really  felt ownership or few ownership.  This company has survived ups and downs, enormous growth for, I think, plus 20 plus years in  a very, let's say, quote unquote different way.  
**[0:30:41-0:30:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:30:41):**  But everybody found, I mean, unleashed an innovation.  It wasn't for everybody, let's be clear, but it was for many people, the best place to  work and the best place to spend almost all their time.  Many people overworked, even if there were no incentives because it was their home and  their family basically.  
**[0:30:56-0:30:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:30:56):**  Yeah.  And I think that can motivate a lot of people for a lot of things.  It's important for me to say that, of course, many organizations have things that they don't  like to be put in the public and maybe rightfully so.  So then, for this stuff to really go mainstream, of course, some organization will not put  
**[0:31:15-0:31:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:31:15):**  everything on the table and there are also privacy technologies to enable that.  But for a lot of things, you could do a lot of interesting stuff for this, especially  if it's stuff like that you consider in the public domain or something like that, where  there is maybe an interest and it's like adding a lot of value for us as a species that those  things are open.  
**[0:31:36-0:31:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:31:36):**  Again, I can just talk about the Interbank market, right?  We have very little insight into when they are systemic risks and pressures that would  actually impact all of us.  If there's another 2008 crisis again, imagine how much money is going into impact investment,  right?  
**[0:31:54-0:31:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:31:54):**  A lot.  So there are things there where we actually maybe have a right to have public insight  into what's going on there because that's going to avoid a lot of stuff.  And on the other side, of course, things that depending on the company type or existing  type, you don't really want to be out in the public for business purposes or for privacy  
**[0:32:14-0:32:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:32:14):**  data purposes.  So I'm not saying everything should be an open front payment as well, but having some  of these things out in transparent can really add a lot for the earth as a whole or as you  talk about employees and being more involved and engaged and grinding innovation and results  from that.  
**[0:32:32-0:32:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:32:32):**  So I have so many questions, but we're not going to get to all of them.  We're only going to scratch the surface, which is fine.  We'll repeat this at some point, but I know you have some interesting thoughts like what  this could mean for the podcast or our audience.  I always ask that question of what would you do with a 1 billion investment fund tomorrow  
**[0:32:50-0:32:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:32:50):**  morning or now, but this is instant so we have to say now.  How would you, not necessarily how would you put that to work, but how would you structure  that?  And if you were to put that to work, you would apply to this for people just to see the possibilities  of what is already possible now or very, very near future, like where everything goes at  
**[0:33:08-0:33:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:33:08):**  a breathtaking speed at the moment.  So what would you do if you would be an investor with a billion dollars or whatever currency  you want, but let's say a lot of money to put into making this planet a livable planet  again?  Yeah, so I try to be very honest to you, Kon, that I'm not really an expert in retail  
**[0:33:25-0:33:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:33:25):**  selling culture, etc.  That's sort of my starting point.  Me neither.  I just follow the podcast.  I know a few projects, etc., etc.  
**[0:33:30-0:33:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:33:30):**  But that would be my starting point to say, actually, you don't know so much about this  stuff here.  But I do trust that, let's say, if we would look at and we could maybe see, okay, this  person and verify that this person, because you have also like podcast platforms that  are on blockchain now and they can see that, you know, it's the same wallet address showing  
**[0:33:49-0:33:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:33:49):**  that it's the same kind of person that have listened to similar podcasts 20 times.  Then I would say, okay, so everyone who listens to a podcast, at least like 20 podcast of  views, plus perhaps all the guests that are sort of experts, they would be my signal for  sort of the collaborative funding process.  Okay.  
**[0:34:06-0:34:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:34:06):**  So you would look at like a group of, we can verify that they, let's say, no more than  the average or more than you, but we can have an estimated guess.  Like we're not sure, sure, obviously, if they're good investors, but at least it's a signal  that they know quite a bit about the space because we've interviewed them and or they  may, it might be the same person, but they listen to quite a few episodes all the way  
**[0:34:26-0:34:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:34:26):**  through, not just the first five minutes.  Yeah.  And then what sort of is working very well in the Ethereum ecosystem is a platform called  the Gitcoin and that's using what's called quadratic funding.  So that basically means that I have sometimes donated money, I sometimes received a bit  
**[0:34:42-0:34:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:34:42):**  of money where I would say, all right, with this money, I would say maybe, okay, let's  do this the next 10 years every quarter.  I am going to allocate the according percentage of that money as matching funding.  And this is using this principle of quadratic funding.  Quadratic funding.  
**[0:34:58-0:34:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:34:58):**  I'm going to put it in the notes.  People don't worry.  There will be a lot of notes after this interview.  So we'll say, okay, we're going to do something every quarter for the next 10 years because  we feel it's the next 10 years are going to be crucial and you're going to match things.  
**[0:35:09-0:35:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:35:09):**  Yeah, because you know, this is kind of, which is sometimes okay as well, but I would sort  of, you know, sometimes there is this problem that, you know, I would just tell you, ah,  you should donate to this project, but I'm not really donating myself.  So why do I think you should donate to it if I'm not up for doing it myself?  And this is sort of this basic idea of skin in the game.  
**[0:35:28-0:35:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:35:28):**  So then this matching would sort of look like that depends on the matching algorithm, which  is something that, you know, Bitcoin had done this for a long time and it's like the last  two years and it's evolving all the time too.  But basically you would say something along the lines that, okay, so if there is this  farm in Berlin, right, nearby Berlin that is doing recent tech projects, they put over  
**[0:35:48-0:35:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:35:48):**  like a grant where they describe and then copy page, what are they seeking?  What kind of funding are they seeking and what are kind of their projects and deliverables?  They're kind of free to do that.  In other implementations it's more like standardized, so it's easier maybe to look at, but that  looks a bit like a normal crowdfunding sort of site, right?  
**[0:36:08-0:36:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:36:08):**  But then you can then tell, well, if someone, and then that depends on the matching algorithm,  if it's like 100 unique people that we can sort of verify are unique and maybe also rank  them depending on sort of the expert level, if they put their own money into this project,  that probably gives some signal that this is better than, you know, the scam project  Gosh just put up and he doesn't know anything about reaching the funding, right?  
**[0:36:32-0:36:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:36:32):**  So if for each of these people in this case, if they put in $10 each, then I will match  it with $50 each of those people who put in their own money and we can verify that they  are sort of, you know, individuals and they are knowledgeable about this space based on  some criteria.  We cannot never fully, that's always like a thing, we can never fully make that perfect.  
**[0:36:51-0:36:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:36:51):**  That's like another big problem in IT, how to fully like show that you're fully unique,  et cetera, et cetera, but it works fairly well.  And then based on that, I'm actually not making that decision.  I'm just trying to let my funding be allocated based on that signal of sort of people who  know more about it than me and who put their own money as well.  
**[0:37:11-0:37:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:37:11):**  That's sort of just to avoid any sort of obvious spam issues, et cetera, et cetera.  So I think that's basically how I would go about it, I think.  And I would, within the field I would fund, I would then try to, you know, grade and adjust  this matching algorithm, et cetera, et cetera, based on, you know, the specific topic and  what makes sense.  
**[0:37:33-0:37:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:37:33):**  And obviously, I mean, you mentioned the grant, but this could be an investment as well.  And I think the underlying, the key point here is you're very clearly saying, and I  think that many people should say that more often, like I'm not an expert, but let's find  a way to tap into sort of the general knowledge or the distributed knowledge that is in the  space.  
**[0:37:54-0:37:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:37:54):**  And there are many ways to do that.  And one of them you mentioned is to see like public experts or that have clearly shown  that they are learning a lot about it because they are listening to certain things or they're  reading, et cetera, et cetera.  You can verify that in different ways.  
**[0:38:06-0:38:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:38:06):**  And that's not enough because it's nice if they say, if they point to this farm in Berlin  or close to Berlin saying, oh, that's very interesting, but if they don't put any money  on the line, yeah, there's no skin in the game.  So if that's, there are many different ways to do this, but in this case, if they put  in X, then you can match it with Y.  
**[0:38:23-0:38:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:38:23):**  And if enough of them do it, it actually probably has a strong signal that it's not spam.  Like you avoid a lot of the downfalls of a lot of crowdfunding campaigns that don't go  anywhere because it's completely invisible.  Like who's behind it?  Who's actually putting money in?  
**[0:38:36-0:38:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:38:36):**  Who's an expert that knows slightly more about this, et cetera, et cetera.  And it's very scalable.  I mean, you can repeat that every quarter until let's say the money runs out or money  starts coming back to do that.  And this is how many, many projects at the moment in the blockchain world work, right?  
**[0:38:51-0:38:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:38:51):**  Yeah.  I mean, this niche is particularly suitable for projects which don't have like, when we  talk about the grant domain, of course we can talk about the grant domain, projects  that don't have like any clear monetization ideas for making their own token.  Because of course the other aspect there is, is a, which I will probably also allocate  
**[0:39:08-0:39:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:39:08):**  a part of, if we say $1 billion for would be projects which I see can be enabled as  many other projects, you know, let's look at the, I know you had the, you know, region  network example in here, right?  Christian.  Yeah.  
**[0:39:21-0:39:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:39:21):**  They are sort of launching their own token to launch their own network.  And right now it looks like they're quite successful on doing that.  And they are doing that with specific purpose.  They're on Cosmo, right?  They're on a specific blockchain.  
**[0:39:31-0:39:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:39:31):**  Yeah.  So they're using what's called the tenement, which is like a framework to set up blockchains.  And then that's sort of developed by the guys that also are running what's called cosmos  and cosmos as a way to connect different blockchains.  So if you, if you do what they're doing, it started, you get out getting sort of a, a  
**[0:39:48-0:39:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:39:48):**  quite efficient blockchain that you can set up without having to develop everything yourself.  Then following this cotton protocol, you can then sort of be in trouble with other blockchains.  And that's what was happening in this space too, is when, as you can imagine, first all  these blockchains happens, people make other blockchains.  Now some blockchains are better or geared towards other things than others.  
**[0:40:07-0:40:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:40:07):**  And sometimes it makes sense that that blockchain, you know, which is in their example, sort  of optimized for like existing restoration and like cessation, et cetera, et cetera.  And that's, you know, that's maybe connected with another blockchain that have another  purpose.  So, so that's what they're doing.  
**[0:40:24-0:40:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:40:24):**  But in that case, what I would mean with, with like my, my sort of enabler statement  would be, well, they also are going to fund a lot of projects.  Now they, they're going to set up in this space sometimes that you really have sort  of a multi-vacator effect there by enabling those projects as well, which are also going  to launch their own tokens.  
**[0:40:44-0:40:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:40:44):**  And these tokens can have very, very different primitives.  And then we got sort of in the, what's called kind of token engineering commons direction,  which is also like a big community that works on how to design such tokens with incentives  or you know, you know, again, what, what, what you want to do.  But that's in that case, you can, you can sort of design specific issuance curves or  
**[0:41:09-0:41:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:41:09):**  exchange curves, or you can do such as every time this currency is exchanged, you know,  10% of the fees are donated to, you know, this restoration project, et cetera, et cetera.  So just as we have like tokens, it's just like very, very sort of generic, you know,  it can mean a lot of things.  So that's like a big topic we can go into, but yeah.  
**[0:41:35-0:41:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:41:35):**  Maybe for the next time, but I think it's fascinating to just point out that this space  is attracting a lot of people, a lot of very, very smart people.  And in general, again, that's a signaling function.  Like if you see very, very smart people moving into a space that I see actually in the regeneration  space as well from other sectors that leave very good jobs behind or very nice careers,  
**[0:41:55-0:41:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:41:55):**  et cetera, it means something is happening, even though I don't fully understand it.  Maybe nobody does, but you see like it's a signaling function.  If people they've skin in the game because they gave up something else.  And when you look at something like regenetwork, I remember interviewing them and struggling  because I don't really grasp what to even ask.  
**[0:42:11-0:42:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:42:11):**  Like what are metrics?  What is a mental framework we listeners to this podcast should use when we're asking  questions to these kind of coins, tokens, blockchains that claim everything about regeneration  that we possibly want.  But of course, there's a lot of noise out there.  
**[0:42:27-0:42:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:42:27):**  Not saying that regenetwork is noise, but I really struggle with what questions to come  up with because in let's say, quote unquote, normal companies, I can do that.  But in this case, it's really different.  Yeah.  So how I view it is a bit the same as investing sort of in different organizations or giving  
**[0:42:42-0:42:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:42:42):**  like different group of people in organizations like money or investing into them.  There are different stages and at this different stages, let's say it's just like very conservative,  VC, okay.  And maybe there's like pre-product stuff like that.  Very risky stage.  
**[0:42:57-0:42:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:42:57):**  Then there is a product.  And then there, if you are sort of a more short-sighted investor, you're very look it  into like what is the revenue and stuff like that.  And then later on, you're looking at like other things like depending on like maybe  an hour, two years when you have done that A&B round, you want to have, you know, look  
**[0:43:12-0:43:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:43:12):**  for like now, great.  You have all this, all these users.  You have all the turnaround.  Now we want to see a lot of profit, et cetera, et cetera.  I think how I think about these kind of blockchain startups is it's kind of a bit the same that  
**[0:43:25-0:43:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:43:25):**  you kind of look at different things at different stages, naturally speaking.  So when we are creating products, et cetera, et cetera, and like a very early stage, let's  say some of the checks we maybe give like pre-seed money, you know, maybe they raised  $100,000, you know, with a quite low valuation, something like that, just to get us started.  At that time, well, I think me personally, it's so much about the people, the team, you  
**[0:43:49-0:43:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:43:49):**  believe in it.  Everything they say basically is some kind of vision and that vision can be critical.  And it's a story they're telling like, you know, how most things in society works as  your stories or narrative you tell.  But if they can somehow convince you that that story and vision that they will do and  
**[0:44:03-0:44:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:44:03):**  it kind of sound planned and it makes sense, maybe you can take off in front of you.  Maybe you decide to give them money because you have that feeling based on those metrics.  So that's sort of more when you are like that early, like kind of pre-seed angel, I think  it's fair to say there's a lot of gut feeling intuition on that.  And that's about chemistry with founders.  
**[0:44:22-0:44:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:44:22):**  And some people you can just believe that, you know, what they are saying is possible  or that they have the right to, might want to do it.  And some people just do.  So at that stage, I think that's sort of both traditional companies to start up the production  space that you're looking for.  
**[0:44:37-0:44:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:44:37):**  Then at a later stage, a semester, well, if I would look, let's say, I'm just going to  like a contrast now to the full other aspect and look at blockchains today.  If I want to compare, let's say, Ethereum with like 10 layer, like 13-layer blockchains,  for example, right now, I'm sort of going in that systems that are already live and  they are in this kind of scenario, it's a contrast tool because it's typically not a  
**[0:45:01-0:45:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:45:01):**  typical startup that runs these blockchains because of this big network.  But then just as you have sort of an annual point of view of our company, you have also  a quantitative metrics you can look at the blockchains.  So you can look at like how many users do you have, how many active daily users.  That's the same as you know, if you wanted to invest in Snapchat some years ago before  
**[0:45:18-0:45:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:45:18):**  they have any revenue.  That's how you look at these kinds of software startup too.  Then what you can look at is also like how much gas is actually paid in fees and of course  the percentage of growth in this and the user numbers.  So gas fees is basically the cost that you were mentioning before like to do something  
**[0:45:35-0:45:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:45:35):**  on the blockchain is called gas fees.  And in Ethereum that's been exploding.  And of course, that's a risk.  If you want to do a lot of small transactions, you're not going to pay a huge transaction  fee or infrastructure fee.  
**[0:45:46-0:45:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:45:46):**  But if you are running something like Ethereum and you actually are accumulating, like a  lot of millions of dollars in transaction fees from like millions of users, that also  shows a bit like very new from a startup that shows like, okay, you want to try on something,  right?  So you are providing a service that people want to pay actually a lot for.  
**[0:46:01-0:46:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:46:01):**  So that's like a quantitative metric too.  People are valuing it enough to pay the gas fees.  Yeah.  And in this example, I'm talking about blockchain so that you could talk about like traditional  annual report metrics for companies.  
**[0:46:11-0:46:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:46:11):**  And then this is more kind of network metric you could say.  And then you would also look at, you know, the number of startups, how much have they  raised?  What are they doing?  How many users do they have?  
**[0:46:20-0:46:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:46:20):**  What's built on top of this?  Because blockchain, that's sort of just infrastructure and it's only as good as, especially the ones  which are more generalized computers, what's built on top of it, you know.  This is the new app in B that is built on this blockchain and they have a billion users.  Well, then it's probably worth something, right?  
**[0:46:34-0:46:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:46:34):**  If they sort of build on this infrastructure, maybe there's, you know, also the next Amazon,  maybe there's also the next etc, etc.  So that's definitely something that's interesting too.  And then in these protocols that are now protocols, but it's kind of like apps on top of these  blockchains.  
**[0:46:51-0:46:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:46:51):**  If that's for example, decentralized exchange where you can swap your tokens and there is  a specific volume on that, or there's so much, you know, we have the measure called TVL stands  for total value locked.  And this is when you lock up specific things, assets in a blockchain, maybe for specific  purpose, like a return or something else.  
**[0:47:12-0:47:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:47:12):**  Then that also shows that people have locked some what's up on an app on top of this blockchain.  So that's sort of the, what you can look at it, if you are sort of more investing into  the, or looking at the like larger blockchains.  Then there are all these steps in between where you are early stage product, etc, etc.  And I would just, my understanding is just like going from very like trust, intuition,  
**[0:47:33-0:47:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:47:33):**  or like chemistry in the team base.  And of course, if the team had sold a startup before, that's always like a super good thing.  Or if they get a, you know, it's the best friend from the startup you already invested  into and it's very successful.  That's the same kind of thing with the normal business.  
**[0:47:48-0:47:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:47:48):**  Then you have these different steps on the way where typically as an investor in this  space, well, if there is equity, you want equity, but if there's tokens, you want that  kind of more.  So you want both, if there's both equity and token, if it's a token launched from, you  know, a nonprofit organization, it's fine.  
**[0:48:03-0:48:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:48:03):**  You just get tokens.  But then it depends a bit on like the tokenomics.  Does this token actually add something to the product or is it just like something that  is like, you know, squeezed in there to like make a lot of money very fast?  If it makes the product worse, I would say it's kind of bad token.  
**[0:48:21-0:48:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:48:21):**  If it makes the product or sort of, you know, whatever the startup is doing better and it's  like a fundamental thing for making that thing work, then I think it's very interesting.  And then if it can somehow a true value or there's some element to it, then, well, that's  then we are sort of in the what's called tokenomics aspect.  And then that's very interesting too.  
**[0:48:43-0:48:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:48:43):**  But of course it's just one element like next to, you know, what every startup organization  have in terms of like go to market, getting users, customers, you know, partnerships,  etc, etc.  Yeah.  So very similar in many aspects to what investors might be already used to.  
**[0:48:59-0:49:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:48:59):**  I want to be conscious of your time and ask a final question.  What would you do if you, so you no longer have distributed fund that we talked about  before, but what would you do with a magic wand?  If you could change one thing, but it could be anything, doesn't have to be blockchain  or region, ag or regeneration related, but you had the power to change one thing overnight.  
**[0:49:18-0:49:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:49:18):**  What would you do?  One thing overnight?  Well, I think what is needed and what Bella taught me is that this is mostly about what's  in the head of all of us.  We have actually paradise on earth.  
**[0:49:29-0:49:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:49:29):**  We have the flourishing path here on earth.  So it's more like a thought revolution and working together and collaborating on solving  those basic, you know, problems and serving those basic needs.  We all have natural about like humans here and make sure that with that realization,  we are not destroying the planet, we're not destroying itself, animals, other life beings.  
**[0:49:51-0:49:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:49:51):**  So I think like having that awakening and thought revolution and empathy would be the  single biggest thing.  And I think that would actually solve a lot of problems.  I want to thank you so much, Gustav, for giving us an insight into the fascinating world of  blockchain and everything crypto.  
**[0:50:06-0:50:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:50:06):**  And probably not the last time, there's so much happening in that space and obviously  in all the spaces that are surrounded.  And I think we're going to see a lot of much more practical applications of these models  over the next year slash years.  And we'll be coming back to explain them to us and to see what to how we should put these  
**[0:50:23-0:50:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:50:23):**  very, very powerful.  Let's not underestimate this at all.  Very powerful tools to work.  Sure.  Yeah.  
**[0:50:30-0:50:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:50:30):**  Thanks a lot.  Very happy to be here.  Share my knowledge.  Happy to get in touch, answer further questions.  And also want to thank you, Korn, for your great work on summoning leading experts in  
**[0:50:39-0:50:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:50:39):**  this field around the world and coordinating here, because I think that that's really leading  to a lot of great collaboration.  And that's a huge impact that maybe can be hard to see just from day to day.  But I think that's really leading to a lot of very interesting developments.  Thank you too for that.  
**[0:50:53-0:50:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:50:53):**  Thank you so much for those nice words and have a great day.  If you found the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast.  
**[0:51:09-0:51:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:51:09):**  And it only takes a few seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  join my membership community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on gumroad.com slash investing region egg or in the description  
**[0:51:31-0:51:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:51:31):**  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  
**[0:51:54-0:51:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:51:54):**  Why are we doing this course?  After a hundred interviews and more than a hundred hours of audio asking the question  how to put money to work in regenerating soils and I've been following the space since 2011  and recording these podcasts since 2016 we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in this space over the last years?  
**[0:52:12-0:52:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:52:12):**  How have we built our decision making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees and what questions should you ask?  What is happening in this space?  What should you read?  
**[0:52:23-0:52:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:52:23):**  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  You the soil builders and investors in this space.  
**[0:52:33-0:52:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:52:33):**  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management consultants, etc, etc.  People that are building soil at scale and the investors who are putting their own money  to work through their family office or as private individuals or people who are putting  
**[0:52:56-0:53:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:52:56):**  other people's money to work through foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies,  etc.  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  
**[0:53:06-0:53:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:53:06):**  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you.  And I'm very aware that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very  different means.  So I'm inviting you if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  
**[0:53:24-0:53:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:53:24):**  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides.  So you don't have to ride along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  
**[0:53:40-0:53:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:53:40):**  is so risky.  How to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to invest  in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find if  you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  
**[0:53:56-0:54:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:53:56):**  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  
**[0:54:10-0:54:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gustav-friis#t=0:54:10):**  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking, click on  the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  