### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2022-00-10)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  Did you know most farmers never dug a hole to look at their soil or smell their soil?  How can we change that and create a quote unquote army of farmers who are super curious  
**[0:00:24-0:00:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:00:24):**  and how do we empower them to keep asking themselves why, why, why?  What role can tech play here and how can it lead to the much needed mindset shift to a  more regenerative one, seeing the potential of abundance not be hindered by competitive  thinking?  This is the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast, Investing as if the Planet  
**[0:00:45-0:00:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:00:45):**  Mattered, where we talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why my focus on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  
**[0:01:06-0:01:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:01:06):**  our land and our sea, grow our food, what we eat, wear and consume.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  To make it easy for fans to support our work, we launched our membership community and so  many of you have joined us as a member.  
**[0:01:25-0:01:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:01:25):**  Thank you.  If our work created value for you and if you have the means and only if you have the means,  consider joining us.  Find out more on gumroad.com slash investing in Regen ag.  That is gumroad.com slash investing in Regen ag or find the link below.  
**[0:01:43-0:01:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:01:43):**  So welcome to another episode.  Today we have Abby Rose back on the podcast and we're welcoming for the first time Nicole  Masters, who is the founder of Integrity Soils.  Welcome both Abby and Nicole.  Thanks for having us.  
**[0:01:57-0:02:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:01:57):**  And we have had Abby, don't worry if we're talking at the same time, we're recording  a different track so nothing happens.  We have had Abby before on the show but for anybody that didn't listen to that episode,  of course I will link it below.  You joined us for a very interesting webinar on the role of technology in regeneration  
**[0:02:12-0:02:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:02:12):**  as well, which was two years ago and we had you in 2019, so three years ago on the show.  A lot has happened.  If you have to briefly or slightly, not so briefly, introduce yourself, what do you normally  say when you meet somebody in the subway or somewhere in an elevator and you have a long  elevator ride, let's say five minutes, what do you say?  
**[0:02:34-0:02:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:02:34):**  How do you introduce yourself?  And then we get into what are you busy with here at the end or beginning of spring in  2022?  Yeah, well, I guess I always start with the fact that my family started farming when I  was in my late teens and through visiting the farm, I became totally obsessed with farming  
**[0:03:00-0:03:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:03:00):**  basically because before that I actually wasn't interested at all and I thought it was sort  of boring and nothing to do with me and now it's my life and why did I become so interested?  It was because I realized that every decision we make on the farm not only affects us, but  it affects everyone around us and really it affects everyone on the globe because we're  making decisions about how do we graze our animals and therefore how much carbon is sequestered  
**[0:03:31-0:03:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:03:31):**  in the soil?  How much rain are we capturing?  So all of these things made me really realize that actually farming and farmers are one  of the main interaction points of humanity with the natural world and so yeah, I became  very involved and through that, my family's farm is in Chile and so we were kind of trying  
**[0:03:56-0:03:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:03:56):**  to farm organically.  We had olives, almonds, pistachios, now we have that and some vines and there were just  so many questions all the time.  It's like, oh no, now what do we do?  There's a new problem and who do you ask?  
**[0:04:14-0:04:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:04:14):**  And so out of that, two things came about which are the main things I spend my life  on today.  One of them is Farmerama, which is a podcast showing the voices of the regenerative farming  movement and that really was about going out and being able to ask people, what are you  doing about this on the ground?  
**[0:04:34-0:04:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:04:34):**  Who are the pioneers here?  And we definitely had Nicole on there a few times giving us insights into how to buy our  prime seeds and very practical things as well as storytelling.  And then also at the time, we didn't have any way to monitor the crops or trees and  so I had studied physics and I was able to code so I built some tools for using on our  
**[0:04:59-0:05:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:04:59):**  farm an app and then that kind of our neighbors started using it and that was developed into  our company, VitaCycleTech, which is we offer a soil mentor, sector mentor and work mentor  and those are all apps focused on helping farmers in the regenerative transition, particularly  the sector mentor is focused on vineyards and orchards or agroforestry and then soil  mentor is very focused on soil health and biodiversity, so more general farming and  
**[0:05:36-0:05:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:05:36):**  work mentor is on farm worker management for small to medium scale farms.  And so we use all three of those on our farm in Chile and then it's a super privilege to  work with farmers around the world and amazing, well, partner with Nicole to really bring  some of those insights about what does it look like to build good soil health and how  can you keep your vines healthy using the least inputs possible.  
**[0:06:08-0:06:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:06:08):**  The soil first approach is really embedded in everything we do.  Super and yeah, we're going to unpack more of that obviously, but first let's welcome  Nicole for the first time here on the show and definitely feels like we have a very famous  person among ourselves.  And what brought you, because I don't know the origin of your soil story, let's say the  
**[0:06:28-0:06:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:06:28):**  origin of your story, what brought you to agriculture and food and go so deep literally  and figuratively into the world of soil?  Well thank you for asking that question, Kern, and I believe everybody has these originating  stories and sometimes I wonder if it's just been in my DNA forever.  If you ask my parents, they'll talk about stories of, you know, they can't find me and  
**[0:06:52-0:06:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:06:52):**  I'll be in the garden eating slugs and snails and you know, I've always had that obsession  with soil under my fingers.  But I think as well as a New Zealander, we're very connected to the rural community more  than many other societies.  You know, all my different relatives were certainly farming.  
**[0:07:10-0:07:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:07:10):**  I was brought up as a military brat, so Air Force, you know, traveling a lot, spending  a lot of time in aircraft looking down and just being incredibly concerned.  I mean, some of my earliest memories is seeing the scale of erosion in New Zealand and being  really concerned as a little person, like, where's that going and what's it doing to  the rivers?  
**[0:07:31-0:07:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:07:31):**  And then Mount St. Helens erupted when I was five and my Nana subscribed me to National  Geographic and just being like, wow, we are so small in all of this and how quickly nature  can just overwhelm everything.  And then National Geographic tracked that recovery of those landscapes and it's like,  you know, nature is so resilient.  
**[0:07:52-0:07:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:07:52):**  And yeah, it's just, it has been a journey that's just kept evolving and evolving like  I never had in my mind, I'm going to be an agroecologist when I grow up.  And in fact, I was an agroecologist for eight years before I realized it had a name.  Like I just was working in this field, working with farmers and ranchers and connecting them  to soil and thinking about ecological context because that's my background and then go,  
**[0:08:16-0:08:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:08:16):**  oh wow, this is actually a thing.  But one of my, like you have these pivotal moments and one of them happened in Hong Kong.  So we lived in Hong Kong for seven years, or I did, my family was there for like 14.  And I remember just looking at all of the soot and the poor air quality and the plastic  bags that were just everywhere and thinking, we will live in our own filth if we don't  
**[0:08:42-0:08:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:08:42):**  interrupt the pattern.  What does it take to interrupt a behavioral pattern so that this doesn't become normalized?  So it's become very formative for me in terms of, I do feel like I can be a bit of a disruptor  or a paradigm shifter and how do we shift forward because it's not going to take complacency  in business as usual.  
**[0:09:02-0:09:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:09:02):**  So yeah, there's so many stories I could share, like everybody.  And what do you spend, I mean, except for being on a podcast, but let's say your days  on or your work on, what is keeping you busy now in April 2022?  What are you spending most of your time on?  And we'll unpack obviously the Regia platform and you working with VitaCycle, but beyond  
**[0:09:27-0:09:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:09:27):**  that or next to that, what is keeping you busy?  So our core work since 2003 has been education.  And actually even before that, 2003, I formalized having a company.  So education is definitely the backbone of what we do.  And what we're doing right now is we're coaching the coaches.  
**[0:09:46-0:09:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:09:46):**  So people that are interested in agroecology and coaching or consulting, we have a five  month long program and that just finished yesterday.  So I'm still kind of spinning from the impact that that program's had on my life and the  impact that I see it having on people.  Like we spent all yesterday just crying and crying with joy of like, what is now possible  
**[0:10:08-0:10:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:10:08):**  for people in the world?  And it was one of the women who's incredibly talented and pretty well known, so I won't  necessarily mention her name, but she was saying, I thought I'd come to this course  and learn more about you.  And what you do and the work that you do.  
**[0:10:23-0:10:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:10:23):**  And she's like, what I came to the course and learned about was myself.  And if we're not transforming this piece, which is that internal space and our mindset  and our paradigms, then real change isn't going to happen on the ground.  And so that was the driver behind the program is yeah, we're going to look at the technical  aspects of how does this microbe in the soil affect the uptake of this nutrient to the  
**[0:10:48-0:10:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:10:48):**  plant?  And in human health, but we really delve into the technical side, but woven through all  of that is who are we being in this space?  So I've been absolutely blown away by the success of that program.  And I feel very heartened today and tired.  
**[0:11:09-0:11:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:11:09):**  I can imagine.  I can imagine.  And will you be repeating that program?  It sounds like it was a first time or a first one, like the impact it had.  Because that naturally raises the question, is it going to come back or is it done?  
**[0:11:24-0:11:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:11:24):**  Because I haven't dealt with my world of overwhelm.  We're running it again in another couple of months.  So the next intake shuts on the 15th of May.  And we will do one more in the US.  And then next year, we're looking to Australia.  
**[0:11:41-0:11:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:11:41):**  And then probably in 2024, we'll be looking at Europe.  It's a big undertaking.  Every person on that program gets an individual coach that they're working through processes.  It's not something that we can just throw out in the world and say, hey, you do this  and walk away from it.  
**[0:11:59-0:12:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:11:59):**  It is incredibly intensive.  And then you find time next to that.  And I want to bring in Abby as well on when did this region platform started to, let's  say, started to fermentate and started to seed or sprout?  What was the because you've been building these apps and tech side and that felt like  
**[0:12:21-0:12:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:12:21):**  maybe it wasn't enough?  Like, you could have grown that for a long time, I think.  And then you said, let's bring on another layer.  Let's add another layer to that.  Why did you decide to do that?  
**[0:12:31-0:12:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:12:31):**  And then why did you decide or how did you ended up partnering with Nicole?  That doesn't seem like she has nothing to do.  So it was like, how do you build that?  Yeah, well, I mean, I read Nicole's book called For the Love of Soil.  And I would highly recommend it to be read by anyone who's interested in this at all.  
**[0:12:53-0:12:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:12:53):**  Because it's, well, one, it's extremely entertaining.  But two, it is an amazing balance of like the personal and the technical.  And so I think that, you know, whether even if you know nothing about regenerative agriculture,  you can really enjoy it and you can learn a heck of a lot.  So reading that, also, Nicole has a strong emphasis on digging holes.  
**[0:13:17-0:13:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:13:17):**  And that's something that I have learned.  That's the way I've learned about soil.  You know, I dug my first hole, like in 2017.  That's embarrassingly recently.  But that was the beginning of my journey.  
**[0:13:31-0:13:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:13:31):**  Depends on when somebody listens to this.  Yeah, that's true.  But yeah, that was the beginning of my journey into learning like what soil really is.  It's one of those things that I'd heard everyone talk about it.  You know, I've been involved in this world for quite a few years before that.  
**[0:13:47-0:13:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:13:47):**  But I'd always been like, oh, yeah, soil is really important.  But that was where my knowledge ended.  And then I started to dig some holes.  And I read Nicole's book and started to piece together all this information about this world  below our feet and how much you can learn from looking at it.  
**[0:14:03-0:14:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:14:03):**  And so that was why when Nicole like really built on that knowledge of how much you can  learn from looking at it and some of the things, you know, distinctions that she drew out in  her book.  So I was like, oh, my gosh, I've got to talk to this person.  This is incredible.  
**[0:14:19-0:14:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:14:19):**  And so, yeah, I can't remember who introduced us, but we had an initial chat.  I think, oh, yeah, maybe.  And I think what really got us connected, I guess, at the time was that actually I brought  up the feminist business principles, which I've definitely talked about before.  And we talked through them.  
**[0:14:43-0:14:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:14:43):**  And Nicole, you really encouraged me to move.  You know, how can we not have them be about gender, but actually have them be about something  everyone can see themselves stepping into.  And yeah, so that's we've moved into the regenerative business principles.  But I think that conversation, like, you know, when you start talking about things like the  
**[0:15:04-0:15:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:15:04):**  first principle is you have a body.  When you start talking at that level, it was like a level of connection that it just, you  know, if someone if you're going to get on with someone at that point.  So we just really connected, I think.  I think of you as my sister from another mister.  
**[0:15:22-0:15:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:15:22):**  That was certainly an instant connection, and I think, too, we had a consulting version  of an app that only the consulting team was using.  And the platform we were using was quite clunky.  So Abby really helped to resolve an issue that we had.  And we transferred all of that consulting level information into Abby's platform.  
**[0:15:43-0:15:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:15:43):**  And then we're like, this is far too overwhelming for most producers who are not interested  in that level of delving in.  And then that kept exploring this conversation around how do we simplify this and make it  really, really valuable.  And if you had to just choose 10 indicators, what would they look like?  
**[0:16:02-0:16:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:16:02):**  And then what does it mean?  And then what potentially can we do?  And I think that's the missing with a lot of data is it's just data for data's sake.  And people just have piles of information that doesn't either doesn't inform the future or  it lags too far behind to give you anything that offers real value.  
**[0:16:20-0:16:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:16:20):**  And I know people that have like 30 years of monitoring data on their places and it  really means nothing.  It's just a navel gazing exercise.  So Abby really takes that to the next level.  Yeah.  
**[0:16:30-0:16:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:16:30):**  And so why?  Now, go ahead.  Good.  No, I was gonna say together, like that's what the Soil Mentor Regen platform is really.  And that's where things get serious, I feel like, because it's one thing being able to  
**[0:16:43-0:16:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:16:43):**  go and look at a hole and record how many earthworms there are.  But the missing, the next level, which is what the Regen platform brings and what Nicole  brings essentially is like, OK, your earthworm number is 20.  Is that pretty good?  OK, or not so good compared to what we would expect from your soil type, your climate?  
**[0:17:06-0:17:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:17:06):**  And what might you do about it?  Like what questions might you ask yourself from a regenerative standpoint?  And I think, you know, taking people that step further, two steps further, really, is  a huge leap compared to like where most things leave you, especially with data.  So I think, yeah, it's been really exciting to see how that's empowering farmers kind  
**[0:17:31-0:17:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:17:31):**  of to start to take themselves to the next step to a certain extent.  Yeah, I think that triggering that question and getting rid of the data for data sake,  I mean, you can you can drone your property all you want or send everything to the lab  you want.  But if it doesn't influence any decision after or triggers any question or it's it's a very  
**[0:17:55-0:17:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:17:55):**  expensive hobby.  And so how do you trigger it?  How do you take that from these 10 indicators?  We can walk through them.  I mean, they're on the website.  
**[0:18:02-0:18:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:18:02):**  I definitely put the link below.  So you had to simplify it to 10.  How difficult was it?  Let's first of all start with the question.  Like, how difficult is it for you, Nicole, or you both, Abby and Nicole, to pick 10?  
**[0:18:14-0:18:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:18:14):**  Like what was the what was the long list?  And how did we end up with 10 of these?  And why are these, let's say, the best proxies or the best web that captures hopefully the  80 20 or 90 10 or whatever of what we want to see?  Yeah, it's a really good question, because there's so much to look at.  
**[0:18:30-0:18:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:18:30):**  And I think sometimes people don't realize how dynamic and how many measures there are  for soil.  A lot of them are interrelated.  So if we take like aggregate stability or what we call this laking test as an example,  how that little crumb seems so insignificant, how does that hold together?  
**[0:18:48-0:18:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:18:48):**  Tells you so much about greenhouse gas emissions, your nitrogen cycle, sedimentation and waterways,  the ability for water and air and gas to diffuse through a soil.  And you get that just from this one little crumb.  So for me, there's a couple of that these absolutely have to be on the list.  And then we I think we got down to maybe like eight that we were really clear that we could  
**[0:19:10-0:19:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:19:10):**  agree on these.  And then what would be some of the extras and like China go, oh, maybe we need 12, Abby.  But you know, we really got there.  And it was fun.  Yeah, I don't find we didn't have too much challenges with it.  
**[0:19:24-0:19:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:19:24):**  The challenge is trying to pin me down.  I didn't hear Laura to have 12, like one for every month, like something like 10 is a good  number.  Yeah, I think so.  One of the experiences we do have over the years with soilmentor and working with farmers  
**[0:19:43-0:19:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:19:43):**  in the field is like there is, you know, simplicity and ease are important.  And I know, you know, Nicole knows that as well.  But it's like it is such a different perspective to the consultant or the coach coming in.  What a farmer will actually do in the field, obviously, you know, they have so many other  priorities all the time.  
**[0:20:06-0:20:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:20:06):**  So keeping it to 10, it just so why not eight?  I mean, if you already got to eight, well, from my experience, you could say why not  one and then you get down the path of like carbon as the sole indicator of soil health.  So we do you do need to find a balance of not oversimplifying things.  So we were trying to keep the complexity there whilst also having some form of simplicity.  
**[0:20:38-0:20:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:20:38):**  I mean, I don't know.  What do you think, Nicole?  Yeah, yeah, absolutely.  And to make it still give really good insights.  One of the things we created, which I haven't seen before, was this idea of the bricks barometer.  
**[0:20:52-0:20:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:20:52):**  So bricks is a measurement of how well is a plant capturing sunlight energy, which is  the very purpose of being on the planet.  It's why we can live here.  But what we find is most systems are very disabled as such dysfunctional.  And what you find is whoever's capturing the most sunlight energy is often the plants that  
**[0:21:12-0:21:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:21:12):**  are least desired.  So you could call these weeds, for instance.  But we find as those plants will be so we can measure this using a refractometer and  looking at bricks as a measurement of sugars and dissolved solids.  And whoever's got the highest amount of those materials is then able to pump more sugars  
**[0:21:32-0:21:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:21:32):**  out the roots, is then able to influence the microbial community around those roots.  And so what we find is people have a higher sunlight capture in the plants that they don't  want and very low in their commercial crops or what they do want.  And so the wider that gap, the more of an indicator is that this system is dysfunctional.  That who you are farming for are the weeds.  
**[0:21:55-0:21:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:21:55):**  Who you're farming for is disease.  Who you're farming for is a lack of nutrient density in the crops that you're producing.  So I was excited to see that being developed.  I think that's a good resource.  So how, like these 10 indicators, how easy are they for a general farmer?  
**[0:22:14-0:22:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:22:14):**  There's no general farmer, but for a general person to do that, is it literally I dig a  hole and then I do it?  I mean, you're now mentioning bricks meters.  How complex is it to, or what's the barrier to entry in this?  I want to start, I'm downloading the app, I become a customer or a client or partner,  
**[0:22:31-0:22:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:22:31):**  whatever we call it.  And then what do I need to get the 10?  Or can I get eight right out of the gate and I need to order some other things to do 10?  Or do I need to ship something somewhere?  What's the process for a newbie, let's say.  
**[0:22:46-0:22:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:22:46):**  So actually the majority of them you can do with just a spade.  So and we've done it that way on purpose.  The idea is that it's easy to go and do out in the field.  The refractometer is in all your fields, I'm assuming like you want to do it regularly  and spaciously regularly, let's say over if you have a larger farm to see differences  
**[0:23:11-0:23:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:23:11):**  or would you recommend one?  No, I would recommend multiple I'm imagining.  Yeah.  I mean, different metrics have different frequencies like the bricks barometer, you could, I don't  know what Nicole would say, but you could easily do that every week and potentially  
**[0:23:24-0:23:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:23:24):**  learn something from it.  I don't know.  Nicole's definitely better at answering that question than me.  But in terms of, yeah, the only test that you have to send away to a lab is actually  the carbon stocks.  
**[0:23:38-0:23:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:23:38):**  And that's because obviously carbon stocks are really important.  They're part of the picture.  And so we did want to include one lab based test in there.  So you can, you know, it's getting this whole picture.  But the majority of the tests are, yeah, just go out and get started, I would say.  
**[0:23:59-0:24:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:23:59):**  And so there's no barrier to that in terms of you don't have to have that equipment and  you don't have to send it to the lab to still start these processes and you might go, all  right, well, I have time for this one measure.  Well, just take that one measure and you're still starting to build up your knowledge  bank as such.  
**[0:24:16-0:24:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:24:16):**  And producers are really busy and, you know, it depends what scale they're on.  They don't always have the time for things like this.  So just being able to set aside that time and it is something really fun.  I really encourage producers to go out with their family, you know, counting worms with  your kids.  
**[0:24:33-0:24:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:24:33):**  Ah, so fun.  We were, Abby, you'll like this.  We were out in the field two days ago and we saw something we've never seen before,  which I always love.  But they were dung beetles that had mites all over them, like all over them.  
**[0:24:48-0:24:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:24:48):**  And I'm like, oh gosh, I don't know if this is a good thing.  I was wondering, are they decay mites?  Is that what they are?  Sure enough, they are.  So we Googled it.  
**[0:24:58-0:25:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:24:58):**  And these dung beetles actually have these little hitchhikers who will go with them to  the next cow pie.  And then they are eating, um, root feeding nematodes and pest organisms in the soil,  which is really, really cool.  Um, but just even to do something like that, you want to watch a bunch of adult squeal  
**[0:25:15-0:25:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:25:15):**  like little kids when we, we discover something like that.  It was so fun.  And then how do you capture that in one of the 10?  No, I don't think it was a question.  It was one of the ones that was left out.  
**[0:25:26-0:25:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:25:26):**  Yeah.  But for good reasons.  It's the curiosity, right?  And the interesting thing is that I've been with producers that, that really value soil  health have never dug a hole or things like dung beetles, you know, they've never even  
**[0:25:39-0:25:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:25:39):**  seen, well, you have five different species of dung beetles and this is what they look  like.  And to see people just light up and connect more deeply.  And I think for me, that's a big part of software is that we can actually use that as a behavioral  change tool to, to connect because people will dig a hole and they go, well, it looks  
**[0:25:57-0:26:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:25:57):**  like dirt and I don't know what I'm looking at.  And so, yeah, you dug a hole, but actually let's, let's keep building on this educational  space and we, we can't be everywhere at all times.  So actually having a process that works people through the educational portion is so exciting.  And captures the data and stores it so you can go back in time.  
**[0:26:19-0:26:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:26:19):**  I mean, then it becomes interesting to, to see the lines going somewhere or at least  the directions, if you dug the hole more or less at the same location, of course, not  exactly the same.  And then, I mean, you're capturing as a farmer, these 10 or whatever the number is at that  point you had time for, but like a robust set of data.  
**[0:26:39-0:26:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:26:39):**  How do we make sure it's not data for data's sake?  Like how do we then influence the farming practice or decisions that I need to take  to go out in the field tomorrow?  Like how do, how do we translate that because that sounded like your ambition to make sure  it changes something on the field, except that there's a hole.  
**[0:26:59-0:27:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:26:59):**  Like what, what does, how do you influence management decisions that farmers need to  take daily basically with the data they, in this case, capture themselves?  Okay.  Yeah.  So, I mean, the app, I would say, you know, the app is there to take you so far.  
**[0:27:13-0:27:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:27:13):**  So it will basically show you a soil health scorecard.  So you see all of your results in a scorecard and each result also will have a color behind  it.  So it shows you like, oh look, actually an earthworm score of 12 in this type of soil  for this type of climate is actually in the red.  
**[0:27:32-0:27:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:27:32):**  And then you can click into that and that's where it's like Nicole pops up.  Maybe one day we'll have it.  So we have a little mini Nicole there.  Video.  Like a halo, like a halo, a hologram on your field.  
**[0:27:46-0:27:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:27:46):**  She's there.  Point your phone now to the field and Nicole will show up.  Yeah.  We're working on it, but for now it's just, it's text-based Nicole.  So you get to see your, visually you're seeing colors in terms of like, where do you sit  
**[0:28:07-0:28:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:28:07):**  as a benchmark?  You also get to see where do you, how do you compare with all the other farmers on the  platform who have your soil and your climate essentially.  So you will then see, it's just like a box and whisker plot.  So it's not, you can't tell much about other people, but you can certainly tell how do  
**[0:28:25-0:28:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:28:25):**  you compare with all the other results coming in.  And then the next bit is where Nicole then explains this result.  So this earthworm number may be because of X, Y, and Z.  And then also literally feeds some questions that my understanding is that Nicole, you  would be asking, or one of your coaches that just came off the create course would be asking  
**[0:28:49-0:28:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:28:49):**  at that point.  It's like, okay, well what are the questions to ask right now?  And so, yeah, I guess the app feeds you that.  Yeah.  Because if we, if we step back a little bit or up, what we are going through right now  
**[0:29:02-0:29:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:29:02):**  is an evolution, an evolution in consciousness and evolution in how we work with landscapes,  education, health, everything's shifting right now.  And we're working away from this expert model, which is I have the answer and you should  listen to me.  And what that has created is, and I'm sending your inputs usually.  
**[0:29:20-0:29:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:29:20):**  Yeah.  Yeah.  Yeah.  So, so farmers have been trained to lose that curiosity, lose the art, lose the joy.  And here someone's going to come and tell you, you need to put on 200 kilograms because  
**[0:29:31-0:29:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:29:31):**  that's the answer.  And so very much this app is, have you considered this?  Have you thought about this?  Has this, has this been happening to continue to open up the observation and open up the  critical thinking because that's what's required.  
**[0:29:45-0:29:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:29:45):**  We don't need people out there who have the answer and the technology that's going to  save the day because that's what we've been living through for the last 120 years.  And that model doesn't work.  So how do we, how do we create adaptive creative thinkers?  And that's part of what this app does is just kind of feed into your curiosity.  
**[0:30:04-0:30:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:30:04):**  So basically by triggering questions based on very real examples, amount of earthworms,  where earth percentage, et cetera, et cetera, bricks, barometer, you're trying to trigger  curiosity instead of giving one answer, which you can't because that's what we've been trying  for 120 or probably more years.  And that's impossible, but you're basically trying to trigger somebody, nudge somebody  
**[0:30:27-0:30:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:30:27):**  to keep asking questions until they figure out the answer that works in their context.  And then hopefully keeps using the app and capture the changes in these indicators.  And thus you, do you monitor that as well?  Like do you, like, okay, maybe this is too early, but like what, where virtual Nicole,  text-based Nicole is triggering the right questions?  
**[0:30:49-0:30:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:30:49):**  Like what's the response sort of there?  Like people click through or how do you know it's working?  Or do you know if people keep using the app, they are happy clients?  Like how do we know this is leading to, because it is using technology in this way and it's  not having one of the consultants or one of the coaches that you've trained in the field.  
**[0:31:09-0:31:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:31:09):**  It is, there's a layer in between, which is maybe more powerful and maybe less powerful.  Like how do we know this is, this is working and creates this army of, of curiosity?  Well, I mean, partially I would say, yeah, it's about people using the app and continuing  to use it.  Obviously, you know then that it's creating value.  
**[0:31:28-0:31:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:31:28):**  But I would also say that we only, so it only was released in January for the first time.  So it's very much an evolving learning process.  And I actually personally see it as very much, and I think Nicole sees it the same, like  it's about taking farmers that extra step, but I do still like from my experience of  people going through the regenerative transition, actually the coach is a hugely important role,  
**[0:31:54-0:31:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:31:54):**  probably for quite different things than people use consultants for today.  So it's not to tell you what to apply, but it's to be there to like support you through  your questioning essentially.  So the app will start with these questions.  It gives you some links.  
**[0:32:08-0:32:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:32:08):**  You can go like explore more, learn more, watch videos, read information.  And then the coach is there to be like your sounding board to talk to, to help guide you  through that process and give you the confidence you need.  Because I do think it's not fair to just give an app to a farmer, give them some questions  and then be like, okay, off you go.  
**[0:32:28-0:32:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:32:28):**  Good luck.  Good luck.  But that's, I think the difference between a coach and a consultant, like that the coach  will, a good coach, I think will never tell you what to do, but will trigger enough questions  that you will figure out your path and will be there with you or give you enough confidence  
**[0:32:43-0:32:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:32:43):**  to ask those questions to begin with.  And was it before you, I mean, you mentioned Nicole, that it was part of the work you already  did in another app.  Like was it a huge work like to sort of text, like capture you or capture your coaching,  your style in text and to make it easily accessible and not overwhelming, but also not too simplified.  
**[0:33:06-0:33:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:33:06):**  Like how difficult was that to go from here are 10 things in here, how you can measure  these and how you can have these indicators to, okay, let's trigger people with questions  and make sure they hit a nerve because then we get somewhere.  Yeah, there's kind of two parts because part of it was really exciting in terms of making  the implicit explicit.  
**[0:33:26-0:33:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:33:26):**  How do we take some of these observations for me, which feel very intuitive, feel like  I'm on the landscape, I'm reading the person, I'm reading the land, I'm reading the animals  and then to reduce that and put it into words.  I'm like, no, like that, that part was really challenging.  It's like this needs to be an expansive process.  
**[0:33:45-0:33:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:33:45):**  Because words are so flat.  Yeah.  Yeah.  They're not, they're not, there's no, there's no, there's no, yeah, there's no 3D.  There's no depth at all.  
**[0:33:53-0:33:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:33:53):**  You can explain it in 10 different ways and you would never know because somebody is going  to be somewhere in the UK or somewhere in Italy looking at a screen and think, or her  screen and think, what does this mean?  Yeah.  And so that was the fun of it.  
**[0:34:05-0:34:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:34:05):**  Like how do we, how do we make it as simple as possible without making it, without dumbing  it down.  But also, you know, measures like what does soil smell like and how would you even be  able to rate that on a scale?  It's quite simple to do that.  
**[0:34:20-0:34:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:34:20):**  And what's really interesting, they did a study in California and they got a large number  of people to smell soil that range from good to bad.  And it didn't matter if you were a child or if you were academic or if you had never garden  in your life or you were a master gardener, people could rate soil from bad to good across  the board.  
**[0:34:41-0:34:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:34:41):**  We have an inbuilt sense of what good soil should smell like.  And that's fascinating.  What's really cool is so geosmin, which is the odor of the earth, what you smell on  a hot summer day, if there's a shower of rain, that smell, we can smell that at 200,000 times  the concentration of what a shark can smell, a drop of blood in an Olympic swimming pool.  
**[0:35:06-0:35:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:35:06):**  Like how wild is that?  So we are tuned into soil, I believe, because it's where we come from.  It's the mother.  It's the source of life on the planet.  It's the reason that we're here and we can smell it, which I just think is extraordinary.  
**[0:35:22-0:35:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:35:22):**  So is smell one of the 10 indicators?  Yes.  Or not?  It is.  It's not one of the 10.  
**[0:35:28-0:35:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:35:28):**  It's on the recent plate.  Sorry.  It's on the 10.  It's interesting.  Because the smelling part, I was going to say, because at the beginning you dig a hole  
**[0:35:37-0:35:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:35:37):**  and you look and I was almost going to say you smell, you smell, but luckily it came  up now.  Like smelling is a very powerful sensor.  And apparently we're in a to really understand what's better soil and not.  So we that's that's it's very encouraging that even after 120 years of very chemical  
**[0:35:55-0:35:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:35:55):**  input agriculture, we're still able to do that.  We might have lost some taste, but or have to reset our tasting system a bit.  But the smell from COVID.  Yeah, that's not a good thing.  Yeah, that's a very interesting one as well.  
**[0:36:08-0:36:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:36:08):**  So to dumb that down, dumb that down, quote unquote, obviously, you said it was fun and  challenging.  And then did you also see it as it's almost a threat for your your coaches and you as  well?  Like if suddenly the technology, the app would fix everything.  
**[0:36:23-0:36:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:36:23):**  Have you ever ever pop up or have you had discussions with yourself or among your organization  in with that?  It's so funny.  I did a industry brainstorming session about this in 2006 in New Zealand.  And and people have said to me, why would you coach coaches?  
**[0:36:40-0:36:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:36:40):**  They're going to take your job.  They're going to take away business that's leading to you.  Why would you do that?  Or why would you write it down in a book?  If any of those thoughts are popping up for people about competition, about scarcity, you  
**[0:36:53-0:36:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:36:53):**  are no longer regenerative.  You just jumped back into the old paradigm of the old model of business and competition  and threats and all of that.  So a huge part of really being regenerative is shifting those contexts.  There is no such thing as scarcity and competition in this world.  
**[0:37:12-0:37:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:37:12):**  And you can see the massive expansion of regenerative agriculture right now.  We need more people understanding and doing this work deeply.  And I want to put it in every single person's hands.  And actually, if I can make myself defunct, I'm just going to go live in the mountains  and ride my horse and I'll be very happy doing that.  
**[0:37:28-0:37:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:37:28):**  I'll be done.  I'm like, oh, good.  My work is done.  You'll be fine.  Yeah, I'll find something else to irritate people with.  
**[0:37:35-0:37:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:37:35):**  Yeah.  And it's that ability to pivot or be resilient is what we need to be building in people.  How do we respond if someone else starts to offer something that you're doing and might  take your market share?  It's like, well, then you're not offering something truly unique and continually learning  
**[0:37:53-0:37:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:37:53):**  and expanding yourself.  And do you feel like this two-step approach, maybe there are multiple steps, but this approach,  and I say you, but depending on who wants to take this question, of triggering, obviously,  the indicators and starting with that, and then with the questions triggering this curiosity  mind or this beginner's mind or this regenerative think, is that enough to, or have you seen  
**[0:38:15-0:38:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:38:15):**  that already now?  Or is that what you're thinking there enough to trigger that mindset?  And because you mentioned on the website specifically, we want to trigger a regenerative mindset  and to farm regeneratively, we need much more than different indicators and different practices.  We need to start, like we said now, actually, to work in an economic system, regenerative  
**[0:38:35-0:38:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:38:35):**  economic system.  We need to switch mindset quite strongly.  Do you see that this is triggering people to do that?  Do you have examples since January?  It's very short.  
**[0:38:45-0:38:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:38:45):**  We're at the end of April now, 2022.  Do you have any interesting stories there?  Is it too early there?  Is it, what do you see?  What do you feel?  
**[0:38:53-0:38:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:38:53):**  Any case studies that come to mind?  Or is this too early and we need to come back in a year or so?  Yeah.  I mean, I think that to me, that's like, that is the question.  It's the most massive question possible.  
**[0:39:05-0:39:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:39:05):**  And to me, this is just the very beginning.  And it's just a small part of the regenerative mindset change.  So I would never kind of want to assume that the app was going to change someone's whole  life.  I mean, we're talking about a whole life change here in my mind.  
**[0:39:22-0:39:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:39:22):**  It's not just, you know, building soil health.  It's like, as Nicole said about the Create course, like people are going on this course  and it's like literally, you know, unearthing yourself as well as this regenerative transition.  So I think, you know, the app is a small part of that.  And where I think is interesting is that for many people, this transitioning or the soil  
**[0:39:46-0:39:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:39:46):**  health learning and investigation and the biodiversity learning and investigation is  actually an amazing place to start.  And I've seen that time and time again, as people start down the path, like probably,  you know, myself included in many ways, you start in a direction and it unfurls this world  of possibility where actually what's happening below the ground in the soil is all of these  
**[0:40:11-0:40:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:40:11):**  connections and all of this like magic in inverted commas that we haven't been tapping  into.  You know, it's this, it's the flourishing.  It's that abundance that is the opposite of the scarcity, that is the opposite of the  competition.  
**[0:40:28-0:40:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:40:28):**  It's all about the collaboration.  And once you start to see that working below ground, I think you do, you know, and suddenly  your plants are just like going wild.  Like these cover crops are just like so bountiful.  It does start to have people move in this direction of like, oh wow, okay.  
**[0:40:44-0:40:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:40:44):**  Like it just starts to open up a crack of what's possible.  And so I think that would be, yeah, to me that is the regenerative transition.  And I think that's what we're all aiming for.  I don't know.  Yeah.  
**[0:40:59-0:41:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:40:59):**  And for me, it's been really interesting to be training people that have already been  teaching mindset, have already been teaching regenerative agriculture and for them to say,  I teach this and I never shifted my own mindset.  I'm like, oh, mind blowing.  You know, that piece is that really that deep, deep connection into shifting how everything  
**[0:41:24-0:41:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:41:24):**  in the world occurs to you.  And I don't think any app is ever going to be able to do that.  But part of what we're seeing is this arising of groups that are mentoring each other, that  we're seeing farmer hubs forming where people are, I guess, troubleshooting in their own  context, in their own area and starting to ask deeper and deeper and deeper why questions.  
**[0:41:49-0:41:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:41:49):**  And I think that's the mycelial learning network.  That's what we're seeing shifting across the planet.  So it's not an app or an academic or somebody else that's got the answer.  But what's cool about this, the Regen platform is that it just provides a guidance and a  platform and a structure to what can seem very overwhelming.  
**[0:42:10-0:42:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:42:10):**  And especially if you're working with a whole lot of people that are all very new to this,  let's not fall back or lose confidence.  That's kind of the piece of just supporting confidence to know that we are moving forward.  And thinking back to this collaborative piece, if we don't collaborate, we're in some serious  trouble right now.  
**[0:42:31-0:42:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:42:31):**  And climate change is not being driven by carbon, in my mind.  That's not a climate change issue.  We're going to grow more plants probably with a whole lot of carbon.  The issue is that we have totally degraded ecosystems that have destroyed small and large  water cycles and are affecting climate dramatically.  
**[0:42:50-0:42:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:42:50):**  And it takes 100,000 hectare parcels to get together that we can actually modify or geo  engineer climate.  So it's taking a collaborative approach to we need to be managing land, all of us together  to deal with some of these hugely complex issues and that we have degraded ecosystem  services across the planet.  
**[0:43:10-0:43:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:43:10):**  So I could go on and on.  I shall stop.  And it's fascinating.  And do you enable that mycelium to grow as well?  Like between farms, you say you allow farmers to look at each other, look at each other,  
**[0:43:23-0:43:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:43:23):**  not the right word, to compare to others.  Is it anonymized?  Is that like, oh, I would love to connect with this farmer with this type of soil in  the same climate because he or she might be nearby or not nearby, but nearby mentally  because we're farming the same time, but he might be or she might be on the other side  
**[0:43:40-0:43:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:43:40):**  of the world, which is great because I can WhatsApp or whatever technology I use.  How do you enable, if you are or you're thinking about it, that mycelium to start connecting  and then the carbon, the sugars, the nutrients, the vitamins, et cetera, to start flowing  between the two nodes, if the metaphor works here?  Yeah, that worked.  
**[0:44:02-0:44:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:44:02):**  So the way, well, we are actually seeing some of those kind of non-localized but mindset  based groups forming.  So for example, across the UK, Pasture for Life have got a group of farmers all working  in the same way, using the Regen platform, connected by WhatsApp or the forums.  Whatever works.  
**[0:44:24-0:44:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:44:24):**  Yeah, whatever works.  And then they are working together to do the different monitoring and then coming back  to compare and shift things together.  Working together like that is amazingly powerful.  So the app absolutely can help you do that.  
**[0:44:43-0:44:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:44:43):**  We do have group setups or organizational setups so that you can have lots of different  farms on the same setup.  And then we do also have something in the pipeline, which is specifically for farmer  groups who want to be sharing all of their data pretty much, because the app assumes  that farmers don't want to share much of their data.  
**[0:45:08-0:45:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:45:08):**  It assumes that every farmer owns all their data and that that's very much theirs and  we're not here to compromise that in any way.  And so you can, when I said you can compare, you can only see like, am I in the bottom  25% or the top 50%?  Or am I top of every farmer who has my soil type and climate?  
**[0:45:30-0:45:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:45:30):**  But beyond that, you can't actually tell much more, anything more.  So for smaller groups of farmers who do actually want to share much more data than that, we  do have a farmer group comparison tool that's in the works.  And yeah, that will make it so that you can like literally compare from the field that  we visited last week as a group, you know, oh look, their earthworm count is this, their  
**[0:45:58-0:46:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:45:58):**  rhizosheets are that.  How does that compare to my field that I've managed differently?  Maybe I could try managing in that way.  So for me, it's always about this physical digital combination.  How can we combine those like groups that are in real life going to visit each other's  
**[0:46:14-0:46:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:46:14):**  farms with those on-farm observations that they're making potentially individually, and  then combining all of that to learn from it and discuss together, okay, well, how might  we do things differently?  Or maybe I could do like Fiona did on her field or whatever that is.  And the fact that you assume that farmers don't want to share that data, is there a  
**[0:46:36-0:46:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:46:36):**  way like maybe they do, or there is a way to trigger that partially anonymized or obviously  opt in?  I mean, we're not going to share any data that doesn't want to be shared, but there's  an enormous interesting trigger there to see if you're in the top not, or to see just to  connect over these dashboards and to start obviously, for sure people are screenshotting  
**[0:46:58-0:47:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:46:58):**  it and sharing it in WhatsApp, like look what happens here, etc.  Like to encourage that more, because then we get to real connections than it is about  something is that not only in small groups that already know each other, but also among  others obviously always looking at privacy and data ownership.  What are your thoughts there?  
**[0:47:18-0:47:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:47:18):**  I mean, this is super, super fresh.  We're four months in, but still.  I don't know, Nicole, do you have any thoughts on that?  Well, part of what I'm seeing is that people that have been involved in regenerative ag  for a while are more savvy about the value of data, at least I hope so.  
**[0:47:34-0:47:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:47:34):**  What we're seeing is that data is becoming one of the most valuable commodities on the  planet, which is why we teamed up with Abby and the Soil Mentor, because that data isn't  being mined.  It's not being used to make decisions that take that out of people's hands.  I know that some of the biggest companies in the world right now are looking at how  
**[0:47:56-0:48:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:47:56):**  do you make money off the agricultural landscape, and that totally subjugates or goes around  producers.  I think there's a concern about if I put all my data out there, someone's going to take  that and they're going to potentially use it for evil.  We've got to stop farming the farmers.  
**[0:48:16-0:48:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:48:16):**  We've got to start acknowledging the contribution that they're doing or acknowledging the fact  that they are the builders of infrastructure on the planet.  They are the conservatives.  What's been happening forever is just rape and pillage, take every single cent off those  producers.  
**[0:48:32-0:48:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:48:32):**  That's why we have landscapes so dysfunctional is it's very hard to think outside the box  when you're under so much stress from debt, under so much stress from legislation and  all these pressures on producers.  I really feel that they have the very strong right to keep that data to themselves.  What I'm seeing is group hubs so that the hubs are sharing that information, but it's  
**[0:48:55-0:48:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:48:55):**  not out there in the public domain space.  Maybe that'll change.  Maybe the whole world will actually go through this paradigm shift that I hope they will  and it becomes something that benefits the producers.  You could argue that this data is of all of us.  
**[0:49:13-0:49:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:49:13):**  In some countries like Norway, your tax data is public.  It really depends how you frame that or how we go through that.  Of course, not to be mined and not to be sold to XYZ, but should we all know what's happening  in our landscapes?  I'm saying our as the full planet.  
**[0:49:34-0:49:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:49:34):**  Is that or should it really be because I happen to be lucky enough to own this land, which  we can ask a lot of questions about, then I should also be owner of that data.  I don't know.  Is that true or should we go through a transition or an evolution to question that as well?  Yeah.  
**[0:49:54-0:49:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:49:54):**  I have a concrete example that really solidified my thinking on this, which was that early  days I learned that every farmer in the UK has to pay a tariff essentially on all of  their wheat that they sell, every bushel or oats.  That goes to a centralized organization in the UK, a farming organization.  Then that organization takes all of the data from all of those bushel sold, puts it all  
**[0:50:20-0:50:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:50:20):**  together and makes it open source and available.  When you really look at who benefits from that data, it is not the farmers.  The farmers are paying for that data to be dealt with and collected, but the people who  benefit are the traders essentially or the investors or the huge... I know people who  create the software that draws on all of that data around the world, puts it together and  
**[0:50:45-0:50:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:50:45):**  then sells it as trading information.  They make a heck of a lot of money off of it.  I tell you, it's amazing.  Who knew?  For me, what I learned from that was like, okay, I get it.  
**[0:50:59-0:51:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:50:59):**  That data is valuable.  It's not necessarily compromising the farmer's integrity in the sense that it's not location-based  and it's not saying this farmer does this, but it's valuable data in the aggregate for  someone somewhere.  If this data is going to be valuable in the aggregate, then for me, I think the farmer  
**[0:51:17-0:51:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:51:17):**  should be able to opt in and they should get paid for it, or they should have some sort  of financial remuneration for the fact that they helped collect that data and that it's  providing value elsewhere in this supply chain.  That's the position that we've taken, which is that it is the farmer's data.  If somehow we come up with some agreement with someone and we're going to do an aggregate  
**[0:51:44-0:51:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:51:44):**  data share or we would like to, then that will be the farmer's choice whether they want  to participate in that.  My hope would be that there would be a way of passing... I would make sure that there's  a way of compensating throughout back to the farm gate, essentially.  Speaking of this, what would you say... Imagine again, we're in a theater, we're doing this  
**[0:52:06-0:52:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:52:06):**  live and the room is full of, let's say, people that consider themselves smart investors that  are hearing this, like, we love the technology approach.  Obviously agriculture landscapes have to transition.  I've asked this question already to Abby, so I'm going to ask it to Nicole.  What would you tell, obviously without giving investment advice, which is not what we're  
**[0:52:23-0:52:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:52:23):**  doing here, but what would you tell them to look at the moment they walk out of the theater  and they are, of course, super inspired.  They're going to read the book or they already did.  They're going to look at a lot of documentaries.  They're going to visit some farms, but then where should they start literally and not  
**[0:52:38-0:52:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:52:38):**  literally digging deeper?  What are pieces of this regenerative transition that you're so deep into that really could  use some, say, investor energy or resources or places where... Then I'm going to ask  the question where you would put money to work, but first of all, let's address the  audience.  
**[0:52:56-0:52:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:52:56):**  What should they do the moment they walk out of this theater?  For me, I think it's very interesting in terms of, I think as human beings, we're attracted  to the big and the shiny and maybe the technology and the, oh, look what I made.  Look what I'm doing.  And where we really need to be focused in on is how do we really empower people?  
**[0:53:21-0:53:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:53:21):**  How do we really make a difference?  Investing in education, investing in training people to think, to be able to be this creative  space.  It's not as sexy, but that's what's truly going to make an impact in the world because  that one person that you've now empowered and they're out in the world, you don't know  
**[0:53:41-0:53:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:53:41):**  what the impact of that person could be.  And it could be absolutely massive.  I mean, I think just me as one person, I speak to potentially over 10,000 people in a year.  I'm working with over 24 million acres with behavior change programs.  That's what we need to be investing in is not me, although you can, that would be great,  
**[0:54:04-0:54:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:54:04):**  but investing in those people that are really shifting the context, that are really shifting  the paradigms.  And perhaps that starts with educational centers.  But what I see, like right now there's the carbon smart $1 billion that the American  government is putting out and what they're looking for is products and practices.  
**[0:54:26-0:54:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:54:26):**  That is not going to make the difference.  If you just invest in a practice, you can make that practice degenerative in a heartbeat.  The practice is guided by our philosophy and our principles.  We need to be working on those higher philosophies so that it becomes abhorrent to come out and  use Paraquat and 2,4-D and other chemicals to terminate a cover crop.  
**[0:54:47-0:54:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:54:47):**  And you go, oh look, I grew a cover crop.  I'm regenerative.  That's the piece that's really got to shift.  So I think for investors to be looking at where are the change agents and how do we  get under and make a difference with them?  
**[0:55:00-0:55:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:55:00):**  Because they're the ones making the difference on the ground.  And sorry, that's not very sexy.  And then let's flip the question to you.  So let's say you're an investor and I mean, you knew this question was coming, but you  have a billion dollars to put to work and I'm not looking for exact dollar amounts.  
**[0:55:16-0:55:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:55:16):**  I'm looking for what would you prioritize?  How would you put that money to work?  It's as an investment.  Definitely, there could be some grants here and there, but predominantly to put it to  work and at some point it should come back ideally.  
**[0:55:32-0:55:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:55:32):**  What would you approach first?  What would you do first tomorrow morning if you put on your investor hat?  I think I would really like to invest with some large scale projects that really demonstrate  how we can alter climate.  So we're looking at that 100,000 hectare blocks where we can really demonstrate how does this  
**[0:55:56-0:55:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:55:56):**  affect downstream?  How is this affecting everybody else?  And then the education piece.  So there are more and more regenerative ag centers being set up.  What I'd like to see, and it's the same with the NRCS here in the US, I want to see them  
**[0:56:11-0:56:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:56:11):**  being trained in the mindset piece.  So what does it take to get some of these schools of thought into the people that are  already on the ground?  There's 140,000 people working for the NRCS.  If they shifted their context and their mindset, whoa, what would be possible just here in  
**[0:56:28-0:56:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:56:28):**  the US?  So yeah, that's where I would like to be investing.  And you're mentioning 100,000 because it's a nice big number or because there's a thought  behind it, like that's the minimum we need to hit to hit the climate.  Exactly.  
**[0:56:44-0:56:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:56:44):**  That's the minimum we need to hit to see this engineering of climate.  I hate that word engineering.  I need a new word.  To see this differential start to happen, see cloud formation, see volatile organic  compounds, to see that whole surface start to raise water and to change climate.  
**[0:57:05-0:57:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:57:05):**  So yeah, there's some pretty good research to show that's the minimum that you need to  be able to start influencing downwind.  And how would you approach that then with a billion dollars?  I'm imagining from a non-regenerative mindset you wouldn't buy up all the land.  How would you do it?  
**[0:57:20-0:57:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:57:20):**  And in case, where would you start?  Do you have an ideal landscape in mind for 100,000 hectares we're talking about or acres?  Hectares.  It would have to be absolutely collaborative.  It would have to involve justice and equity and indigenous people in this space.  
**[0:57:35-0:57:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:57:35):**  So looking at what does it look like to restore these ecosystems.  And there's so many partners out there right now that are asking the same question to develop  a collaborative model.  So no, this wouldn't be, oh, all this land is owned by some guy who flies to Mars.  That's not what we're interested in doing.  
**[0:57:53-0:57:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:57:53):**  It's not about the ownership of that land, but the collaboration.  And we've seen some great projects in New Mexico and in China and Saudi Arabia.  There's projects that are starting to do this, but definitely it has to involve entire communities  and have community buy in.  And so we're seeing some interesting stuff here where I am in Big Timber in Montana is  
**[0:58:17-0:58:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:58:17):**  that just through the actions of one producer, we're seeing 50% of the land area in a 10  mile radius changing their management practices and moving towards adaptive grazing management.  And we're seeing that resilience now to drought.  So last year we had a major drought all through most of the West and to come here and still  see you've got knee to thigh high, green grass, and the ranch is saying, this is not a drought  
**[0:58:47-0:58:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:58:47):**  issue.  This is a management issue.  And to see that looking over the fence, people are buying in into that and they are the ones  that will be directly remunerated.  But sometimes there's a fear that I said like debt can be a real barrier.  
**[0:59:01-0:59:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:59:01):**  The banks, the accountants can be real barriers.  Like I'm interested in how do we pull down some of those barriers that's reducing uptake.  And so you could use community scale projects to look at what are the barriers to you to  uptaking this and maybe it requires some financial investment.  So the carbon project that started here, producers are being paid for their carbon, but they're  
**[0:59:24-0:59:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:59:24):**  not doing it for the carbon.  And you ask all of them, they're all talking about ecosystem services, downstream effects,  biodiversity.  You know, they're really brought into the whole thing, but that money enabled them to  put in more infrastructure to put in more water.  
**[0:59:40-0:59:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:59:40):**  And so we take away your fund, unfortunately, but you have magic power to change one thing,  to change one thing overnight.  And then I have a lot of people and say, yeah, I'm going to do two, which is sort of okay,  but let's try to keep it to one.  Like what would you change?  
**[0:59:55-1:00:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=0:59:55):**  It could be global consciousness, could be get rid of subsidies, could be anything in  food and ag in this case, obviously, but also even outside that, like what would you do  if you had literally a magic wand to change something overnight?  Those things would be awesome.  And I think teaching primary school children ecological principles to start some of this  
**[1:00:19-1:00:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=1:00:19):**  thinking, creative thinking, to change the whole schooling system so that one plus one  doesn't equal two.  You know, what is one plus one?  Well, if it's a buck goat and a nanny goat, that could be four.  You know, like how do we start to create people that can think outside the box?  
**[1:00:38-1:00:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=1:00:38):**  Because those are the ones that are going to really be able to deal with a world that  we don't know what it's going to look like, you know, in our lifetime.  The uncertainty is we want adaptive thinkers, right?  And I've asked this one already to Abby, but I don't really remember what you said, actually.  You might have changed it three years down the line.  
**[1:01:00-1:01:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=1:01:00):**  If you could change one thing now with all the experience you have three years further,  what would you change?  What would you address or not address?  What would you use that that wand for?  Yeah, it's interesting.  
**[1:01:12-1:01:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=1:01:12):**  I think it's very reflective maybe of just some of the more recent experiences I've had,  but there is something about getting coaching or therapy or something for everyone.  Because that feels like if people, it is so, there's so much healing that needs to be done.  And that's both of the land, these degraded landscapes, but they're very reflective or  like, you know, how we are is so reflected in what we see all around us.  
**[1:01:44-1:01:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=1:01:44):**  And so it is very reflective of the healing that's needed for every one of us human beings  on the planet.  And so, yeah, what does that look like and how can that be part of what this journey  is?  And I do feel like, you know, as Nicole, you so often are always talking about mindset.  
**[1:02:04-1:02:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=1:02:04):**  It is like, it's what's in our heads.  And if we can interact with that and heal, that would be an amazing place to start.  If I can add, I was just at the conference on world affairs in Boulder, Colorado.  Hundreds of people at that event, 120 speakers and speakers that are on, contributing to  the IPCC report, people talking about justice and equity, really just big topics like what's  
**[1:02:35-1:02:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=1:02:35):**  going to happen with migration and food quality and indigenous rights.  And what was absolutely fascinating is at the end of every single panel that I watched,  when people were asked, what do we need to do?  All of them said, connect with your heart.  Do the work here first, because then we're in a position, we're not going to be the wounded  
**[1:02:56-1:02:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=1:02:56):**  healers trying to heal the world.  We're not going to be those with anger and fear and rage inside of ourselves trying to  create peace.  And it was amazing to me that it was scientists saying this, it was activists saying it, it  was philosophers.  
**[1:03:10-1:03:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=1:03:10):**  Everybody had the same message.  And I'm like, holy Toledo, this paradigm is shifting so fast.  We have no idea.  And that really is where the work needs to start is with ourselves and the people around  us and certainly, you know, families and the whole piece.  
**[1:03:25-1:03:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=1:03:25):**  But that's the piece I'm most excited about.  I don't think there's a better way to end this one.  I have a lot of other questions, but I want to be conscious of your time as well.  And I hope it's not the last time I have you both or individually on the podcast so we  can dig deeper and deeper.  
**[1:03:41-1:03:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=1:03:41):**  And of course, following your amazing work.  So I want to thank you so much for coming back, Abby, and for coming on the podcast  for the first time, Nicole.  Yes.  Thank you.  
**[1:03:50-1:04:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=1:03:50):**  Thank you so much for listening all the way to the end.  For the show notes and links we discussed in this episode, check out our website, investinginregenerativeagriculture.com  forward slash posts.  If you liked this episode, why not share it with a friend or give us a rating on Apple  podcast.  
**[1:04:14-1:04:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=1:04:14):**  That really helps.  Thanks again and see you next time.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  
**[1:04:39-1:04:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=1:04:39):**  Why are we doing this course?  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question, how to put money  to work in regenerating soils, and have been following the space since 2011 and recording  these podcasts since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  
**[1:04:57-1:05:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=1:04:57):**  How have we built our decision making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  What questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  
**[1:05:07-1:05:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=1:05:07):**  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  
**[1:05:15-1:05:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=1:05:15):**  You, the soil builders and investors in this space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management consultants, etc.  People that are building soil at scale.  
**[1:05:35-1:05:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=1:05:35):**  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  No.  
**[1:05:49-1:05:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=1:05:49):**  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  that among the listeners of this podcast we have people with very different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  
**[1:06:09-1:06:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=1:06:09):**  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to ride along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  
**[1:06:25-1:06:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=1:06:25):**  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  
**[1:06:45-1:06:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=1:06:45):**  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  
**[1:06:59-1:07:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/nicole-masters-abby-rose#t=1:06:59):**  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking, click on  the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  