### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2022-00-17)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com slash course or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  Imagine if you could, with a single or a few samples of water collected downstream in a  watershed, map all of the biodiversity in that watershed.  
**[0:00:22-0:00:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:00:22):**  Instead of sending teams to survey the different bird species placing camera traps hoping that  you capture these crucial species, you can use environmental DNA to map all of the species  from bacteria to blue whales.  And if you do that regularly, you can actually see if the biodiversity is increasing or decreasing.  This is already possible around mining areas and conservation areas.  
**[0:00:42-0:00:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:00:42):**  And imagine applying this to landscapes full of agriculture.  And what if we add soil sampling and even more cutting edge air sampling to monitor  the biodiversity in a landscape?  Welcome to another episode of investing in regenerative agriculture, investing as if  the planet mattered.  
**[0:01:00-0:01:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:01:00):**  Podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  
**[0:01:20-0:01:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:01:20):**  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  In March last year, we launched our membership community to make it easy for fans to support  our work.  
**[0:01:37-0:01:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:01:37):**  And so many of you have joined as a member.  We've launched different types of benefits, exclusive content, Q&A webinars with former  guests, ask me anything sessions plus so much more to come in the future.  For more information on the different tiers, benefits and how to become a member, check  gumroad.com slash investing region egg, or find the link below.  
**[0:01:56-0:01:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:01:56):**  Thank you.  Welcome to another episode today with the head of nature, positive supply chains at  nature metrics, the home of cutting edge biodiversity monitoring powerful, scalable biodiversity  data delivered safely and sustainably using DNA from bacteria to blue whales.  They monitor biodiversity in context ranging from conservation to environmental impact  
**[0:02:16-0:02:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:02:16):**  assessments.  Welcome, Kath.  Hi, great to be here.  And shout out, first of all, to Paul Chatterton who mentioned nature metrics that I didn't  know about yet.  
**[0:02:25-0:02:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:02:25):**  A shame on me, obviously, and got very, very interested in what you are doing in the conservation  space and starting to look at the agriculture space.  So we'll unpack all of that, what it means, they're using DNA, what it means, the water  side, how can you measure blue whales and all of that.  But let's start with a personal question.  
**[0:02:42-0:02:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:02:42):**  How did you end up going this deep into biodiversity?  So I think my whole life has really been around biodiversity and nature.  As a kid, I loved being around animals, being outside.  I grew up in New Zealand where we have amazing biodiversity on our doorstep.  And really as I grew up, it was what I wanted to do as a career choice.  
**[0:03:04-0:03:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:03:04):**  I sort of studied zoology at university and then really became aware of the challenges  that the world's nature is facing and decided that that was what I wanted to do with my  life.  I wanted to try and help restore nature, biodiversity, to make sure that we were going to have something  around for future generations.  
**[0:03:26-0:03:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:03:26):**  There are many different paths that you could have, even in that specific, let's say, Tree  of Life branch, you could have taken and you ended up working at a very exciting startup.  What was the journey like?  It wasn't straight to that.  You've worked in many different places.  
**[0:03:39-0:03:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:03:39):**  How did you decide at some point to maybe not stay in academia, but actually to join  the corporate world or to join the commercial world and then ending up at a startup where  life is not always easy and quite exciting, but also quite challenging, I can imagine,  compared to you being in a university somewhere and studying super interesting biodiversity  stuff, obviously in New Zealand.  
**[0:03:59-0:04:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:03:59):**  I mean, there are places you can spend your whole life studying stuff there, but you decided  to move.  Yeah.  So I started off in academia and I love research, but there was this growing frustration about  the fact that academic research, so much of it just goes and sits on a dusty shelf and  
**[0:04:17-0:04:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:04:17):**  nobody reads it or uses it.  There's this huge disconnect between the practitioners and the people that really need the evidence  and the researchers that are producing it.  For me, it just feels like sometimes a really inefficient way to create impact.  You spend years and years trying to answer one very specific question.  
**[0:04:39-0:04:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:04:39):**  You then spend years trying to get that published as an academic article that nobody reads.  So I really wanted to do something that was driving change on the ground a little bit  more.  So then I moved more into the conservation sector, working with NGOs, with practical  projects on the ground.  
**[0:04:57-0:05:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:04:57):**  And again, that was great, but I wanted to try and drive impact at a slightly bigger  scale and I was just really conscious through the work that I was doing of the impact that  the private sector was having on biodiversity, but also the power that they had to change.  So you can see that they can be so nimble, when they're motivated, the private sector  can change at a much faster pace than policy can change, for example, and through that  
**[0:05:28-0:05:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:05:28):**  they can have massive impact.  So that was when I started to work more closely with corporates on helping them understand  how they could start to measure their impacts on biodiversity and then manage those impacts.  And when you were in academia, I imagine, I've never worked in academia, but it's relatively  easy to stay there for a long time.  
**[0:05:49-0:05:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:05:49):**  Like once you're in, you can stay there for a long time.  You said, no, there was this growing frustration with time as well, like not the most efficient  way of creating impact.  Was that a slowly growing thing or was there one example like, okay, I spent four years  studying this one bacteria and then it didn't get published or something like that?  
**[0:06:06-0:06:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:06:06):**  Was there a slow process to say, okay, I need to go out of academia?  Or was there one moment that at some point, okay, this is enough and now let's do something  else?  I don't think there was a single moment, but it was working more with communities on the  ground.  
**[0:06:22-0:06:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:06:22):**  I worked with an amazing project working in West Africa in a protected area.  And it's just that disconnect between the practical tools that local communities need  to enact change on the ground and the kind of questions that you're answering with some  research project conducted by predominantly Western scientists on the other side of the  world.  
**[0:06:48-0:06:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:06:48):**  But also, you sort of mentioned that you could get comfortable in academia.  I think it's really hard for people entering that career space now.  There's much less job security.  It's driven by grant funding.  Grant funding is really competitive, which in itself is a really inefficient use of resources.  
**[0:07:08-0:07:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:07:08):**  You spend a huge amount of time and energy chasing grant money with, you know, 1% chance  of success.  So just the whole system.  Sounds like fundraising.  Yeah.  
**[0:07:19-0:07:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:07:19):**  Even worse.  Yeah.  It's a bit like fundraising, but yeah, it's such potluck.  So I sort of felt like there was better ways I could be spending my time.  And then in the corporate space, at what point did you sort of notice that the tools were  
**[0:07:34-0:07:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:07:34):**  missing or the tools maybe were there, but not adequate, not cheap enough, not accessible  enough or not specific enough, or maybe too specific.  What was that process?  And then of course joining nature metrics, which you're going to unpack, but what was  there like, okay, there's actually something to do on the tool side and on the practical,  
**[0:07:50-0:07:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:07:50):**  like the shelves and ordered off this sector and not necessarily also, but we first need  to get the tools better to start asking much bigger questions about how to change those  supply chains and have those impacts impacts on the road or down the watershed.  So my work with corporates is really focused on companies with supply chain.  So their impacts on nature are really concentrated at the production of the raw materials that  
**[0:08:15-0:08:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:08:15):**  they're purchasing.  So that tends to be agriculture.  So we see in the space of kind of corporates and biodiversity.  So the extractive sector, for example, is quite well advanced in how they measure their  impacts on biodiversity, but that's partly because they make a lot of money out of a  
**[0:08:32-0:08:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:08:32):**  small area of land.  And there's also a lot more regulation around it.  Meaning the mining sector, anything that literally takes stuff out of the ground is usually,  I mean, even though they're big, it usually are relatively concentrated on around and  in the mine.  
**[0:08:46-0:08:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:08:46):**  And there's a lot of regulation around what they can dump into, so water use, et cetera.  Like they're under a lot of scrutiny compared to some other, also extractive sectors that  maybe they dig a bit less deep, like a lot of the players in the agriculture space.  Yeah.  So the mining sector, I mean, also infrastructure.  
**[0:09:03-0:09:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:09:03):**  So people building things.  Yeah.  Those sort of sectors, they've got a much longer history of trying to understand their  impacts on biodiversity.  But like I say, they've got the money to spend on it.  
**[0:09:15-0:09:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:09:15):**  So they can send out teams of surveyors to these places, to these technical experts that  can go out in the field and identify birds and mammals and fish.  So how does that work?  Let's say I own a mine in, let's say in West Africa and I need to, because of regulation  and because of my own policy, assess the impact on biodiversity.  
**[0:09:36-0:09:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:09:36):**  I fly in a team.  Is that what I'm hearing from you?  Like how does that work and what do they do?  Like how should I imagine that process currently works or used to work or currently works if  I want to understand my impact of this mine on biodiversity?  
**[0:09:49-0:09:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:09:49):**  So I'm not an expert in the sector, but yes.  So in general, they'll start off with environmental impact assessment.  You'll normally have some sort of desk-based assessment where you're kind of trying to  understand what the risk is.  Is this mine in an area with lots of endangered and protected species and important habitat?  
**[0:10:06-0:10:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:10:06):**  But then yeah, absolutely, you will need experts in the field.  And sometimes they may have access to local experts, but a lot of the time they won't.  And so they will be flying in teams of people who have expertise to go out and survey these  sites for different birds, et cetera.  So they go around and spend weeks in the areas for quite a few days, I'm imagining, to survey  
**[0:10:31-0:10:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:10:31):**  and to capture the biodiversity, the full scale, which is super difficult and very expensive,  I'm imagining.  Yeah, absolutely.  So you can imagine that when you then think about a different sector like agriculture,  it's just not feasible.  
**[0:10:48-0:10:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:10:48):**  You can't send out teams of experts to a farm where the profits that you're making out of  a hectare are just a fraction of what a mining company is going to be making out of the same  area of land.  So the challenge that I was working with with supply chain companies, how do you create  a scalable way of monitoring your impact on biodiversity when you potentially have thousands  
**[0:11:13-0:11:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:11:13):**  of suppliers and, you know, thousands of suppliers who are producing commodities but aren't making  huge margins off that.  And there's also not that same regulation, regulatory incentive to spend lots of money  on this biodiversity monitoring.  And so what was the solution you came up with or one of the solutions?  
**[0:11:34-0:11:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:11:34):**  What was the direction in going, okay, we cannot fly in teams of people and send them  two weeks into farm areas or whole watersheds to start surveying the amount of birds and  the amount of insect wildlife and use it as a proxy to see what's happening.  That would be amazing in many cases, but it's also incomplete and very, very expensive.  So that's not an option.  
**[0:11:52-0:11:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:11:52):**  What are other, I mean, people talk about satellite, remote sensing, sensors, etc.  But you took a different route to a potential solution.  Yeah, absolutely.  So remote sensing is a great option, but it doesn't really let you see individual species.  You can't necessarily see biodiversity from space.  
**[0:12:12-0:12:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:12:12):**  So that was when I came across NatureMetrics, which surveys biodiversity by looking at the  DNA that species leave behind in the environment.  So it's a bit like crime scene forensics but for animals.  So we can collect through samples of water or soil and even air.  You can collect a sample and then we can process that in the lab and look for these little  
**[0:12:37-0:12:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:12:37):**  fragments of DNA that species have left behind.  And the thing that really appealed to me is that I love spending times in nature.  I love watching animals and birds, but I'm a terrible field biologist.  Why are we just so terrible?  What does a good field biologist look like and why would you be a terrible one?  
**[0:12:59-0:13:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:12:59):**  Well, so for example, I spent a lot of time working with ornithologists, so bird experts,  and a lot of time working with the data sets that they produce.  But these are people that can go out in the field and they can identify a bird species  by song, normally from quite some distance away.  And they can only tell you where 10, 20, 30 meters away that bird is.  
**[0:13:26-0:13:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:13:26):**  And to me, I can't do that.  But it sounds like something that we can do.  Let's say if you would record that, in this case, it would be audio waves, obviously,  like a computer would be able to tell you as well.  We can train software to do that at some point.  
**[0:13:40-0:13:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:13:40):**  I'm not sure.  But the acoustic space feels like something, okay, I would, we're recording this now.  So I'm in my simple mind thinking, okay, that's a fixable thing.  But it's only a very small part of the biodiversity of the place to capture that, analyze that.  And then, but you're saying we're capturing, we're doing water samples, air samples,  
**[0:13:58-0:14:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:13:58):**  and soil samples, and then give you almost a full spectrum of what has been living and  now has let something go, which could be poop, which could be other DNA, which could be a  lot of different things, has been living upstream, or at least where the wind or the water came  from.  And that's, I think, the interesting piece, you're saying 10, 20 meters.  
**[0:14:16-0:14:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:14:16):**  But in this case, if you do this analysis, it can be a much larger area that you can  sample with a few samples only.  Yeah, potentially.  So acoustics is another fantastic technology.  And there are some really amazing people working on that.  
**[0:14:29-0:14:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:14:29):**  But as you say, with, so we call it environmental DNA.  So that's the fragments of DNA that animals are leaving behind in the environment.  So with eDNA, we can sample like the whole diversity of life.  So we can look from bacteria to blue whales, I think, as we mentioned earlier.  And for me, what's really exciting about DNA is that it gives us this really unbiased view  
**[0:14:56-0:14:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:14:56):**  of the ecosystem.  So a lot of these traditional surveys led by technical experts in the field, they're  focused on those really charismatic species.  So the birds and the chimpanzees and elephants and…  And even in the birds, maybe the ones we know the song of, the ones we don't know, we  
**[0:15:15-0:15:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:15:15):**  are not even captured, I'm imagining.  Bird experts would probably know, be able to cover everything that was in the relevant  local environment.  But whilst, you know, those charismatic species are the things that we really connect to and  think about when we think about nature, that is not necessarily the biodiversity that's  
**[0:15:33-0:15:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:15:33):**  fundamental to…  There's not necessarily the biodiversity that's fundamental to a functioning ecosystem.  So that's not necessarily the biodiversity that is really underpinning our economic systems.  Which would be the bacteria, the insects, like the non-sexy ones, basically are the  ones we actually should be… and we're not following them.  
**[0:15:54-0:15:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:15:54):**  Which is that we have no really good like overview in many places, like many conservation  areas, but also many farms for sure.  Most of it is sort of in the dark.  Absolutely.  So the soil microbiome is fundamental to global agriculture.  
**[0:16:10-0:16:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:16:10):**  You know, without a functioning microbiome, we don't have crops.  But we know just, you know, a tiny amount about the bacteria and the fungi and the insects  that are living in the soil and how different combinations of different species are important  for making crops grow.  And so how did you end up then…  
**[0:16:32-0:16:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:16:32):**  So you found NatureMetrics you mentioned, and then now I think it's time to go.  What is NatureMetrics doing analyzing this eDNA?  And what does it tell?  Like what are typical clients you work with or customers you work with?  Typical use cases where you might be measuring the blue whales or the bacteria or both.  
**[0:16:48-0:16:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:16:48):**  And so what should people imagine?  Okay, it's not, we're not sending a huge team listening to the song of birds, but we're  doing something else and we're getting a different image or maybe a better or more  accurate or more relevant image of the area we want to survey.  So we have a huge range of clients.  
**[0:17:03-0:17:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:17:03):**  So as I mentioned previously, a lot of our work is with the extractors sector, so mining  companies, infrastructure, so property developers.  And what we're doing in those sectors is we're replacing the need to send out these  huge teams of technical experts to the field.  You're not making friends with that, I think, because this used to be, I think for a lot  
**[0:17:25-0:17:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:17:25):**  of these technical experts also, I'm not saying nice trips, but important trips and  relevant trips, but yeah, you're undercutting them probably by a significant amount in terms  of price.  And I mean, yeah.  So you still need people out in the field, but I think one of the fantastic things about  
**[0:17:40-0:17:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:17:40):**  what we do is that anybody can take a sample.  You don't need to be an expert to take a sample.  So how do you take a sample?  Walk us through visually, because of course we're an audio.  If I want to take a sample, how would it work?  
**[0:17:53-0:17:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:17:53):**  So for example, probably our most developed kits are our water kits.  And so with that, you collect a few liters of water in a bag that we supply.  And then we have a little disk, which is a filter, which captures the DNA.  And then you use a syringe, you syringe up the water, and then you just push it through  the filter.  
**[0:18:18-0:18:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:18:18):**  It's just a small round disk, maybe five centimeters in diameter.  And you will push a few liters of water through the disk.  And then that's it.  That's your DNA sample.  You pop it in the envelope and you send it back to our labs.  
**[0:18:34-0:18:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:18:34):**  And we then process that in the lab.  And so I don't have to send water, which probably logistically makes it a lot easier.  And then you set a few liters, like in a normal circumstances, what kind of area can I cover  with it?  Or how often should I do it if I'm running a mine of, I don't know, 50 hectares or something?  
**[0:18:53-0:18:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:18:53):**  Like what, it depends on the terrain, obviously, but should I do many samples or is it relatively,  like the ratio of one disk, like how big is the ratio that I should normally consider?  Of course it depends.  It's sort of a million dollar question of how many samples is enough.  And I can't give you an answer to that because it really depends on the question you're trying  
**[0:19:14-0:19:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:19:14):**  to answer and the context.  What would I like to see?  Yeah.  Like how much do you miss in one, in a few liters of water?  Yeah.  
**[0:19:20-0:19:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:19:20):**  So how sure do you want to be that you've sampled all the biodiversity in the area?  You need a slightly more intensive sampling approach than a, I'm just interested to know  generally what's here.  And then the next step is kind of do you want to be able to track changes through time?  But in general, you can sample at a much lower field work effort than you would with a traditional  
**[0:19:44-0:19:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:19:44):**  survey approach.  And if you're thinking about things like water catchments, it can be a really effective way  of sampling biodiversity at that catchment scale because the DNA does of course move  with the water.  So if you're sampling downstream, you are capturing some of the biodiversity from upstream  
**[0:20:02-0:20:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:20:02):**  as well.  And you've seen surprises in there, right?  In conservation areas where people thought, I think Paul mentioned at Chatterton that  certain things were more extinct or didn't, were living anymore in that part of the river  system and only in the other part and actually the DNA showed that they were absolutely also  
**[0:20:18-0:20:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:20:18):**  living in other areas than we thought until now.  Because of course if you have very thick jungle, for example, yeah, we can only go so far with  the search teams and the DNA doesn't lie.  Like if it's there, it had to be upstream in the watershed somewhere.  It's not that it just comes, it doesn't go up upstream by itself.  
**[0:20:35-0:20:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:20:35):**  Yeah.  We've had some great examples of species that are new to an area that we've rediscovered.  But I think one of my favorite examples is the pygmy hippo, which is, as you might guess,  it's a tiny hippo.  It lives in West Africa.  
**[0:20:52-0:20:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:20:52):**  It's incredibly rare and endangered.  I worked on this conservation project in Sierra Leone and we knew there were pygmy hippos  around this national park.  But you could, I mean people that had lived adjacent to that national park their whole  lives had never seen the pygmy hippos.  
**[0:21:11-0:21:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:21:11):**  And we spent a huge amount of money on putting up camera traps and doing all sorts of surveys  to try and find these pygmy hippos.  You know, and you might get one photo across thousands of nights worth of camera trapping  effort.  And then when you use an eDNA approach, you can just take samples of the water and there  
**[0:21:32-0:21:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:21:32):**  are pygmy hippos all over the place.  Can you see how many as well?  Or you can maybe see over time if it increases or decreases.  Like how likely is it that this DNA mixes like in water in terms of like it gets picked  up?  
**[0:21:45-0:21:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:21:45):**  Probably that's research you're doing now.  Like what is the ratio of missing things versus capturing it even if you like, how big was  this watershed and how many samples did you have to do?  Or was it literally, like you said, a few liters and we understood that in this national  park or around it actually were quite a few pygmy hippos.  
**[0:22:01-0:22:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:22:01):**  So it was more than a couple of liters to find these particular pygmy hippos.  And this particular project was in Liberia.  So you can't directly equate the… we sort of look at more presence absence of animals.  So sometimes if you have a greater amount of DNA in your sample, that tends to correlate  quite well with abundance, but it's not a one to one ratio.  
**[0:22:29-0:22:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:22:29):**  It's not a gram to pygmy hippo ratio.  No, that will be too… but you know the direction.  Like if they suddenly disappear or the quantity starts increasing over time in multiple samples,  I mean there's an indication of something is happening.  Yeah, absolutely.  
**[0:22:45-0:22:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:22:45):**  Especially if you're going back to the same place at the same time of year to repeat the  sampling and looking at the same species, then that gives you a great way of looking  at trends.  And we also within Nature Metrics have a fantastic team of data scientists who are working on  amazing modeling techniques which help translate that kind of… that one or two or hopefully  
**[0:23:07-0:23:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:23:07):**  more samples into what is the likelihood that we missed a species that was actually there.  And what have you done any work around the agriculture part of this?  Because runoff is a huge issue.  As I said before, somebody…  I don't remember which farmer said it.  
**[0:23:24-0:23:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:23:24):**  It's probably the best way to analyze a farmer to know if a farm is going in the right  direction or not is to analyze the water that leaves the farm at the lowest point on the  farm.  But of course these are also extractive industries but not as profitable as certain other ones.  So have you done any work in agriculture and if not, why and how can we fix that?  
**[0:23:43-0:23:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:23:43):**  So agriculture is an emerging sector for us.  So we can see lots of potential applications of the technology.  So as you mentioned, we can look at water quality.  So there are groups of particular species that are really good indicators of whether  water is polluted or not polluted.  
**[0:24:05-0:24:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:24:05):**  So what we're working on at the moment is how do we turn our kind of list of species  into useful metrics that can then inform decision making.  So freshwater pollution indices are a great application of our technology.  But of course in soil, I think the most exciting thing is looking at the soil microbiome.  So with a small sample of soil, we can look at the bacteria, the fungi and the invertebrates  
**[0:24:37-0:24:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:24:37):**  that are living in that soil and start to understand how that correlates with a healthy  or regenerative soil.  And you mentioned probably our water part is the most developed.  What is different when you're analysing soil and could you be analysing soil also indirectly  through water that is runoff that went through the soil?  
**[0:25:00-0:25:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:25:00):**  How different is that approach if we say, okay, we want to analyse a few litres of water  and if we do that in a number of places, it gives us a good idea of the watershed, which  sounds like huge in soil.  I don't know.  It feels immediately to me that, okay, we have to do more of that because it's more  
**[0:25:15-0:25:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:25:15):**  local.  Is that a right thought or how different would soil sampling or soil analytics be compared  to water?  Yeah, which also sounds amazing, but I don't know how, I cannot even imagine how to do  that.  
**[0:25:26-0:25:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:25:26):**  So, yeah, you're right.  I think the biodiversity in the soil is not moving in the same way that the DNA in a waterway  is.  So you need a different sampling approach.  So if you want to characterise the microbiome of a field, you would want to take probably  
**[0:25:42-0:25:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:25:42):**  multiple samples of that field.  Or if you are not that worried about the variation within a field, you just want to kind of to  know in general what the microbiome looks like across that field.  You can use lots of sub samples.  So you take lots of sub samples across your field, a bit like you might do for chemical  
**[0:26:01-0:26:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:26:01):**  sampling, mix it all together and then you kind of get an average result.  And then do you need to, because you cannot push it through a filter, like then you need  to run water through it to sort of dissolve.  So how does it work?  So we don't use a filter for the soil samples.  
**[0:26:17-0:26:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:26:17):**  You would literally send us a small few grams of soil and that's what we would analyse in  the lab.  And would, I mean, how different is that result or would that result be compared to, for instance,  after a rainy day, taking a bit of the runoff water from a field, would they be able to  tell us fundamentally different things or would you say no, the soil sampling is in  
**[0:26:38-0:26:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:26:38):**  this case better, more complete or because as we see with the conservation side, like  this bacteria or the DNA left over, they travel with water.  How would that differ or it's not such a relevant approach to look at that low, like the water  running off from a farm or travel through a farm?  I think it would depend on your question, but I think runoff, you wouldn't get the same,  
**[0:27:00-0:27:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:27:00):**  you wouldn't get a very accurate representation of kind of the soil on the field from which  the runoff came, I guess.  And then air, how would air or how does air work?  Like an air sample.  I mean, I can imagine you open a pot and you close it, but that's probably not the approach.  
**[0:27:16-0:27:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:27:16):**  So this is cutting edge.  That's what I want to know.  So this is probably a great example actually, going right back to academia.  I mean, NatureMetrics work is founded off the back of, so our founder Kat Bruce, she  did her PhD on meta barcoding, which is what we call, that's what we call when you're processing  
**[0:27:39-0:27:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:27:39):**  a sample and looking at lots of species, looking for all the species in that sample.  So really, NatureMetrics was founded on the idea of, well, we've done cool science, but  we really need to find a way to apply it and have impact.  So air DNA is complete cutting edge.  It's work that we're looking at in collaboration with academics that are leading on this.  
**[0:28:04-0:28:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:28:04):**  The idea is that you have some sort of suction system to filter the air itself, but it's  the same idea.  I mean, we know that DNA exists all around us.  We're all shedding DNA the whole time.  Animals are no exception.  
**[0:28:18-0:28:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:28:18):**  We can capture that.  Animals and trees and plants, et cetera, although probably in water, it's, I wouldn't say easier,  but it moves downstream.  Like you sort of know where it comes from and where it didn't come from before.  But of course it could be influenced by rain, it could be influenced by many, many other  
**[0:28:34-0:28:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:28:34):**  things.  Now I'm just thinking that it's not that easy, but air feels like it just moves randomly.  So how do you contribute that to a place or a biome or a watershed?  But then it probably tells you a lot more different things if you're able to do that.  So sure, air is going to move and water moves, but the reality is that you still get a much  
**[0:28:55-0:28:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:28:55):**  stronger signal from things that are in their immediate environment.  So you're much more likely to pick up the person standing right next to the filter than  you are, the rhinoceros that's 20 kilometres away.  True.  And so you said agriculture for us is an emerging space.  
**[0:29:13-0:29:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:29:13):**  What needs to happen?  What would be an ideal agriculture client in the space?  Could be of course a large food company or something, but if somebody is listening, what  they should imagine as an ideal case to push the boundaries or to be on the cutting edge  to do maybe both air and water or soil and air, etc.  
**[0:29:30-0:29:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:29:30):**  What would really excite you on the agriculture side, on the soil side?  So I think we're really interested in soil sampling in the agriculture context and working  with people that can help us translate the data that we get into meaningful metrics.  So the soil microbiome, it's not just a list of species.  You don't get a list of 20 birds or whatever.  
**[0:29:54-0:30:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:29:54):**  It's thousands of bacteria and fungi and invertebrates and turning that into something meaningful  is much more difficult.  And it can really depend, right?  I mean the ideal ratio of bacteria to fungi in one cropping system might be different  for a different cropping system or soil type.  
**[0:30:19-0:30:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:30:19):**  So what we're really interested in is just testing out the approach in as many different  contexts as possible.  What I'm particularly interested in though is how do we create a scalable monitoring  system for the agricultural space.  So it has to be a different business model to how we operate with extractives because  
**[0:30:44-0:30:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:30:44):**  you're not making millions of dollars out of a field.  Except maybe a few small areas where we make very particular collective wines for collectors.  But the rest of the industry unfortunately is not operating on those margins.  So it has to shift from, it has to be a different approach is what you're saying.  And so what I'm really interested in is we have all these big corporates who are dependent  
**[0:31:12-0:31:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:31:12):**  on agricultural outputs and they're making big commitments to things like regenerative  agriculture.  How they're implementing those commitments, how they're supporting the suppliers, sometimes  a little bit opaque.  What I'm really interested in is bringing the corporate players to the field level to  
**[0:31:33-0:31:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:31:33):**  push them to develop the measurement approaches they need to really evidence the claims that  they're making and hopefully supporting their producers.  And for that I think we need a different scale of approach to monitoring.  And where I think DNA has real value is, you know we were talking about water catchment.  So monitoring biodiversity at the scale of water catchment.  
**[0:32:03-0:32:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:32:03):**  So can we do that at the same scale for agriculture?  So can we start to monitor biodiversity at the landscape scale?  So rather than having the onus on an individual farmer to fund the measurement approach himself,  we look at the bigger picture, we get people to co-invest in the measurement and we look  at kind of measuring those outcomes at a much larger scale.  
**[0:32:32-0:32:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:32:32):**  So sort of thinking along the lines of, you know we see landscape and jurisdictional approaches  developing as solutions to sustainable commodity production.  So let's kind of harness that model and see if we can deploy biodiversity monitoring as  part of those programs.  And let's say you have a landscape where one or two or multiple corporates are buying a  
**[0:32:56-0:32:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:32:56):**  considerable amount.  So there's an influence, there's an interest to monitor.  How would you approach it to figure out where to sample?  How do you pick like, okay, we don't work on a farm level so we can pick any farm or  any spot on a farm.  
**[0:33:10-0:33:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:33:10):**  How do you normally approach that as well?  But how would you do that in agriculture?  Okay, what we have three ways of sampling where to do what and why, how difficult is  that on a, but if you have the whole landscape and there's somebody paying for it, is it  then still very tricky to figure out, okay, we have to be there, there and there.  
**[0:33:26-0:33:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:33:26):**  And that point probably is not so essential to measure, but it would be nice.  Like how do you prioritize with like, you could, of course you only have limited resources,  now that you can do 10,000 sampling.  So how do you prioritize the spots where you catch air, water and or so?  So I think that's probably what we're really looking for partners for the opportunity to  
**[0:33:47-0:33:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:33:47):**  test out.  I mean, there are kind of rules of thumb.  I mean, you know, you can look at your landscape, you can look at the different crop types and  landscape types and habitat types, and you can, you know, break those up and you can  sample a bit in those different types of areas.  
**[0:34:05-0:34:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:34:05):**  But it also is driven very much on the kind of information whoever's funding and undertaking  the measurement wants to get out of it.  Do the farmers want meaningful information that might inform their farm management?  Then we probably need to look at, you know, perhaps more intensive sampling at the field  level with soil.  
**[0:34:27-0:34:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:34:27):**  The corporates not so interested in that, but they want something to tell them about  how they're improving charismatic species across the landscape.  Then we might look to use the water sampling, for example.  So I should have said, water is great because you don't just pick up the species living  in the water, you pick up a lot of the species living around and interacting with that water.  
**[0:34:51-0:34:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:34:51):**  Not just the hippos, but also the birds.  But it's a much wider net and doesn't tell you specific on a field level, obviously,  like what's, if the field is moving forward or not, and if it's improving.  And then of course you might have in a landscape also the conservation areas where there's  a different need as well to what to communicate and what you want to learn.  
**[0:35:10-0:35:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:35:10):**  But I think that, I mean, we keep coming back to that on the podcast as well.  The landscape approach is absolutely essential, not just for the biodiversity measurement,  but in general, because you want to be changing your practices and improving your land if  you're a farmer in a landscape that's also moving forward, because otherwise you're  really fighting against way too much.  
**[0:35:30-0:35:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:35:30):**  So that seems to be, keeps coming back as an absolutely crucial piece of the puzzle.  For me, I think it's a really practical way of taking corporate engagement in agricultural  sustainability forward, particularly around the context of biodiversity in nature, because  biodiversity is not the same as carbon.  A ton of carbon is the same whether it's released in Brazil versus America, whereas  
**[0:35:59-0:36:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:35:59):**  the impact you're going to have on biodiversity is going to be very different depending on  your sourcing, your ton of soy from Brazil versus America.  So context is really important, but of course these global multinationals who are making  all these commitments to regenerative agriculture, very few of them have traceability to the  site level.  
**[0:36:21-0:36:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:36:21):**  They're not working with individual farmers.  So I see a key way for them to engage in this space is at that landscape scale, because  they will know, well we know we are sourcing soy from the Sahara in Brazil, or cocoa from  Cote d'Ivoire.  So they know the landscapes that they're operating in, and I think that's kind of  
**[0:36:43-0:36:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:36:43):**  the right spatial scale for them to engage in sustainability initiatives.  Yeah, and then it becomes much more practical as well to, and it is part of that decommodification  that you are working in a landscape, something you can just switch and go to some cheaper  soy somewhere else, which happens a lot, but the whole process of decommodifying it means  you have longer ties to the same traders and to the indirectly to the same farmers, and  
**[0:37:09-0:37:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:37:09):**  you want to make sure that that is moving forward.  And let's say in terms of costs, I'm imagining it's much more bearable to be bearable for  the large corporates.  Like if you want to, because a lot of them are making huge commitments on carbon as well,  and it requires a lot of sampling to say something irrelevant about it.  
**[0:37:25-0:37:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:37:25):**  Of course, there's a lot of sensing, but it has its limits.  Like this is an easy add on to that, like in terms of cost to monitor biodiversity.  And I guess it's, would it be easy to add it to these kinds of projects because the  cost is there, but relatively limited or also there we have to work to bring down that cost  of like some companies are doing in the carbon side, like easy measurement tools, not that  
**[0:37:45-0:37:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:37:45):**  deep, but still really innovating on that side.  Or you would just say like, actually this is in the grand scheme of things of a landscape  approach of a corporate, this would be, I wouldn't say a rounding error, but it's  not so difficult to get it into a project like that because it's compared to extension  agents, changing management, different machinery, this is relatively small.  
**[0:38:03-0:38:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:38:03):**  I think it probably is a relatively small cost, but there is still a mindset shift that's  needed.  These big corporates are not prioritising resources for measurement, I don't think.  They don't have the budgets to do this sort of work.  I mean, I think there's a huge, there's an obvious business case for it and they're  
**[0:38:28-0:38:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:38:28):**  doing all this work on carbon.  A lot of the work they're doing on carbon has benefits for biodiversity as well.  So for marginal additional investment, they could capture that information and really  shore up their sustainability claims.  Because if you're doing a soil sample for carbon, I mean the step to sending it also  
**[0:38:48-0:38:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:38:48):**  to you is relatively small.  I mean, of course you have to pay for the analytics, but somebody already did a soil  sample.  Yeah, it's maybe not quite that straightforward, but if you've got somebody in the field  taking samples, then absolutely they could be taking samples for biodiversity at the  
**[0:39:03-0:39:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:39:03):**  same time.  But traditionally, I mean, we have this challenge that nature has historically been undervalued  by our economic systems.  I mean, we are in this situation.  That's an understatement.  
**[0:39:16-0:39:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:39:16):**  Yeah, undervalued is an understatement.  It must have been at zero or negative as a cost.  Not valued, yeah.  I mean, we're in the situation we're in because big corporates, farmers, I mean,  we get these ecosystem services for free.  
**[0:39:30-0:39:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:39:30):**  And so it does require a change of thinking to suddenly be like, well, there is value  in collecting information about biodiversity.  There is value that I'm willing to pay for.  I mean, I still have a lot of conversations with these multi-billion pound companies where  they're expecting biodiversity data to be served up to them for free, to be provided  
**[0:39:54-0:39:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:39:54):**  by conservation NGOs.  A lot of them are still not quite at the place where they're willing to invest in that  data collection.  In that, as a crucial, just as they're investing in other accounting parts of their, or other  systems within their accounting just to have a good understanding of what's happening  
**[0:40:12-0:40:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:40:12):**  in factories, what's happening in their supply chain, sensors here and there to understand  if things got frozen or not.  I mean, that's all sort of, we take that for granted.  That's part of the cost of running your operation, but of course, being able to understand  what's happening in the landscapes you're supplying from is just as much part of that  
**[0:40:30-0:40:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:40:30):**  as keeping an eye on where your containers are around the world.  And if the temperature went up too much during the trip or not, and if you should be worried  about what's coming out when you open it in whatever harbour you open your container.  Yeah, no, that's a very good point, actually.  Yeah.  
**[0:40:44-0:40:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:40:44):**  And so this brings up a question I always like to ask at the end as well, but would  that be something like if you had a magic wand and the magic power to change one thing  overnight, would it be something on that side or something completely different?  Like you can mention anything from global consciousness, I usually say better taste  or having a carbon price, like taking away all subsidies.  
**[0:41:04-0:41:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:41:04):**  We've had a lot of different answers to this question.  It doesn't have to be on corporate biodiversity awareness, but what would you do if you had  a magic wand?  That's the most difficult question, I think.  I mean, fundamentally, I think if we want to reverse the situation we are in, and that  
**[0:41:20-0:41:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:41:20):**  is the dual crisis of both nature and climate, we need a way to value and embed biodiversity,  ecosystems better into our business practices.  And I don't think businesses will achieve it alone.  I think we need much better regulation.  But yeah, if I could wave a magic wand, for sure.  
**[0:41:49-0:41:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:41:49):**  Would we have a price on biodiversity?  I think is not perhaps quite the place I would take it to, but there needs to be incentives  and disincentives for how we operate and use our natural capital.  And what if you would be on the other side of the table, not on the corporate side, but  let's say on the investor side?  
**[0:42:11-0:42:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:42:11):**  There are a lot of people, even people are setting up quite significant funds saying  we're going to invest in biodiversity, we're going to put money to work, etc.  Two part question.  First part of the question, what would you tell them?  You probably meet them sometimes at conferences, virtually and offline.  
**[0:42:27-0:42:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:42:27):**  What would you say to the finance people that are starting to enter the space and say from  London City, from Zurich, from wherever, we want to invest in biodiversity.  What would you tell them without starting to laugh in some cases, obviously, because  it sounds a bit naive sometimes, but how would you approach and say, okay, go and look a  bit deeper there or this is our interesting areas to go deeper into, obviously without  
**[0:42:47-0:42:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:42:47):**  getting investment advice?  I think they need to do their due diligence.  They need to build good partnerships.  You sort of see this narrative of suddenly nature exists and has value because finance  has realised, decided.  
**[0:43:05-0:43:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:43:05):**  And there are fantastic people that have been working on this challenge for a long time  and they have a lot of knowledge.  So I would say, yeah, build good partnerships with those conservation organisations.  Be humble.  Yeah, be humble and bring in expertise.  
**[0:43:25-0:43:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:43:25):**  You are not going to become an expert on biodiversity and nature because you've listened to a few  podcasts or read a few articles.  I think I would really like to see some people embedding people with backgrounds and expertise  in the space when they're building these new portfolios.  Get the experts on board as well.  
**[0:43:50-0:43:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:43:50):**  I think it's the same.  We see a lot of decks on carbon companies and are focusing on solar carbon, etc.  And I always click very quickly to the team page.  First of all, see the diversity, which is often shockingly low, but also where's the  farmer?  
**[0:44:04-0:44:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:44:04):**  Like where is the person that actually is dependent on a farm for his or her livelihood  and decided that this is an interesting endeavour to spend some of his or her time on, which  is usually running very, very low.  And most of these, shockingly, don't have any connection to any farmer.  And the first question I always ask, when is the last time you were on a piece of land?  
**[0:44:23-0:44:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:44:23):**  And it's scary to get the answers to that and how much money gets raised and burned.  And I think Robin O'Brien of Replant Capital mentioned in an interview a long time ago,  he sees this Silicon Valley ones raising crazy amounts of money and then not going anywhere  because they don't have any product market fit because they didn't really go to the  market and they didn't really spend the humble time on farms.  
**[0:44:45-0:44:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:44:45):**  And I'm imagining it's the same in biodiversity.  There's a lot to learn on the field and in the field and in the water streams and with  the people that have spent a lot of time there.  So it's absolutely crucial.  So what would you do if you would be in charge of a large investment fund?  
**[0:44:59-0:45:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:44:59):**  Like tomorrow morning you wake up and have a billion dollars or even 10 billion.  The billions keep growing these days with inflation, so we might have to put an extra  zero.  But let's say a lot of money or billion pounds to invest and put to work could be very long-term  investments but definitely investments.  
**[0:45:14-0:45:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:45:14):**  I'm not looking to you an exact pound amount, but what would you prioritise?  What would be the main themes or parts or technology or is it investing in?  What would you focus on?  So I think like you've just mentioned the connection to the farmer is key.  So investing in farmers, I think particularly smallholders who are going to need the most  
**[0:45:38-0:45:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:45:38):**  support in making any big transition.  I'm much less interested in big agri-business.  I think if they have the will to change, I'm sure they can make the changes, but there  are a lot of people that are fundamental to our agricultural systems, food systems that  will need a lot more support.  
**[0:45:57-0:46:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:45:57):**  And I think if you can empower them with the right tools and training, then we could make  quite a big difference.  And I guess a frustration I have is that we see so much of this money, it's run by people  behind desks in Europe, poor America or wherever it is.  How can we find a much better way of deploying that money with local communities?  
**[0:46:32-0:46:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:46:32):**  We see some amazing things that can happen with microfinance, for example.  This project I talked about in Sierra Leone, there was a cocoa agroforestry project around  this national park.  But there were these fundamental challenges about, they were suffering from things like  crop raiding from animals that were coming from the national park.  
**[0:46:59-0:47:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:46:59):**  So how do you put in place the economic financial mechanisms to ensure that they can value the  biodiversity in the national park while also supporting their livelihoods?  You get these really cool solutions like these little micro insurance systems where you give  them some seed funding and then they're off and running and they have that safety net  in case something happens one year.  
**[0:47:28-0:47:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:47:28):**  Working with the farmers, particularly with smallholders, particularly empowering people  who are actually producing the commodities to empower them to make changes.  And I guess the other thing that I would be on the lookout for would be investing in innovation.  And when you say innovation, better air sucking machines?  No.  
**[0:47:53-0:47:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:47:53):**  So innovation, you get excited about or you wish we had already and not still being developed.  So I mean, my background, of course, is much more about monitoring and evaluation, which  I guess is the less exciting side of a sustainable transition.  If I knew more about innovation that was going to help drive the sustainable practices, great,  I would invest in that.  
**[0:48:17-0:48:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:48:17):**  But I am really excited about the innovation that we see in better ways to understand our  agricultural systems.  So whether that's eDNA or some exciting, you know, there's this really cool startup that's  using acoustic monitoring to look at pollinator populations, for example.  Tell me more about that because it sounds like we want to interview them.  
**[0:48:38-0:48:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:48:38):**  Yeah, no, I think like the tools, the enabling tools, I think the shovels and it's like to  how to build this industry is fundamental.  Yeah, I mean, I think we have overlooked the value that good monitoring can provide.  It can inform more effective decisions.  It can inform more effective resource use.  
**[0:49:01-0:49:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:49:01):**  It can inform more effective investment decisions.  And we're just like we're on the edge of such an exciting space of the deployment of technology  to answer some of these monitoring challenges.  I mean, I think like a really good example has been how deforestation gets monitored  and now in international supply chains.  
**[0:49:27-0:49:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:49:27):**  We have a global map that gets updated, you know, pretty much every day showing exactly  where deforestation is happening in the world.  Something like that for biodiversity would be amazing.  So if you had that for biodiversity or a global map for soil health that you could track the  changes on an annual or a monthly basis, depending on climate and other things.  
**[0:49:56-0:50:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:49:56):**  How cool would that be if you could see soil health or biodiversity from space?  Yeah, we just recorded, just a few weeks ago, recorded an interview actually with Isha and  Tom on OpenGeo map, OpenGeo Hub, sorry.  And one of the articles they wrote is everybody has the right to know what's happening on  our home planet or on our planet.  
**[0:50:15-0:50:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:50:15):**  And we were just thinking like, how do we get access to the satellite data?  How do we translate it into something useful for the land steward, the farm manager, whoever,  like exactly the conversation we have here.  So I will link that one below as well, because I think we are on the crips of starting to  actually know and see what is happening on our home planet.  
**[0:50:34-0:50:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:50:34):**  And then hopefully we take action.  But first is knowing it is no longer good enough to say, okay, I didn't know that tree  was being felled, or I didn't know that legal road was being built, or I didn't know that  that field was being sprayed, even though we're paying the farmer, or even though the  company taking the grain had an agreement that it should be organic or should be beyond  
**[0:50:53-0:50:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:50:53):**  organic etc, etc.  Like that kind of level of transparency, we need it because we're on a full planet and  we're having to manage these resources fundamentally different.  So yeah, there's this fundamental way you can use this information to encourage compliance.  But I think there's also, you can flip it, right, in terms of knowledge is power.  
**[0:51:14-0:51:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:51:14):**  And we can also use that to do things better in future, like testing interventions.  Absolutely.  Yeah.  We can see the effect of things if we have a good map of biodiversity on even on a landscape  level.  
**[0:51:28-0:51:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:51:28):**  Okay, we start switching certain fertiliser inputs, especially with these high prices.  But in general, we start switching to certain bio fertilisers, we start integrating trees  into ecosystems, what does it do to the overall ecosystem of biodiversity is something we  I don't think I've ever really monitored, at least not at scale.  And then of course, looking at the climate and all of that, like, how does it influence  
**[0:51:51-0:51:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:51:51):**  that full, the full ecosystem and the full landscape is extremely exciting.  Super.  Now, I want to thank you so much.  I want to be conscious of your time as well.  And thank you so much.  
**[0:52:00-0:52:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:52:00):**  There's so much more to ask, but we'll have you back and unpack more, especially as you're  getting more and more into the ag space, let's say, and the exciting ways of using eDNA into  changing management practices and changing large scale or changing the practices at a  large scale or at a lot of hectares or acres or whatever we're managing, because that's  the impact we need.  
**[0:52:20-0:52:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:52:20):**  So thank you so much for your time today.  Yeah, my pleasure.  Very happy.  If anyone has any questions or wants to find out more about DNA based monitoring, happy  to talk to them.  
**[0:52:30-0:52:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:52:30):**  Super.  We have quite a few links in the show notes and so anybody interested to run tests, pilots,  et cetera, get in touch and we'll get you in touch with Kate, obviously, to start pushing  the work more and more into the other extractive industry, which is ag.  Sounds good.  
**[0:52:47-0:52:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:52:47):**  If you found the investing in regenerative agriculture and food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  It's the best way for our listeners to find the podcast, and it only takes a few seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  
**[0:53:07-0:53:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:53:07):**  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  join my membership community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on gumroad.com slash investing region ag or in the description  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  
**[0:53:32-0:53:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:53:32):**  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After a hundred interviews and more than a hundred hours of audio asking the question  
**[0:53:50-0:53:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:53:50):**  how to put money to work in regenerating soils and I've been following the space since 2011  and recording these podcasts since 2016 we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in this space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  
**[0:54:07-0:54:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:54:07):**  How have we picked interviewees and what questions should you ask?  What is happening in this space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  
**[0:54:16-0:54:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:54:16):**  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  You the soil builders and investors in this space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  
**[0:54:32-0:54:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:54:32):**  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management consultants, etc, etc.  People that are building soil at scale and the investors who are putting their own money  to work through their family office or as private individuals or people who are putting  other people's money to work through foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies,  etc.  
**[0:54:53-0:54:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:54:53):**  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you.  And I'm very aware that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very  
**[0:55:05-0:55:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:55:05):**  different means.  So I'm inviting you if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  
**[0:55:16-0:55:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:55:16):**  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides.  So you don't have to ride along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky.  How to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to invest  
**[0:55:36-0:55:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:55:36):**  in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find if  you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  
**[0:55:55-0:55:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:55:55):**  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  
**[0:56:06-0:56:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/cath-tayleur#t=0:56:06):**  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking, click on  the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  