### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2017-07-01)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com slash course, or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  You're going to listen to an interview with Michele Manelli, CEO of Salcheto Winery from  multiple channels Tuscany, Italy, one of the pioneers when it comes to sustainability.  
**[0:00:22-0:00:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:00:22):**  We're going to talk how he got started, where his passion for sustainability comes from,  how he got his investors on board to turn the business around and how he is influencing  his colleagues to also turn more sustainable and why it makes so much business sense.  Enjoy!  Welcome to another episode of investing in regenerative agriculture, investing as if  
**[0:00:43-0:00:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:00:43):**  the planet mattered.  A podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  
**[0:01:01-0:01:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:01:01):**  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small and consumers, start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  Before we get started, I've been recording these interviews next to my day job and I  
**[0:01:21-0:01:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:01:21):**  will definitely continue to do so and release about an episode a month.  But at the same time, I would love to take this further, share more interviews.  There are many more stories to share on investing in regenerative food and agriculture, more  depth, improve the quality, maybe even doing some video series.  So I started a Patreon community, which makes it easy to support creators like myself.  
**[0:01:42-0:01:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:01:42):**  If these podcasts have been of value to you and if you have the means, I invite you to  support me and make this happen.  For more information, please find the link to my Patreon account in the description below.  And now without further ado, the interview.  Enjoy.  
**[0:01:58-0:02:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:01:58):**  So welcome to investing in regenerative agriculture, investing as if the planet mattered.  I'm Koon van Seijen, your host.  And in the podcast of today, I'm joined by Michele Manelli, CEO of Salchetto Winery from  Multipulciano Tuscany, Italy, one of the pioneers when it comes to sustainability and wine.  And they're also B Corp.  
**[0:02:14-0:02:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:02:14):**  Welcome, Michele.  Thank you for inviting me.  And to start with a personal question, how did you end up in the biodynamic wine scene  in Multipulciano Tuscany?  Because you don't have a history from there.  
**[0:02:28-0:02:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:02:28):**  Well, it was a dream, simply to be a farmer, an entrepreneur and a politician.  And so far, I think I kind of achieved all of them together by making wine, which is  a nice part of agriculture, quite rich of culture and complex.  It's also a complex business.  And so it's an enterprise.  
**[0:02:55-0:03:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:02:55):**  And at the same time, when you see and when you have a vision of your company that one  will is to create a socially virtuous model and things that the business is a central  part of society in terms of possibly generating an overall value.  And it's a relevant one for environmental matters, for social matters, then you become  also, you catch this political dimension.  
**[0:03:33-0:03:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:03:33):**  And you started about 20 years ago, I think you became head of the winery in 1970, if  I remember correctly.  Did you start immediately with sustainability?  Or how did it start?  And where did that come from for you personally?  
**[0:03:49-0:03:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:03:49):**  No, actually, at the time, I definitely had my personal values.  Even though I think that more than considering myself as someone actively at the time involved  in environmental challenges, for example, in general in sustainability challenges, which  was by the way, very, quite a boutique niche definition, you know, in the late 90s, it  was a starting point.  
**[0:04:20-0:04:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:04:20):**  And it was definitely not a common way to approach whatever I would say.  I think I had a negative reaction.  I was feeling that we needed to challenge the deterioration of our environment and our  society.  And this was definitely my first challenge.  
**[0:04:43-0:04:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:04:43):**  And this was one of the reasons I wanted to try to do it from agriculture.  By the way, as a privilege from a very nice corner of very, very pretty corner of the  world, which is Tuscany and the Montepulciano, particularly.  And so I came here and I from the beginning, imagine to run organically to be inspired  by biodynamics.  
**[0:05:09-0:05:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:05:09):**  I started to build up the opinions together with pioneers such as Daniel Schuster, for  example.  So there were values in the sense the way we wanted to create our relationship with  car, with workers or in general any stakeholder, let's say that there was a value.  But then this consciousness of how it would have been important to create from the business  
**[0:05:36-0:05:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:05:36):**  change, grow further later in time, especially when I decided in the early 2000s to first  convert the company from a personal one to a public, sorry, to a limited one.  And start a path of growth which would involve those investors and then also create some  bigger scale.  That's when I really started to face the idea of how can I be more responsible in making  
**[0:06:13-0:06:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:06:13):**  my business.  And when it comes to, because at that time, the early 2000s, you brought on a number of  investors.  What was the role of sustainability in that?  Or was it really still maybe part of the inside of the company and how did they respond to  
**[0:06:28-0:06:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:06:28):**  your values in Latin, to your vision of where you wanted to bring this winery?  Well, intuitively everybody was understanding that we had the part of our mission, the way  we were approaching the projecting of our company and our marketing mix in general.  There was an attention, a special attention to these themes and it was intuitively appreciated.  But it was never at the beginning considered a specific added value as it became furtherly.  
**[0:07:10-0:07:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:07:10):**  In some way, I have at the time particularly first brought up the skills of the company  in a more traditional way, keeping the transparency over this evolution.  And then when it became clear that we were turning around into a specific direction,  everybody was more than happy and more than interested in following this path.  So you also not only brought the people in the company, the employees, etc. on this journey,  
**[0:07:53-0:07:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:07:53):**  but you also took your investors on the journey.  Oh yeah, definitely.  Very interesting.  And then, I don't exactly know when, but you decided as well to try to influence not only  the 50 actors you have in Multipulciano and you manage, but also your neighbors and your  
**[0:08:11-0:08:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:08:11):**  colleagues in the industry.  Can you tell a bit more about this alliance of Vinum that you started in Multipulciano  to push for sustainability and to push the brand and the marketing around this really  old and sustainable tradition of winemaking?  Well, the alliance is an extremely interesting project we are running and started a few months  
**[0:08:34-0:08:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:08:34):**  ago of producers of multiple channels that want to try to lead some change, you know,  probably an incubator or a think tank of innovation for the territory on the dimension of marketing  also, but sustainability and efficiency.  Definitely the first step is try to recognize who we are and how we should approach our  being in Multipulciano territory.  
**[0:09:05-0:09:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:09:05):**  But before this, I would like to point out what we did as Arqueto and myself also in  contributing to the growth of the know how and in sustainability of the wine value chain  in Italy, because together with many partners in the academics, in the scientific community  and also certification bodies, governmental one, since now 2013 as an official group,  we have worked to build up a national standard for sustainability in wine.  
**[0:09:49-0:09:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:09:49):**  So to really put together all the experiences that were really, really many and very intense  that were run in wine in trying to create models of management of the sustainability  in wine could find a common house or more specifically could find a common way to define  the borders of sustainability and the signs of sustainability then and also to create  the tools for managing it along the chain and last but not least, being able to transparently  
**[0:10:26-0:10:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:10:26):**  certify these approaches and communicate them to public.  This was the real big mission that was run first by the forum for wine sustainability  and which then led the way to Equalities, a company that is controlled by the consortio  of Italian wines, the federation of the consortio of Italian wines, Fedor Doc and also partnered  by technical, let's say, supporters as CSQA, Valor Italia, the big certifiers for our food  
**[0:11:05-0:11:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:11:05):**  and wine industry or Gabriela Rosso as a communication leader in communication in this field in Italy  to create a national standard and it happened, it's extremely complete and interesting tool.  It's now being diffused and I really dedicated a lot of energy in these last years to really  be able to have a common instrument where the whole industry could.  When I mean all industry, I mean just basic agricultures, those who transform the big  
**[0:11:40-0:11:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:11:40):**  bottles or companies like ours which represent a piece of the cake too, not that control  the whole value chain and are maybe committed to high quality like we are so it's really  something for everybody.  This was a great project that really I am very satisfied to see grow.  And do you see that the fact that you have 20 years of experience of turning your company  
**[0:12:10-0:12:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:12:10):**  around gives you extra credibility with your colleagues in the food sector in Italy that  you have a place that you can point to like look, it can be done, it's never finished  and it's a lot of work but you can put your personal values of sustainability actually  also in your company.  Does it help to have that example?  
**[0:12:30-0:12:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:12:30):**  Oh for sure.  You know, whenever you go around I think that what is most, I mean, when I say go around  we often are involved in conferences, seminars or whatever and I see how much it is important  for anyone who is observing this process to imagine that it has been done, that it's  possible, that it's possible as you were saying to do it and to grow continuously and  
**[0:13:07-0:13:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:13:07):**  to keep being updated and in some way on the edge of the efficiency of the market success,  the known world, etc. and also being extremely efficient in energy wise.  We have done in 2009 and 2011 this extremely efficient seller in terms of energy and it's  possible that we have done indexing in, as at the time, pioneeristically in carbon footprint  and water footprint or biodiversity, all these things that are not just an academic hypothesis,  
**[0:13:50-0:13:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:13:50):**  when it becomes reality this brings an even greater value for another company that looks  into it or anyone involved in the value chain up to the consumer of course.  And when you, let's say you meet a winery owner at one of the conferences you go to  and who hasn't done anything yet but is ready to move, I can imagine it's quite daunting  if you look at your winery and its 20 years of experience of turning it around, what would  
**[0:14:21-0:14:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:14:21):**  you advise him or her, where would you start, what would you do first and where do you begin?  Well, if we would be talking by scratch, starting by scratch in the sense of nothing already  happened because I think that creating a good control board, how can I say, a control panel  sorry, so working a lot in the measurement or in the information management of the processes.  To get a good overview of what's happening now.  
**[0:15:06-0:15:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:15:06):**  Yeah, I think this is very important.  So imagining to create a solid control panel, a solid management of information because  then everything becomes effective because okay, then you can decide.  In the seller, when I'm projecting I am creating efficiency because I'm investing in renewable  and this and that but then once you start, if you don't have the possibility to control  
**[0:15:44-0:15:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:15:44):**  what is effectively happened, you will never be able to understand if you're really achieving  and if your investment is working well, this is the concept.  And I say it because of course in our industry, we are typically a little bit smaller so we  tend to less care about these dimensions because we think that it's something that is...  For big companies.  
**[0:16:12-0:16:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:16:12):**  Yeah, for big companies.  I think that generally the reporting is extremely important and of course that already start  by reporting which is not only meant to report the economical dimension but all the others  too.  So creating from scratch sustainability report just beside the annual economical one.  
**[0:16:38-0:16:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:16:38):**  In general, I would say that this is the point.  You just have to start by considering that your company project is based on a wider value  that is not only the economical one.  It must be an integrated, it must be harmoniously integrated and you have to always think that  anyway there is always a chance.  
**[0:16:57-0:17:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:16:57):**  There is always a chance to find a better solution for a process for whatever choice  you have to make in your company management that contributes to all the dimension.  I can't believe that there isn't.  The point is just looking for it.  And so if you want to be sure to look for it, you have to create a reporting system  
**[0:17:25-0:17:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:17:25):**  and then you have to create an attitude and an approach to the business which is multi-dimensional.  Which is agile, tinkering, constantly improving.  Never be satisfied basically with what you have.  It can always be done better.  Exactly.  
**[0:17:40-0:17:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:17:40):**  And when it comes to your winery, you started with looking at energy, then you started looking  at water, biodiversity, you're measuring a lot.  The water footprint and of course also the CO2 footprint of the bottles and then at the  end wine.  What's the next step for Salcato?  
**[0:17:57-0:18:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:17:57):**  What's the next step for you in terms of sustainability and regenerative agriculture?  Well in the last 12 months I have finally started to work to innovate in the social  dimension.  I think that of course I am very happy to have invested and innovated much more in the  previous 10 years in environmental matters because there was a need for that.  
**[0:18:27-0:18:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:18:27):**  There was a much more, you know, there was a higher expectation of innovation in this  field.  But I think that was one of my dreams.  I wanted to go higher, to meet higher standards of social management of the company.  And by that I mean workers first and then community, local.  
**[0:18:57-0:19:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:18:57):**  Of course in the wider sense of community I have already done stuffs in the previous  years like these projects that I have reminded a lot of shared projects of research.  And for example now we have introduced in 2017 a welfare plan.  It's the first codified welfare plan for a wine industry in Italy.  I'm very happy about that.  
**[0:19:20-0:19:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:19:20):**  And this will allow by the way to increase the benefits to our works and in some way  the overall remuneration with tax advantage which is also even efficient in terms of economics  which is very bright by the way regulation that in Italy is introduced and nobody knows.  And so we have worked on this innovation and this is very interesting.  We have worked for, now we have a plan for hosting children of the local primary and  
**[0:19:53-0:19:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:19:53):**  schools.  This is also very interesting.  And by the way I know it's probably out of the topics but it's…  Nothing is out of the topic on this topic.  Well you know just a few weeks ago I was in a meeting with a manager of a big winery here  
**[0:20:14-0:20:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:20:14):**  in the territory because we are also doing a project for technology transfer for sustainability  for the other wineries of the area which is planning to create a software that will allow  any winery to manage the equalities standard so the sustainability standard with much more  easiness because it's a software.  It's a very interesting project.  
**[0:20:42-0:20:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:20:42):**  And I was there with this manager whose son at eight years old visited the winery here  with the school, our winery.  And he started saying you know since the kid went to visit your winery at home we speak  continuously about renewable energy and he asked me questions and he wants to put a solar  pad a little.  
**[0:21:06-0:21:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:21:06):**  It starts very early.  And you know you melt down when someone tells you something like this.  You really want just to…  You are like…  I don't know what to say.  
**[0:21:18-0:21:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:21:18):**  It was really one of the biggest satisfaction I had in the recent years honestly.  That's it.  So that is a bit of an next challenge.  To get your influence beyond your farm gate.  Of course you've worked with the wineries that may be a bit further away and with the  
**[0:21:38-0:21:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:21:38):**  board to create a standard and now you're looking more and more into the other stakeholders.  Yeah with local stakeholders and as I was saying workers.  How many do you have?  Well in this moment long term workers are 14 and with seasonal workers that I mean on  the touristic part only we get to 20 and then we have of course now since a few years we  
**[0:22:07-0:22:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:22:07):**  don't have any more seasonal workers in the fields because it's now we have a very efficient  offer of outsource labor for the peaks of work in the fields.  And so that's where we…  And by the way this is also something we are working to.  We are working to grow the quality, the standards also of our suppliers.  
**[0:22:39-0:22:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:22:39):**  We've always worked even accidentally.  You know when in 2008 I think it was something like this.  We decided to purchase only wood source materials from certified PFC or FSC chains which was  very pioneeristic at the time.  It was very complicated to find the suppliers at the time you had to really… it took months  
**[0:23:14-0:23:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:23:14):**  to find a guy that could make labels for us, cardboard boxes or anything.  The corks was really tough.  And what was very interesting is that over time the local suppliers started, that were  our previous ones, started to get certifications to service and then the certification was  spread around.  
**[0:23:35-0:23:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:23:35):**  And this is the thing so…  The impact of the pioneers.  Yeah this is the impact of just making things, innovating, changing, creating the… starting  some of the process and then something happens.  Even if we were super small suppliers, clients for all them.  
**[0:23:55-0:23:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:23:55):**  But you know it's a seed.  And this is the same again for the social aspects that we want to transfer to the labor  companies.  And this is very important.  And is that something that let's say we'll talk again in a year from now, is that something  
**[0:24:14-0:24:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:24:14):**  you want to look back at that you really made some big steps on the social part?  Will that be the focus of this year?  Yeah this is it.  This is my focus now.  And in terms of… when you're looking at barriers for… when your colleagues see you  
**[0:24:34-0:24:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:24:34):**  doing it so successfully and as an example, what do you think is the barrier for many  of them to not doing it yet or maybe just started looking at it a few years ago and  not 20 years ago?  What are the main barriers for this regenerative agriculture approach to scale in the wine  business?  
**[0:24:54-0:25:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:24:54):**  Well I think in some way you consider it not a priority because for some reason you think  that it's not something that is going to bring direct value or not something that is more  important than something else.  Then you don't have models to refer to.  Not everybody is ready and has the attitude of going to the unknown.  
**[0:25:26-0:25:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:25:26):**  The process of innovation is something that requires some kind of violence that you have  to make.  Any extraordinary action sometimes is something that needs special help for that.  It's an attitude.  It's legitimately not everybody should have.  
**[0:25:45-0:25:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:25:45):**  And so many need examples.  Otherwise it would run into issues.  Exactly.  Many.  And also it's a kind of investment because you have to imagine that for especially bigger  
**[0:25:58-0:26:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:25:58):**  companies when they have to change a process that works and maybe makes money, it's a strange  investment you know.  Or at least it's…  Yeah, how do you explain that to the family or to your investors and to the owners?  To the investors, exactly.  
**[0:26:16-0:26:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:26:16):**  Maybe there's one or two brothers and sisters and maybe the brother wants it but the sister  doesn't care about it.  It can happen.  And so this is definitely…  So I think that bringing out examples and successful ones is an essential element of  
**[0:26:39-0:26:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:26:39):**  diffusion of these good practices.  And then of course there is also hopefully the idea that the market will help us because  if we start to offer, sometimes the manager requires an offer.  So if we start to offer more and more it will be then a virtual circle that will generate  expectations in this sense from other companies.  
**[0:27:13-0:27:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:27:13):**  Have you seen, speaking of the market, have you seen that change a lot in the last 20  years?  For sure.  For sure and I think that still today we are not seeing prevalence of consumers that are  ready to choose, let's say, a sustainable product rather than another one because it's  
**[0:27:48-0:27:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:27:48):**  sustainable.  And I think that this will never happen or at least it's not ready to happen soon unless  something extremely radical changes in the society, I would say.  I consider that though there are more and more people that are ready to put this value  beside other values, which is already something extremely important.  
**[0:28:11-0:28:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:28:11):**  And I mean, okay, the consumer is interested to have a good product in the sense, for example,  in a wine must be quality at the right price with the right services around it, right packaging  in terms of if you consider it as a service in some way, and sustainable as an added value  of the others.  This is, I think, is the way to read the market today.  
**[0:28:45-0:28:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:28:45):**  And it is extremely important to read it this way because we are in front of what we were  10, 15 years ago imagining only, which was that the point is not creating a green product.  The point is making become a green product the economical product, you know, so making  the green product become the successful one, which is a totally different approach.  So it doesn't even have to be co-green, and let's hope to be now almost, and it's quite  
**[0:29:25-0:29:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:29:25):**  true, let's imagine to be beyond this point.  The point is that we have to make the best product, which is also the best product for  the society and the environment.  Yeah, the best product, which is by definition has to be green and sustainable.  Exactly.  
**[0:29:42-0:29:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:29:42):**  And I think that this is the consumer that we have in front of us.  Now in wine in particular, we see that the consumers, even in wine, are approaching this  theme just as for other products.  We have, the problems are similar to other categories, are the definition of the sustainable  product and the transparency of the proof, of the certification or confirmation process  
**[0:30:20-0:30:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:30:20):**  of the sustainability skill.  So basically this is the biggest problem, one of the two big problems.  The second, I would say, is that we have a very fragmented typically offer and distribution.  And in general, we have a big barrier to climb, which is our distribution channels.  We see, and I don't know if it's similar for other categories, but we see that our distributors  
**[0:30:53-0:31:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:30:53):**  are often, so the distribution chain, let's say in general, it's often the one which is  pulling back because again, they don't understand, so they don't invest in these skills.  They don't know, they're not ready to really promote a product which has these skills because  they don't understand these skills.  And so they don't want to put their face on it.  
**[0:31:19-0:31:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:31:19):**  What would be a solution for that fragmented distribution or the distribution channels  that are now maybe slowing it down or holding it back?  What do you see as a solution there?  In fact, I see the same solution as for the general problem of how to see growing sustainability  in our value chain.  
**[0:31:38-0:31:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:31:38):**  So it means, again, less standards, more solid.  This is the point.  So at least we have to freeze a little bit the situation and say, OK, this is sustainability  we have defined.  These are the standards.  
**[0:32:00-0:32:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:32:00):**  And so we have to see them more visible in the market so that at least a dimension is  created.  It's like organic today, for example.  It took a while.  But I'm sure, and I've seen some even last week, a little survey made by Rome University.  
**[0:32:21-0:32:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:32:21):**  They went out to say, what is not organic food or healthy food as we were imagining  10, 15 years ago being related to organic.  They went and said, what is a sustainable food or why?  And the consumer said it's organic.  Because it's the only label brand that is so well known.  
**[0:32:43-0:32:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:32:43):**  So now there is even further confusion because organic is not a sustainable system.  It's just the best practice for farming.  And it's even best practice, which is not considering best practice that is just limiting  chemicals in the farm.  But it's not at all talking about the first step.  
**[0:33:06-0:33:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:33:06):**  It's a little first step.  It's not talking about energy.  It's not talking about water.  It's not talking about biodiversity management.  It's not talking about social management.  
**[0:33:14-0:33:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:33:14):**  So they don't even care.  They can't control.  They don't control if you have, I'm sorry to be shocking, but if you have immigrant  workers without any legal care or social care and paid half of the minimum wage, to make  an example, which suddenly happen.  
**[0:33:45-0:33:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:33:45):**  You can still be organic.  Exactly.  Which suddenly happens in the world in today.  And so this is something that is, so the first solution is this, is to be more organized  in governing this process of standard, transparency, and one label, one brand, or at least two  
**[0:34:07-0:34:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:34:07):**  of them that talks the same language, et cetera.  Which is what we are, as I was saying, we are trying to do as an industry.  And with the qualities we have, we have a very, very good chance to make this, to make  a difference.  And then once this is done, it's of course a matter of just, it happens by itself.  
**[0:34:31-0:34:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:34:31):**  It happens by itself.  It's a cultural issue by the way.  What do you mean by that?  I mean that at the end we can't imagine, when I say culture, I just want to point that it's  a complex dimension that requires a diffuse knowledge.  
**[0:34:53-0:34:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:34:53):**  We have, you know, I make this example.  When in the 60s, so after the war, the European Union partners imagined the system of the  wine appellations.  They had a dream.  They had a vision.  
**[0:35:10-0:35:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:35:10):**  The vision was we have to promote a quality agriculture.  We have to also control it.  But we have to really promote a quality agriculture that is going to be more healthy, more successful,  and valuable for the consumer and for the producer.  So they were defining, in some way they were writing down on paper the rules to define  
**[0:35:32-0:35:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:35:32):**  a wine.  They had to meet and say, okay, what is wine, and their common codification.  Wine is made of grapes, certain alcohol.  Then what is an appellation?  Okay, it needs a territory.  
**[0:35:44-0:35:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:35:44):**  It needs a certain yield per hectare and maybe farm in a certain way.  It requires a certain process of aging.  And then it needs to meet specific requirements of, you know, biological parameters like alcohol,  acidity, et cetera.  So they defined something that then became, okay, the identity.  
**[0:36:10-0:36:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:36:10):**  Then there were so many of them started to interpret it.  I mean, I call them so many, but like a wine expert, like a journalist, okay, then this  appellation has this card because it's made of this grape in this territory.  We did this descent.  And they started to create a dimension of quality, you know, a language, codifying.  
**[0:36:29-0:36:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:36:29):**  It was something complex.  There was a government involved political bodies, the industry of farming, but also  industry of services like media.  And then the consumer started to get involved.  They wanted to participate.  
**[0:36:46-0:36:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:36:46):**  They wanted to visit.  They wanted to buy a course of wine or a book on wine.  So in this sense, we can call this a culture.  So I think.  And that is what we have to aim as a vision to create.  
**[0:37:05-0:37:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:37:05):**  We need a new culture because sustainability.  Today, it's for the last 20 years, it has been research and development has been, you  know, so it was a great it was fermentation, you know, a lot of fermentation around a lot  of projects, not the cows, but positive cows.  Now we have to see the next step in which we codify and create the main signs so that  
**[0:37:30-0:37:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:37:30):**  within these signs, within the new the new appellations, the appellations of sustainability,  we can we can see with more order the growth of the all value chain and the industry, the  market in this sense.  This is this is, I think, what we have to aim.  And in some way we are doing it.  
**[0:37:52-0:37:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:37:52):**  Italy is Italy is working in this direction.  It's working.  Everyone is.  But probably Italy is one of the most the most advanced country.  It's hard to imagine sometimes.  
**[0:38:07-0:38:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:38:07):**  But it is.  I would like to end with a final question on let's imagine and I hope so that a number  of smart impact investors are listening to this this podcast.  And what would you tell them if they would like to get into the regenerative or the sustainable  winery or agriculture?  
**[0:38:27-0:38:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:38:27):**  Let's let's look specifically at winery space.  What what would be your advice to look for?  Maybe they're based in the US, maybe they're based in Europe, maybe they're based in South  Africa.  What would be some of the questions you would ask if they want to invest in a winery?  
**[0:38:43-0:38:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:38:43):**  What would be the questions you ask to a winery to see if they are they're truly sustainable,  they're truly thinking this holistically?  Well, I would first of all, I would ask do you I would if I have to have a if I have  time, let's put it this way, not in the sense in our interview, but in my in my assessment  of this company, I would I would start to understand the what is the general approach  
**[0:39:15-0:39:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:39:15):**  of at the different level.  So what is the knowledge of of the of the different tools that are existing today of  measurement and management of sustainability?  So what is the knowledge of what today are these these elements of this of this of this  picture?  
**[0:39:37-0:39:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:39:37):**  Then I would then I would, of course, at the same time and as strongly try to understand  if they are solidly also basing their project on the knowledge of the market in the more  traditional way.  So definition of quality, as we were saying before, efficiency and marketing, whatever,  because I think that there must be today you have to develop a specific culture, as we  
**[0:40:04-0:40:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:40:04):**  were saying before.  So in anything in the sustainable approach.  So I mean, knowing what is a carbon footprint, a water footprint, knowing how to implement  these these indicators in your management and so on, being updated in these in these  know how very well updated.  
**[0:40:25-0:40:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:40:25):**  But on the other hand, never forgetting this probably at a financial investor level that  we are not creating, we're not selling carbon footprint, we're selling a good bottle of  wine first.  I want to thank you for for your time and sharing what you shared in this podcast.  And I'll be definitely be checking in with you in the next months and next years to see  
**[0:40:49-0:40:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:40:49):**  how you're progressing and what your next impact in your next steps will be.  Thank you so much.  Thank you, Juan.  You just listened to an interview with Michaela Manelli.  I hope you enjoyed learning more about sustainable wineries and what it means to run a sustainable  
**[0:41:04-0:41:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:41:04):**  winery.  Thank you for making the time to listen to this podcast and making it all the way till  the end.  I hope you enjoyed it as much as I did.  If you found the investing in regenerative agriculture and food podcast valuable, there  
**[0:41:16-0:41:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:41:16):**  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  That's the best way for our listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  
**[0:41:35-0:41:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:41:35):**  join my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or in the description  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  
**[0:42:04-0:42:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:42:04):**  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After a hundred interviews and more than a hundred hours of audio asking the question  how to put money to work in regenerating soils and I've been following the space since 2011  
**[0:42:22-0:42:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:42:22):**  and recording these podcasts since 2016 we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision-making framework, what to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees and what questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  
**[0:42:40-0:42:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:42:40):**  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  
**[0:42:48-0:42:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:42:48):**  You the soil builders and investors in the space, the soil builders, people working in  this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers, vehicle builders, crowd investing,  farm builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food companies, permaculture, key line  designers, holistic management, consultants, etc, etc.  People that are building soil at scale and the investors who are putting their own money  
**[0:43:09-0:43:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:43:09):**  to work through their family office or as private individuals or people who are putting  other people's money to work through foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies,  etc.  Is this course free?  No.  
**[0:43:22-0:43:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:43:22):**  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you.  And I'm very aware that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very  different means.  So I'm inviting you if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  
**[0:43:39-0:43:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:43:39):**  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides.  So you don't have to ride along.  
**[0:43:52-0:43:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:43:52):**  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  
**[0:44:14-0:44:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:44:14):**  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  
**[0:44:28-0:44:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/06/michele-manelli/#t=0:44:28):**  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking, click on  the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  