### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2022-00-31)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  A conversation with one of the most fascinating thinkers and writers out there, the writer  of The Sacred Economy and Climate A New Story, about his fascination for soil and regenerative  
**[0:00:24-0:00:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:00:24):**  agriculture and what he would do with a billion dollars to invest and his advice and direction  to investors and what he sees as the role of animals in regeneration and his thoughts  on our fascination for quick technology fixes, vertical farms and clean lab grown meat, I'm  looking at you.  But what is the role for tech in regenerative food and ag?  
**[0:00:42-0:00:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:00:42):**  Plus why most research on yields and production is flawed and what returns we can expect when  truly engaging with regeneration at its core.  Enjoy!  This is the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast, investing as if the planet  mattered, where we talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  
**[0:01:03-0:01:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:01:03):**  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why my focus on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land and our sea, grow our food, what we eat, wear and consume.  
**[0:01:25-0:01:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:01:25):**  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  To make it easy for fans to support our work we launched our membership community and so  many of you have joined us as a member.  Thank you!  
**[0:01:40-0:01:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:01:40):**  If our work created value for you and if you have the means and only if you have the means,  consider joining us.  Find out more on gumroad.com slash investing in RegenAg.  That is gumroad.com slash investing in RegenAg.  Or find the link below.  
**[0:01:59-0:02:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:01:59):**  Welcome to another episode.  Today with Charles Eisenstein, the writer of Sacred Economy and Climate as a New Story  and many other books.  Sacred Economy and Frederiks LaLuz really shaped this podcast immensely.  We're operating in a gift economy in this podcast because of that book.  
**[0:02:13-0:02:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:02:13):**  So I'm very, very happy beyond all the other things that Charles has done to welcome him  here on the podcast and explore regenerative agriculture, investing, food and so much more.  Welcome Charles.  Yeah, happy to be here, Koen.  Thanks for having me on.  
**[0:02:26-0:02:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:02:26):**  And I think in Sacred Economy that came out just after the financial crisis, you already  mentioned, I read it quite a few years later, but you already mentioned soil so much.  Do you remember when you started to be interested in this, I wouldn't say regeneration movement,  but also the soil part specifically?  Because I don't think you grew up on a farm or you have very close connections with that.  
**[0:02:47-0:02:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:02:47):**  Do you remember when that, I wouldn't say awakening happened or when that moment happened  of like, wow, soil is more than dirt.  I didn't grow up on a farm, but my father was an avid gardener.  And even my grandfather was into gardening on my other side of the family.  So it is, and he was always making organic preparations and raising earthworms, you know,  
**[0:03:06-0:03:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:03:06):**  and making compost.  So it was in my consciousness from quite an early age.  And then in my late teens, I started reading Wendell Berry and other bright lights in the  organic movement.  So it's been part of my life, you know, since I was a child.  
**[0:03:25-0:03:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:03:25):**  And it's never far from my thoughts because I mean, how, what could be more fundamental  to the human relationship to the world than how we get our food, you know?  So it's, yeah, that's, that's the skeleton of the story.  And do you feel something has changed?  I mean, I've been following, let's say the soil movement, if we, or the agroecology movement  
**[0:03:49-0:03:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:03:49):**  for the last 11 years.  And I feel there's more energy, more interest, especially the last few years.  But I also fear that it's just my bubble that grew.  Like, have you seen more interest in, in like what could be more fundamental than how we  eat and what we eat and how that food has been grown?  
**[0:04:07-0:04:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:04:07):**  Do you feel as well that there's been more, at least more interest or more movement there?  Or is it from within the bubble, simply a growing bubble?  There's movement in many directions at once.  On the one hand, there's, there are trends toward more and more technology and even the  hijacking of organic standards to include hydroponics, which is basically saying, well,  
**[0:04:31-0:04:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:04:31):**  we don't even need soil anymore.  Even in a lot of greenhouses that aren't fully hydroponic, they're still growing these things  in these mediums that are not really even soil.  Soil cannot be under perfect control.  So really coming into a relationship with soil means participating in a process larger  
**[0:04:52-0:04:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:04:52):**  than ourselves.  That's another aspect of the word organic.  Normally refers to organic molecules, carbon based molecules in the soil, but the word  organic also connotes organs.  So understanding soil as an organism with organs, but also understanding soil as an  
**[0:05:16-0:05:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:05:16):**  organ itself and maybe humans as another organ and the various species that live in an ecosystem  as another organ.  So it's more of a really like true organic agriculture understands this organismic principle  and understands the principle of participation instead of full control.  So that's one direction that's happening, you know, that toward more technology away  
**[0:05:45-0:05:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:05:45):**  from the soil, which is a trend thousands of years in the making, you know, the highest  status in society is usually the person who is not getting his hands in the soil.  It's the priest, it's the king, it's the scientist, it's the financial...  Which sort of started with the invention of agriculture.  Before that, probably there were no people that didn't get their hands dirty because  
**[0:06:11-0:06:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:06:11):**  we all participated.  Right.  Ironically enough, yes.  But then we have a movement in the other direction that started, I mean, maybe back in the 1960s  with the back to the land movement, which is also a back to the soil movement, which  
**[0:06:25-0:06:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:06:25):**  is also a cultural re-embracing and a return to our embeddedness and our inclusivity with  the rest of life.  So in agriculture, as you know very well, there's a movement toward investing in soil,  understanding that the more alive the soil is, the more alive we are and the richer the  soil, the richer the human being.  
**[0:06:55-0:06:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:06:55):**  So that's a movement in the other direction.  And it seems like they're both happening at the same time.  Yeah.  And imagine we're doing this like in a theater, which hopefully happens soon again.  I mean, what, and there's like a room full of investors or people working in the finance  
**[0:07:08-0:07:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:07:08):**  sector.  And I think many of them have been, I wouldn't say lured into, but definitely been very interested  and a lot of money and energy has flown into the technology side of things.  And over the last many, many years, especially lately, like if you compare even what alternative  meats or clean meat or lab grown meat or whatever we want to call it has raised in terms of  
**[0:07:29-0:07:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:07:29):**  attention and does money compared to life-based forms of agriculture.  What would we tell them in terms of what would we say on stage to sort of diffuse our technology  will save us or technology will just fix this agriculture problem and then climate, et cetera.  What do you normally say to people that, yeah, but we'll just figure out a technology fix  for this instead of saying like, look, it's take a step back.  
**[0:07:55-0:08:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:07:55):**  This is part of life and agriculture and soil is sort of reflecting of how we treat that  organ, which is our skin basically, or the skin of the earth.  Like what is your normal response to the technology will fix it all or will save us all, which  I think many people would like to believe and thus invest, maybe listening to this as  well, invest money into.  
**[0:08:14-0:08:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:08:14):**  Yeah.  It would be very convenient and comforting if technology were the answer, because then  we wouldn't really have to change our ways.  We would just let the scientists do it, come up with the next gee whiz invention.  And the problem is solved.  
**[0:08:37-0:08:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:08:37):**  That of course ignores the centuries long history of technology creating new problems  that were unanticipated that must be met with even more technology and more technology and  more technology.  So it becomes an addiction.  Once you go down that path, you depend, you become dependent on the technology.  
**[0:08:57-0:09:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:08:57):**  Once you start fertilizing crops with synthetic fertilizers, once you start relying on weed  killers, once the soil is degraded, then you depend on those inputs even to maintain a  normal what had been normal.  So it's an addiction to keep up and you probably need more.  Right.  
**[0:09:26-0:09:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:09:26):**  Higher and higher dose.  So the phenomenon of unintended consequences where technology creates even more problems  that need to be met with more technology, that is inevitable because technology and  this scientific reductionistic approach to anything, especially agriculture, it always  leaves something out.  
**[0:09:50-0:09:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:09:50):**  It leaves out, because science is based on only the things we can measure.  So if there's anything important that we don't measure or can't measure, then it's going  to cause problems.  It gets neglected, it gets destroyed, it causes problems in the future.  Biodiversity plus a million other things are like, oh yeah, we forgot about the insects  
**[0:10:12-0:10:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:10:12):**  and we forgot about this and we forgot about it or we didn't see it until it disappeared.  Fifty years ago, soil scientists thought that soil was a collection of chemicals and that  if the soil wasn't fertile, that means that you could add, all you have to do is add whatever  is lacking and it would be fertile.  Like a growth medium basically.  
**[0:10:32-0:10:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:10:32):**  Yeah.  It was a neutral thing that you-  Right.  Right.  So they didn't understand the importance of the soil microbiome.  
**[0:10:41-0:10:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:10:41):**  They didn't understand the importance of the mycelial networks.  They didn't understand the importance of life.  That was left out of the calculations.  So if we're going to rely on technology to solve our problems, we have to ask, well,  what are we leaving out of our calculations now?  
**[0:10:59-0:11:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:10:59):**  What is important that we don't know is important.  And as we can probably assume that we don't know most of it, we sort of have to assume  that we cannot go for the easy fixes or the on paper easy fixes because it always sounds  easy on paper.  And then 20, 30, 10 year or two years down the line, we noticed that actually we created  
**[0:11:21-0:11:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:11:21):**  more issues with that.  Then the natural, I mean, there are two, then maybe somebody in this amazing theater we're  in, somebody raises their hand and says, yeah, that Charles Sittles sign is nice and funny,  but with this life approach and the original organic, et cetera, how are we going to feed  the world?  
**[0:11:37-0:11:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:11:37):**  And that's a question a lot from, especially people that haven't visited a farm recently,  but how do we, like there are all these numbers and we have to feed 10 million people and  et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.  You have an amazing short, which I will definitely put in the show notes as well, a short audio  clip.  
**[0:11:53-0:11:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:11:53):**  I think it's seven minutes where you talk a bit about the history of these models of  this research on feeding the planet.  And the question, I think the title is literally, can we feed the world regeneratively?  But if you had to summarize that, or so actually we can take easily seven minutes for that.  What do you normally say when people say, yeah, how do we feed the world with this stuff?  
**[0:12:10-0:12:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:12:10):**  It sounds great.  Very, very, it sounds even a bit naive and it sounds like a place that would like to  be these type of farms, et cetera, or these type of landscapes.  Let's make it a bit broader, but, but can we feed the world with that?  Right.  
**[0:12:21-0:12:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:12:21):**  So this is, yeah, I've, I've gotten this criticism before.  It's very privileged of you to think that we could all eat organic agriculture, but  the world's poor can't do that.  We have to maximize production to feed the starving people.  So how bad are you?  
**[0:12:32-0:12:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:12:32):**  Yeah.  Yeah.  You're starving people basically.  So the critique is really based, I'm sorry to say it, but it's based on ignorance and  it's based on faulty models.  
**[0:12:43-0:12:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:12:43):**  It's based on a very selective historical understanding.  In fact, when organic or regenerative agriculture is done properly, it can produce a lot more  food than monocrop agriculture.  If you, but it depends on how you do the comparison.  So if you're going to compare organic row crops with conventional row crops and hold  
**[0:13:11-0:13:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:13:11):**  everything else constant, then the conventional is going to outperform the organic, especially  if it's a, you know, if you're just taking two blank fields and you're controlling all  the variables except one, do you use pesticides on this and not on that?  That's just one variable, but organic agriculture isn't like that.  You can't hold variables constant if you're really in the true spirit of it, the growing  
**[0:13:35-0:13:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:13:35):**  practices in every place will be unique to that place.  So you can't really do side-by-side comparisons like that.  For organic and regenerative agriculture to reach its potential in terms of yield, that  requires years and decades of building soil, of learning the land, of learning what works  in that microclimate of building a relationship.  
**[0:14:02-0:14:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:14:02):**  So building that microclimate even from scratch in many cases.  Yeah.  Right.  So if you did that, if you somehow could do a study where you compare that true organic  practice over 30 years to conventional practices over 30 years, you get very different results.  
**[0:14:23-0:14:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:14:23):**  But even without doing that, there's still an awful lot of data that shows that small,  diverse farms can outperform large farms.  But it depends on the crops too.  If you're going to say, well, we're going to only measure commodity crops, then the  difference is not, you know, it's not so clear then that organic agriculture-  
**[0:14:46-0:14:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:14:46):**  But even there, I think we see people that are outperforming.  I mean, of course, if you choose commodity crops, I mean, choose in some cases you don't,  but you don't choose, you're forced into or the circumstances.  But then you also have to be part of the commodity system after, which means you're a price taker.  And which probably means very low margins, if margins at all, which means leads to a  
**[0:15:07-0:15:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:15:07):**  whole other array of issues.  And then I would imagine another question coming up like, okay, what about the returns?  Are we, and I hear that a lot in regenerative agriculture.  My response usually is we have extracted so much from these ecosystems that there are  potential returns.  
**[0:15:25-0:15:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:15:25):**  There are absolute returns to be made depending how you do it, what you do.  Obviously, it's not going to be 25% per year or whatever crazy amount we can get in certain,  let's say, stock market operations or casinos or bets we place in other places.  But there is a debt to pay.  There is a restoration needed.  
**[0:15:44-0:15:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:15:44):**  There's a throth, like there's a valley there.  And we don't know how deep it is.  It depends on the place, how deep it is.  And I think an old grown forest has like 3% growth.  Maybe that's what we can harvest or maybe we can't.  
**[0:15:55-0:15:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:15:55):**  What is your answer on the returns?  The question of returns is related to another issue that I wanted to bring into the yield  question, which is the people making these projections about world population and can  we feed the world.  They take certain trends for granted that are actually part of the problem.  
**[0:16:20-0:16:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:16:20):**  One of those is urbanization.  And they understand it as a good thing to...  It's an advance.  It's a development, a positive development if people are leaving the land, going to the  cities and gigantic tractors and machines and robots even are doing the agriculture  
**[0:16:40-0:16:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:16:40):**  because it's freeing people from labor.  If we actually do want to have a regenerative system and heal the planet, more people have  to go onto the land because as I said before, it's a relationship.  To do it really well, you have to be in a personal relationship with the land.  You cannot be on your combine two meters above the ground for 2000 hectares.  
**[0:17:05-0:17:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:17:05):**  Right.  So an ideal agricultural system would have...  Like today in America, 1% of the population is engaged in agriculture.  In 1950, it was 10%.  In 1850, it was something like 70% or 70%.  
**[0:17:25-0:17:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:17:25):**  So I think it should probably go back to 10%.  And that's actually...  Imagine the life on a place if we go from one to 10, which is a 10X the amount of people  in rural communities and schools and systems and the amount of life that would be in the  countryside would be amazing.  
**[0:17:44-0:17:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:17:44):**  Yeah.  And a lot of people want to do that anyway.  So many young people would love to go back into agriculture, but it's pretty hard because  of the economic barriers.  But that's what we need to do.  
**[0:17:57-0:18:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:17:57):**  However, labor is expensive.  And if you want to really get high returns from agriculture, you have to do what Bill  Gates is doing.  You have to consolidate vast mosaics of independent small subsistence farms like in Africa, this  is one thing that the Gates Foundation is doing.  
**[0:18:18-0:18:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:18:18):**  You have to consolidate them into gigantic plantations, mechanized plantations, and get  rid of all the people and use GMO seeds and insecticides, herbicides, pesticides, et cetera,  et cetera.  And you actually make a lot higher return.  At some point, if you are a funder or an investor and you care about the earth, you're going  
**[0:18:44-0:18:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:18:44):**  to have to make a choice at some point what you care about more, the return financially  or the return ecologically.  And there are situations where you can have some of both, but at some point you have to  decide what master do I serve?  What do I care about the most?  
**[0:19:04-0:19:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:19:04):**  What am I willing to sacrifice for?  Because regenerative agriculture, okay, there's always exceptions.  There's brilliant farmers out there who are making lots of money, much more than their  neighbors.  They're doing really well.  
**[0:19:21-0:19:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:19:21):**  There's those opportunities still.  But system-wide, you're not going to make 20% returns in this field for very long and  really stay true to the purpose.  Yeah, there's an important tension there.  We had a conversation with Mark Lewis, one of the people that runs Trailhead Capital,  
**[0:19:43-0:19:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:19:43):**  and they proudly claim hunting for unicorns and regeneration.  And I asked him, is there a tension between that and regeneration?  He said, absolutely, but we've done so much damage that we feel or we see that for a short  period of time, there might be outsized returns possible.  And then hopefully they're not possible anymore because we've done so much restoration that  
**[0:20:02-0:20:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:20:02):**  it sort of starts to flow to a more old-grown forest type of return, which is a few percent  maybe and not every year.  And that's okay.  And that's enough.  So I think we should be very, very aware that everybody promising you crazy returns and  
**[0:20:16-0:20:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:20:16):**  claiming regeneration in the same sentence.  I would ask a lot of questions about it because there is somebody's paying and somebody is  being extracted and somebody is being squeezed and somebody could be earth, soil, people,  other organisms, whatever we choose.  But it's going to be extractive somehow, somewhere.  
**[0:20:34-0:20:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:20:34):**  Yes.  Although we could on a policy level change the playing field.  So what would you do?  I mean, this is a question I love to ask, the magic one question, what would you change  in ag and food or in general?  
**[0:20:47-0:20:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:20:47):**  If you had one, let's keep it in ag and food.  If you had one magic power, only one wish, what would you change?  I'm not going to limit it to one.  There's two actually that I would like to say.  Everybody always does that.  
**[0:20:59-0:21:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:20:59):**  It's really what I say.  One only.  Yeah, but I would do two or three.  Yeah.  Yeah.  
**[0:21:04-0:21:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:21:04):**  Well, one would be to internalize some of the costs that are externalized onto the ecosystem  and make it expensive to deplete groundwater, make it expensive to cause soil erosion, like  levy some kind of a fee on any practices that do those things.  So that all of a sudden regenerative practices become a lot more lucrative and then you're  going to see the investment move into that area.  
**[0:21:34-0:21:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:21:34):**  So we don't have to just rely on the occasional unicorn or on the altruism of investors who  they're under their pressure to make a return as well.  It's not like they're greedy necessarily.  Maybe they are having a pension fund or something like that.  So we can't make things black and white like this.  
**[0:21:56-0:22:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:21:56):**  And in fact, trying to blame greed for our problems is the same mindset as trying to  find the weed or the insect that is causing all the damage, find the one thing to denounce  and to attack.  If only that would disappear, the weed, then we would be fine.  So we can change the playing field and that's something that has to happen on a policy level.  
**[0:22:21-0:22:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:22:21):**  And then if I had a billion dollars, say, I would be thinking more in terms of philanthropy,  but it might work through an investment model too.  I would invest in young farmers, get them on the land.  So would you then buy land?  Getting them on the land, meaning you would buy, you would be the regenerative Bill Gates,  
**[0:22:49-0:22:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:22:49):**  quote unquote, like you would buy it, hold it, probably not no speculation.  You would never sell it.  I'm imagining.  And then getting young farmers on it to do what they do best.  And if they don't have the huge lease necessity, they would do very different farming practices  
**[0:23:03-0:23:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:23:03):**  because they can do it.  By the land, then maybe give it to them with a below market rate mortgage conditioned on  them doing regenerative practices and have some kind of accountability that is not only  based on metrics, but is based on some community function where there's a community of regenerative  farmers that when they inspect each other's farms, it's from the perspective of I'm going  
**[0:23:38-0:23:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:23:38):**  to help you do be an even better farmer.  And so there's a network of trust that is built that has financial backing that say  I'm investing in you to help our society make this transition.  So you're not going to be under as much pressure to convert your soil into money, which is  despite the best intentions, that's what happens to a lot of farmers.  
**[0:24:07-0:24:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:24:07):**  So they need a bulwark to shield them to some extent, at least from those market forces.  And it's not perfect, but yeah, we got to invest in.  So it could be buying land, as I just said, or it could be, hey, we're going to support  you for $20,000 a year for the next five years for you to learn your trade.  And we're going to maybe support apprenticeship programs at regenerative farms.  
**[0:24:35-0:24:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:24:35):**  There's like so many things that we could do if we turned our money that way.  And some of them would be philanthropic and some might be investments, some might be up  to governments to do things like that.  But that's kind of the way I think about it.  And it really seems like the focus you would take would be on literally getting more people  
**[0:24:57-0:25:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:24:57):**  on the land, getting more people engaged with the land.  And I think it's a very valid one as agriculture seems the best gateway into a lot of other  very, very tough questions we need to ask ourselves.  But that relationship with land and food is probably the best entry point there.  And what would you then say to this room of investors, okay, we support young farmers.  
**[0:25:21-0:25:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:25:21):**  And that might be part of your portfolio.  What is then the role?  I say, yeah, but what about technology?  What about, I'm looking at some robot company, et cetera.  What would you give them as questions to ask?  
**[0:25:31-0:25:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:25:31):**  Because there is a role for technology, but we need to be very selective.  How would you assess technology companies or technologies, let's say in regeneration  to help the young people on the farm?  Because there might be very interesting technologies we can use.  What would you ask those technology companies to flush out the ones that are just looking  
**[0:25:49-0:25:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:25:49):**  at let's replace everybody with robots to the ones that are actually relevant for regeneration  or could be relevant for regeneration?  Or don't you see a role for technology, let's say at all?  I'm just thinking there's robots now that pick strawberries, which is very hard labor.  My brother is a farmer.  
**[0:26:12-0:26:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:26:12):**  I've spent mornings picking strawberries.  It's hard on your back.  It's hard work.  I don't think anybody should be picking strawberries all day for an entire strawberry season.  It's drudgery.  
**[0:26:27-0:26:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:26:27):**  As long as we have a system that requires that we have enormous strawberry farms, rows  and rows of strawberries, then yeah, robots are an improvement over human labor.  But if you're growing them in the most beautiful possible way, then for one thing, you can't  have a large enough field of strawberries to justify a robot.  It would just be cost prohibitive.  
**[0:26:54-0:26:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:26:54):**  It would be a poor investment.  So if you don't spend at least a little time on your hands and knees feeling the soil,  then you're not actually going to be the best farmer possible.  I was quite inspired by Alan Savery, the regenerative pioneer rancher.  He says he walks his land barefoot.  
**[0:27:20-0:27:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:27:20):**  The only way that he can tell exactly where to move the herds is through his feet because  he can feel the soil.  He can feel the land in a different way that way.  So that's maybe more of a distant vision.  But robots might have some role in transition.  
**[0:27:43-0:27:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:27:43):**  But I just don't feel that excited about them.  I don't think that they're...  Basically what you have to look at, if you are an investor who cares about the future  and you have a vision for what the future should look like, then you have to bring your  resource to bear.  
**[0:28:00-0:28:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:28:00):**  You have a series of choices.  Do I serve that future or don't I?  And every investment opportunity that comes up, you can ask, is that a step toward the  future I want to see?  Or is that a step away from it?  
**[0:28:15-0:28:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:28:15):**  Now some people might think that a future of these clean, shiny robots doing all the  work while we're sitting in front of our computers having digital experiences is the best possible  future.  I do not want that future.  My beautiful future has a mosaic of small farms and gardens and 10% of the people are  
**[0:28:40-0:28:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:28:40):**  farmers and 50% or more are gardeners and it's a varied landscape and it's biodiverse.  And yeah, we've got our hands in the soil more.  It's not bad to get dirty.  And so this requires reversing a lot of deep cultural prejudices that go back to ancient  times, where the peasant, the lowest on the totem pole was the dirty one.  
**[0:29:05-0:29:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:29:05):**  And yeah, like we want to go back to connection to earth and that change in values undergirds  any kind of positive change we want in our relationship to nature and to soil.  We have to valorize that profession, valorize being in the soil, being of the earth and  in the earth.  So when it comes to robotics or these gigantic hydroponics factories that you have in the  
**[0:29:43-0:29:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:29:43):**  Netherlands, you know, there's a lot of investment potential there.  You can make a lot of money that way, but is that a step toward the future that you  really want to see?  And you brought an interesting point up there on connecting back to soil and nature.  And what do you see?  
**[0:30:03-0:30:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:30:03):**  Because I'm imagining somebody else would raise their hand in a theater.  And you brought up Alan Savery, who was actually one of the reasons I rolled into the space  12 years ago now, because I saw the potential of holistic management.  Even before he did his TED talk, I will put the links below for anybody who didn't see  that yet or didn't go deep into that.  
**[0:30:22-0:30:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:30:22):**  What do you see in this whole debate on the role of animals in landscapes, in regeneration?  I feel there's an enormous amount of debate on it and very easily getting polarized.  How do you normally move in that space?  Because you bring up Alan Savery, you bring up the relationship to animals and to the  rest of the world and to nature around us.  
**[0:30:48-0:30:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:30:48):**  How do you normally move in that space where it really easily gets quite nasty in a discussion  around a vegan versus this versus that, et cetera, et cetera?  I've been interested in Alan Savery for quite a while.  And I've interacted with him a couple of times and am quite humbled by the man.  I've had the great pleasure to ask him one question once on Gruntswell, which was, I  
**[0:31:12-0:31:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:31:12):**  wouldn't say a highlight of me, but still.  He fully said the $1 billion question, I think he said everything on lobbying and great marketing  to really reach the people that are in the driver's seat.  I'm butchering his answer now, but that was his main answer.  We need to change the narrative.  
**[0:31:30-0:31:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:31:30):**  Sorry, but go ahead.  He impresses me as a very humble man.  So I listen to humble people.  So I've mentioned him before in books and stuff.  And then people send me George Monbiot's article.  
**[0:31:43-0:31:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:31:43):**  So it's like, oh, you know, Savery's been debunked here.  And I thought that article was really quite shoddy and not very thorough and had a lot  of tenuous and fallacious arguments.  And I was not impressed by it.  And it just seemed very ideological.  
**[0:32:07-0:32:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:32:07):**  And part of our culture's dysfunction comes through an escapism and a denial of death  and a denial of ourselves as part of nature.  And you would see them as the same thing.  We have to accept the nature and transcend.  We're trying to transcend nature.  
**[0:32:34-0:32:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:32:34):**  And ultimately, this is the ultimate goal of the technological program is to transcend  death itself.  And in some of these futurist visions, we upload our consciousness into computers where  we have constant genetic and nanotechnology interventions in our bodies and we achieve  immortality.  
**[0:32:52-0:32:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:32:52):**  We become no longer natural.  So part of that, and we see in our culture in the West, a denial of death in so many  ways.  We hardly ever see a corpse, for example, in modern society.  And old people are shunted into these warehouses, these nursing homes.  
**[0:33:15-0:33:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:33:15):**  Until they die.  And we have a fetish for youth.  So all this denial of death that suggests that we can somehow exit the cycle of nature.  So I think that that aspiration to transcend nature is behind the move towards synthetic  food and hydroponically grown food and robot grown food.  
**[0:33:53-0:34:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:33:53):**  It's also, it infiltrates the ideologies around veganism to some extent as well.  And I've got nothing against vegans.  I wrote a book on this issue as well, actually, called The Yoga of Eating, about deep self-trust  and what does the body guide you toward.  So if it guides you toward veganism, then trust that.  
**[0:34:28-0:34:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:34:28):**  But I think that, see, and it depends on the place, but generally speaking, animals are  really important to make the land into a whole organism.  I don't know of any ecosystem that doesn't have animals on earth.  So the question then is, what are the right animals and how to incorporate them?  And that requires deep familiarity with the land.  
**[0:34:56-0:34:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:34:56):**  It's funny you say incorporate there.  Yeah.  Yeah.  Yeah.  So, you know, there's many, you know, the kind of grazing that Alan Savery does works  
**[0:35:06-0:35:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:35:06):**  in some places and maybe not others.  So it can't be, it shouldn't become a dogma in and of itself.  But yeah, there's so many people using animals to heal land that you can't just ignore that  on ideological grounds and say, well, that must be bad because, you know, meat, eating  meat is bad.  
**[0:35:27-0:35:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:35:27):**  And also there, I think the, where we started with this as well, it's very cherry picking  on the research side.  I mean, the amount of the debunking Alan Savery and all of that, if you look into that, it's  yeah, just the fact that there are no good peer reviewed papers doesn't mean it's not  true.  
**[0:35:46-0:35:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:35:46):**  I think that's, that's for many things, but the fact that hundreds of thousands of farmers  are using or livestock farmers or ranchers or whatever you are, where that are using  methods or processes similar and having amazing results should count for something.  And most farmers I know at some point when they're in their regenerative journey, they  will integrate animals to a certain extent and they never go back.  
**[0:36:08-0:36:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:36:08):**  Like it's not the other way, which is very interesting.  Like there happens to be a role of animals.  And I think the second question is, should we eat them or not?  That's just, that depends on you, et cetera.  But there is definitely a role in regeneration and obviously that role is not inside a CAFO  
**[0:36:23-0:36:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:36:23):**  operation being shoved grain down your throat.  I mean, that's very, very clear.  That's the last thing we should do.  But it's very interesting how that debate gets incredibly heated in two and a half seconds,  basically.  
**[0:36:36-0:36:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:36:36):**  And even bringing up Alan Savory triggers a lot of things in people.  I wonder what that is.  What's the, I mean, many debates get heated these days, but this is one that of course  close to us because we talk about food and regeneration and agriculture constantly, but  the role of animals really brings out a very, very strong reaction that the role of pesticides  
**[0:36:57-0:37:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:36:57):**  for instance doesn't, or Roundup or GMOs or highly processed food or whatever you want  to call it.  Do you have an idea, is that that fear of death that triggers that?  Or what do you think why it hits such a nerve when we talk about the role of animals?  I mean, this gets into all kinds of psychology and I don't want to oversimplify it.  
**[0:37:21-0:37:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:37:21):**  I think people get upset and are highly committed to veganism for many reasons.  So I don't want to overgeneralize.  This is going to veer way off topic, but I think maybe just really briefly, one thing  that happens is that in our society, we are so cut off from our relationships to each  other from community, from place.  
**[0:37:48-0:37:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:37:48):**  We don't really know who we are.  Our identity is very tenuous and we also carry a wound of self rejection, which is part of  the war on nature.  It becomes a war on ourselves.  So we have a very strong desire to know ourselves as good, as moral, as virtuous as one of the  
**[0:38:08-0:38:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:38:08):**  good guys.  And the rest is bad.  Yeah.  Or the others are.  Yeah.  
**[0:38:15-0:38:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:38:15):**  Right.  Right.  So I think that an identity is to have a dietary practice that says that not only are you being  healthy, but you're being ethical.  You're being a good person, you're raising your vibration, and you get reinforced in  
**[0:38:32-0:38:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:38:32):**  that by people around you.  And so some vegans, especially the ones who are very moralistic and judgmental, are perhaps  motivated by that to some extent, but usually not all.  Like generally, they really care about animals too, and it hurts them to see the suffering  of animals.  
**[0:38:55-0:39:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:38:55):**  And then of course, there are the ecological arguments, which I think are hard to sustain  when you're talking about really regenerative practices.  Yeah.  And so partly there's like this idea that if only we didn't practice animal agriculture,  the suffering of animals could be avoided.  
**[0:39:16-0:39:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:39:16):**  But you know, my niece raises rabbits.  And she's not easy, by the way.  Yeah.  No, she loves her rabbits.  She thinks they're really cute and stuff, yet she's able to slaughter them and butcher  
**[0:39:31-0:39:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:39:31):**  them and make hats out of the skins and eat and sell the meat.  And like those rabbits make a lot of babies.  So it's not like if they were in nature, all of the babies would have a full rabbit life  and grow up to be a rabbit mommy.  If a rabbit has several litters, I mean, a mother rabbit could have 50 babies or more  
**[0:40:00-0:40:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:40:00):**  in her lifetime.  On average, two of them may get to reproduction.  Otherwise the population in nature would explode.  So death is happening all the time.  And we have to, and it's only when we are boxed off and distanced through technology,  
**[0:40:19-0:40:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:40:19):**  through our screens, you know, if we are sheltered from actual biology, only then can we imagine  that suffering is not happening all the time.  Pain and suffering and death is not happening all the time in nature.  Now actually though, the baby rabbits who are being devoured, I mean, most of the animals  in nature that die are babies.  
**[0:40:45-0:40:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:40:45):**  It is a high risk proposition to be a baby rabbit or a tadpole or a baby anything in  nature.  Most of them are babies.  And you know what though, most of their lives are in joy.  Usually it's only a few moments of intense stress and gruesome death, even if they are  
**[0:41:08-0:41:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:41:08):**  the ones who get eaten.  So if we're really going to rejoin nature, that's what we can look to as a goal.  That it's not that we will banish death in animals or ourselves, but it's that their  lives should be good lives.  They should live well.  
**[0:41:29-0:41:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:41:29):**  They should not live a life of confinement.  And they should be able to contribute their gifts to the other beings around them.  Like that's how you integrate animals into a regenerative system.  Like I have some chickens in my backyard, you know, and I'm just learning.  I haven't raised them for that long, but I'm learning, you know, they like go and scratch  
**[0:41:52-0:41:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:41:52):**  up everything.  And I can use that to destroy weeds that are getting started in this patch.  If I move the chickens here, like I'm just starting to figure out how to use, how to  incorporate them into a system.  So yeah, those are just some of my thoughts on this issue.  
**[0:42:14-0:42:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:42:14):**  I hesitate to bring them out in this format because it's, as you said, it's really, really  touchy.  And I don't want to seem as if I'm saying all vegans are dogmatic because they're actually  compensating for their loss of identity and self-worth.  That's just one of the things.  
**[0:42:31-0:42:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:42:31):**  I won't make that a title, don't worry.  Yeah, no, but it's very interesting to explore.  I think that, and I think for many people in general, I think for many investors, it  would be really good to spend some long quality time on, let's say, highly diverse farms or  highly alive farms, just to see how difficult it is, challenges, opportunities, the beauty,  
**[0:42:57-0:43:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:42:57):**  the death, the destruction, all of it, what comes to growing your food, because most of  the food we eat comes from the soil, a tiny bit comes from the oceans.  And also there, we need a lot of regeneration.  But before we start making fancy PowerPoint presentations about the role of alternative  meat, etc., to spend a good quality of time and quality of time being humble and listen  
**[0:43:19-0:43:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:43:19):**  on farms.  And yeah, it is a bit more, it's very complex, very interesting, very fascinating, very rough  and not easy to grow the food we need or we like to eat.  And then on another touchy subject, I see a lot of people now trying to come up with  putting a value on nature, and you've spoken about that in the past as well.  
**[0:43:41-0:43:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:43:41):**  I actually asked Satish Kumar as well, like, what do you think about the carbon credit  markets or the biodiversity market as it's sort of starting to pop up?  And he simply said, yeah, I don't think it's the end game.  And he mentioned somewhere in the range of if we manage to use it to create significant  resources to restore a lot of things, it's okay as long as we realize we can never measure  
**[0:44:07-0:44:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:44:07):**  the whole thing.  It's impossible to measure nature.  It's impossible to measure biodiversity.  Impossible.  We measure a piece of it and we don't know the full depth of that.  
**[0:44:16-0:44:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:44:16):**  What do you, because a lot of the extractive returns we've gotten over the last decades  and centuries are because we pulled in more into the money system.  We put more of nature into the money system.  What are your hopes and fears, let's say, of this putting a value on nature movement  that is sort of happening?  
**[0:44:36-0:44:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:44:36):**  If we just quantify it, then we'll manage it better.  What do you normally think about that?  Or what are the first thoughts that bubble up in this another massive rabbit hole?  Yeah, I agree with Satish about this, that maybe as a temporary expedient, it can be  useful.  
**[0:44:54-0:44:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:44:54):**  Transition.  We can put a value on things that had zero value before, as long as we understand that  whatever value we put on it is less than its true value.  Because you cannot reduce the sacred to a number.  This isn't just a philosophical objection.  
**[0:45:13-0:45:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:45:13):**  It's very practical.  Because if you put, say, the value, put a number on it, put a billion dollars on the  value of a certain forest or an estuary.  Well, if you say that it's worth a billion dollars in ecosystem services, then you are  agreeing that if you could make $2 billion by digging the whole thing up and putting  
**[0:45:40-0:45:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:45:40):**  a lithium mine there, that you should do it.  If you're trying to internalize costs with policy and say, okay, you can do whatever  you want in the land, but it's worth a billion dollars in ecosystem services, so you have  to pay a billion dollars fee.  It's better than paying no fee.  
**[0:46:03-0:46:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:46:03):**  But Elon Musk comes in there and he's like, oh, $2 billion worth of lithium here.  Let's do it.  And yeah, that 1 billion is an expense.  So it undervalues the base assumption is that Earth itself is worth something.  X.  
**[0:46:30-0:46:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:46:30):**  Is worth X.  How do you ultimately calculate the monetary value of ecosystem services if you're not...  What's the basis of that calculation?  Because that would suggest that we can just cut everything down and move to Mars.  So what would you then do?  
**[0:46:49-0:46:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:46:49):**  You say, okay, we currently can estimate it's a billion dollars with our current...  And we know it's way more.  We're not even going to say 100X because we just don't know.  But that's what we currently can imagine is this.  Or how would we then frame it in that transition period?  
**[0:47:05-0:47:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:47:05):**  Total GDP, like the gross world product is about $100 trillion annually.  Give or take.  So at a normal discount rate, you could say that the value of the Earth is something like  $5 quadrillion or $10 quadrillion, something like that.  So that's obviously absurd.  
**[0:47:40-0:47:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:47:40):**  If aliens came and said, we're going to make you a deal.  Here's $20 quadrillion and we're going to buy Earth from you.  And we're going to drain the oceans.  And we're going to destroy the whole place.  Our shareholders say we should do it.  
**[0:47:56-0:47:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:47:56):**  We have to seriously consider that offer.  So obviously, the Earth is not worth any amount.  And therefore, anything that is an integral part of Earth is also not worth any amount,  any finite amount.  So we have to really understand the limits of this way of thinking.  
**[0:48:16-0:48:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:48:16):**  It might have useful expedient applications.  But we have to feed something else into our collective and personal decision making besides  numbers.  We have to have some other way to guide and govern economic, industrial, technological  activity.  
**[0:48:40-0:48:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:48:40):**  Can't just be by the numbers.  We have to incorporate other values besides value.  Because the numbers, you can make the numbers tell everything as well.  It's very easy to...  Spreadsheet economics, especially agriculture, is not the real deal.  
**[0:48:58-0:49:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:48:58):**  So where... and I love to ask this question, not always at the end, but in this case, I  want to be conscious of your time as well.  Where do you...  I'm imagining you don't go, maybe not with your chickens and interest in elm and savory,  but go to a lot of region ag conferences, let's say, or region ag and food conferences.  
**[0:49:13-0:49:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:49:13):**  But when you meet people that are interested in regeneration or regenerative agriculture  and food, where do you see that you think differently?  Where are you contrarian?  Where do you...  What do you believe to be true?  
**[0:49:24-0:49:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:49:24):**  And this question definitely is inspired by John Kemp.  What do you believe to be true about regenerative agriculture that others don't?  Where do you...  There are many things.  What is the main one that pops up now when I asked this question?  
**[0:49:36-0:49:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:49:36):**  Yeah, you know, regenerative ag conferences are like...  I have the feeling like, yeah, these are my people.  I feel very at home in them.  And it's not that I have any serious disagreements.  I'm fascinated by all the...  
**[0:49:54-0:49:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:49:54):**  Especially the cutting edge technology.  We can talk about technology in many ways.  What is the technology that fascinates you the most at the moment?  I guess it's one that's the most, but for example, the guys doing the Korean natural  farming stuff with all of the fermentations and developing ways to use bacteria and microorganisms  
**[0:50:16-0:50:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:50:16):**  to enhance the aliveness and productivity of a farm.  That's fascinating.  I mean, what would our agricultural system be like if we poured the billions of dollars  into researching that and supporting young researchers doing that, that we now put into  making GMO seeds?  
**[0:50:35-0:50:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:50:35):**  And yet you said a billion dollars.  You said, let's put young people on the land.  You could also put it on the technology, but this kind of technology side, which maybe  has a bigger multiple effects.  Yeah, and there's other technologies that are maybe farther out there.  
**[0:50:51-0:50:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:50:51):**  There's a whole biodynamic system.  There's ancient and indigenous understandings of how to plant with the moon or astrological  things.  Which are surprisingly practical in...  I mean, if you look at large scale biodynamic farming, they've been following that for very,  
**[0:51:15-0:51:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:51:15):**  very proven, very, very deep into the right research community.  Let's say not the general agricultural university ones.  They always think that these biodynamic people are the weirdos in the corner.  But it's been working at scale for a long time.  This is not something that we recently stumbled upon or something.  
**[0:51:37-0:51:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:51:37):**  I would say it's quite established in the right, let's say the right circles.  But it's something that people look at, especially like, oh, that's weird.  And it's like, yeah, but look at the underlying and way weirder stuff than that actually.  There's lots of weird stuff.  There's people using magnetic rails and planting between those.  
**[0:51:56-0:52:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:51:56):**  There's people using Victor Schauberger water technologies, where they're making sure the  water, irrigation water is going through natural channels.  I mean, all the water retention, some of this stuff is out there and outside the bounds  of acceptable science.  And some of it is within the bounds of acceptable science.  
**[0:52:16-0:52:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:52:16):**  So if I'm at all a contrarian, I don't have that role in regenerative circles.  But I'm more of like advocating, yeah, let's push the boundaries even further.  Because miracles of healing and productivity are possible when we tap into these other  realms of technology.  I think it's a great place to end this conversation.  
**[0:52:43-0:52:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:52:43):**  I think it was quite a few rabbit holes, but a lot of other ones that we could talk for  absolute hours about.  But to push our boundaries and to push into the unknown or the known, we already know  it, but it has to come into the realm of acceptance is, I think, a very good place to end.  I want to thank you, Charles, so much for your time this morning.  
**[0:53:04-0:53:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:53:04):**  You have a very busy schedule.  And I thank you so much for taking the time to share some of your thoughts with us today.  Yeah, it was my pleasure, Koen.  Thanks.  Thank you so much for listening all the way to the end.  
**[0:53:20-0:53:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:53:20):**  For the show notes and links we discussed in this episode, check out our website, investinginregion.agriculture.com  forward slash posts.  If you liked this episode, why not share it with a friend or give us a rating on Apple  Podcasts.  That really helps.  
**[0:53:34-0:53:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:53:34):**  Thanks again and see you next time.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  
**[0:54:38-0:54:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:54:38):**  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to put money  to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011 and recording  this podcast since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework?  
**[0:54:57-0:54:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:54:57):**  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  What questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  
**[0:55:05-0:55:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:55:05):**  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  You the soil builders and investors in the space.  
**[0:55:15-0:55:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:55:15):**  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management consultants, etc.  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  
**[0:55:35-0:55:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:55:35):**  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  
**[0:55:49-0:55:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:55:49):**  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  that among the listeners of this podcast we have people with very different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  
**[0:56:07-0:56:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:56:07):**  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to ride along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  
**[0:56:27-0:56:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:56:27):**  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  
**[0:56:47-0:56:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:56:47):**  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  
**[0:56:58-0:57:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/charles-eisenstein#t=0:56:58):**  Before making any investment please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  