### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2022-00-07)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com slash course or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  Checking in with Gijs of Groundrud on how they're fair and transparent wholesale regenerative  ingredient businesses doing and why Gijs is more optimistic about the possibilities of  
**[0:00:23-0:00:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:00:23):**  building successful and profitable businesses based on regenerative agriculture practices  and why the focus on quality, taste and transparency of smaller food brands is creating the demand  to make a significant change on the ground.  Not all roses and sunshine.  We obviously also get into why even with all this experience and significant track record,  
**[0:00:42-0:00:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:00:42):**  it is difficult to raise capital for regen agroecology businesses in the global south.  This is the investing in regenerative agriculture and food podcast investing as if the planet  mattered where we talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  
**[0:01:11-0:01:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:01:11):**  Why my focus on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land and our sea, grow our food, what we eat, wear and consume.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt soil underneath our feet to make it easy for fans to support our  
**[0:01:31-0:01:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:01:31):**  work.  We launched our membership community and so many of you have joined us as a member.  Thank you.  If our work created value for you and if you have the means and only if you have the means  consider joining us, find out more on gumroad.com slash investing in regen ag that is gumroad.com  
**[0:01:48-0:01:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:01:48):**  slash investing in regen ag or find the link below.  Welcome to another episode.  Today we have Gijs Boers.  Welcome back on the podcast to talk about Grounded and everything that happened since  March last year, March, 2021.  
**[0:02:05-0:02:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:02:05):**  And when we last talked and in the life of a startup and a scale up, a lot of things  are happening in such a short period or such a long period actually.  So I'm very happy to have Gijs back.  Welcome Gijs.  Thanks Gunen and great to be back again.  
**[0:02:19-0:02:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:02:19):**  So obviously I will put the previous interviews.  I think we called it the good, the bad and ugly of regen ag in the links below and also  an interview we did, I think three, four, maybe five years ago even.  But just to, for everybody to refresh our memories, what is Grounded and what is Grounded  now?  
**[0:02:36-0:02:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:02:36):**  Let's say we're talking at the end of April in 2022.  How would you describe Grounded for somebody that has never heard about it?  Yeah, I think the common line over the past, almost a small decade has been, we want to  scale regenerative agriculture in Africa and increase the income of farmers.  We started off with doing some business development around landscape restoration.  
**[0:03:01-0:03:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:03:01):**  I think for most of you aware that agriculture is the biggest threat to healthy landscapes.  We entered into regenerative agriculture and try to get a transition towards regen agri  up in Africa.  Yeah, and we found the big hurdles and challenges.  So eventually we ended up with a standing up and processing company that together with  
**[0:03:28-0:03:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:03:28):**  a group of farmers to buy produce from farmers, process it and sell it.  And through that company offer a lot of support to the farmers in that transition.  That is still the common thread of Grounded.  Still we're taking active positions in the value chain.  But how we do that in more detail that has changed a lot over time.  
**[0:03:52-0:03:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:03:52):**  I think through many hurdles, mistakes and hard work and perseverance, we manage step  by step to make the model more perfect.  And I think like a regenerative system, it's a step by step, but the nice thing is once  you're on the road and you start picking up pace, slowly but surely you're getting there.  And as you're so deep into the space, has something changed fundamentally?  
**[0:04:27-0:04:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:04:27):**  You see in the sector conversations you had over the last year, like the last 12 months.  I see definitely an uptick on the podcast, a different uptick in my email box of people  wanting information, connections, introductions.  And if you want to please all listeners reach out.  I cannot promise I answer in a few days because the flow is getting quite strong.  
**[0:04:48-0:04:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:04:48):**  But I see a change in the last 18 months, in the last year as well.  There seems to be more happening or at least our bubble is growing.  Do you feel the same or how is that in, let's say the region movement in Africa, in Southern  Africa or the agriculture movement?  Obviously there's a bigger umbrella there.  
**[0:05:05-0:05:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:05:05):**  What do you feel there on the ground?  Has something been changing there as well or is it the same old, same old?  It's still very much neglected or at least from, let's say abroad.  Yeah, there's always multiple answers to such a question, but it's definitely the case that  when we started, you know, region, if you would Google region of agriculture, there  
**[0:05:27-0:05:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:05:27):**  were a couple thousand hits.  And you know, when we started Grounded and we first started to look into regenerative  agriculture, we constantly had to explain what regenerative agriculture was and every  conversation you started.  And after a couple of years, you would run into more people say, yeah, we know regenerative  
**[0:05:48-0:05:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:05:48):**  agriculture, we do agroforestry, we've been in touch with it.  And now I almost never explain anymore in most of the conversation what region agri  is.  And then from time to time, you get these people to say regenerative agriculture, is  that like sustainable agriculture?  
**[0:06:03-0:06:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:06:03):**  And then you say, okay.  And I think that's, that's, that explains how well you're doing your job, Koon, with  Spreading the Word because we are B2B in the background.  And although we've picked up communication a lot over the past two years, but I think  a big kudos to you for Spreading the Word and making it more familiar and bringing people  
**[0:06:29-0:06:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:06:29):**  more up to speed on the potential.  The potential and the challenges.  Yeah.  And you do the potential and we explain the challenges and to make sure that people, our  communication focuses on the challenges and the hurdles that we've overcome.  
**[0:06:47-0:06:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:06:47):**  Yeah, and to make sure that people don't lose faith in that transition, because I think  that's one of the key things in our communication, normally that it's not easy to get there.  But there are ways to get it, there are quick wins.  And yeah, it's just sometimes sad to see some people giving up.  What do you tell yourself or what do you tell them to not give up, like people in any transition,  
**[0:07:21-0:07:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:07:21):**  it's often the darkest just before the light or it's like, it's really, it can be really  tough, especially the first years, of course, depending on the soil, the landscape, the  company.  But it is definitely a very rough journey in many, many cases, yet to hear a story where  somebody said, Oh, it was so easy, just to switch from a heavily input dependent form  
**[0:07:41-0:07:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:07:41):**  of agriculture to something that's much more knowledge intensive, much more interesting,  but much more complex as well.  Like, what do you like internally?  How do you because you're running different companies, you're part of different, like  there are different levels, let's say, or different parts of their journey or different  
**[0:07:57-0:07:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:07:57):**  pieces.  How do you make sure you keep going?  Is it because you've seen some successes?  Okay, we know at some point, we'll figure out a recipe that works.  Let's just keep going, keep trying?  
**[0:08:07-0:08:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:08:07):**  Or how do you keep morale up when you're when you're in those dark moments where where stuff  dies and things don't grow or things grow too fast, which means you have weeds everywhere?  Yeah, to give a practical example, I think in Zambia, a couple of years, we run a training  scheme with hundreds and eventually small up in 1000s of farmers.  And I think if you look over the entire program, the total results were not significant enough.  
**[0:08:40-0:08:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:08:40):**  But if we looked at the top 10% performance, performance in that program, and you show  see the results, and you see the quick wins that can be gained.  And by looking at okay, what makes these farmers successful?  What other hurdles do other farmers have?  And you try to hold on not to the total success or the bottom line success as a company in  
**[0:09:02-0:09:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:09:02):**  those early years, but I think you look a lot at the quick wins and to see what works  and where it works.  And have a strong belief.  We all know that we have to find different ways.  And yeah, if you focus on the wins, and there's a you have an amazing team, and we have so  
**[0:09:22-0:09:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:09:22):**  many people in the team that all feel okay, we have to do it differently.  It's not gonna be easy.  But we just keep going.  And yeah, then you motivate each other.  And based on the first results that you see with some of the farms that do pick it up  
**[0:09:38-0:09:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:09:38):**  and that that do make it into a success.  Yeah, that's, that was just enough spark to keep us going.  But I think sometimes looking back, I think our biggest, our biggest strength was our  perseverance now.  And just in Zambia, just to reiterate what what, what is the current status of that project  
**[0:10:04-0:10:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:10:04):**  in that company?  What did you after a number of years of let's say, trial and error and R&D?  What have you found there that is working?  Yeah, in the details, Zambia is also a larger country with quite some significant differences  in climate zone.  
**[0:10:22-0:10:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:10:22):**  The area we operated in the southern part closer to Namibia was a lot drier.  We've seen that for a lot of farmers, they grew a bit of crops, more of an insurance  on the side, but weren't really seeing farming as a business or really doing farmers more  farming more commercially.  And some of the younger generations that would stay in that area, they try to do it.  
**[0:10:53-0:11:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:10:53):**  And what we've done is we've been now trying to invest more heavily in those top performers  and also aggregate them a bit.  So we try to, we've picked a location with a lot of good farmers in the neighborhood  and try to centralize a bit of irrigation, compost making.  So these family farms still have their own family farm, but one of the family members  
**[0:11:18-0:11:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:11:18):**  or some family members come to more of a centralized farming location there where there's more  affordable irrigation because it's more economies of scale.  But where we super intense region farming model, I would say with agroforestry lanes,  high diversity, focused on high value crops and I mean vegetables, crops that require  a lot of labor, but we combine that with a very strong management team, a very large  
**[0:11:48-0:11:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:11:48):**  amount of knowledge, research, data gathering.  And then there's also, for example, there's a tractor that these families share.  So the best farmers now not only use the half of their time to making paths and rows that  work is being done, but they focus on managing the crops and disease monitoring, making high  quality.  
**[0:12:10-0:12:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:12:10):**  So for them to bring that back to their family farm to spread it or to expand this, let's  say high intensive optimized farm combination.  Yeah, it's a combination of both.  So you want to, yeah, we want to scale both.  I think that's a relatively well developed world.  
**[0:12:31-0:12:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:12:31):**  We have to have an anchor base and from there work with farmers in the neighborhood.  And there, yeah, actually production is commenced and it's actually going really well.  So that's the crops look good, the soils respond very well.  And the farmers respond very well.  So that's a good start.  
**[0:12:54-0:12:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:12:54):**  And another, yeah, we've chosen location because of new connection to Botswana was opening  up.  There's a new border post open, a new bridge.  We're tracking prices of the informal market.  I'm fascinated by these informal markets, the inefficiencies, but also the efficiencies  
**[0:13:10-0:13:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:13:10):**  to trust it's that's for a different podcast, but we tracking prices throughout Zambia.  And we now add to location where prices are higher since that opening of the bridge and  since that connection opening up again.  So it's yeah, after all those years and going from challenge to challenge, you're now in  a position where and we see that over a cross grounded that we're getting more and more  
**[0:13:36-0:13:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:13:36):**  into petitions where things are actually going better than expected.  And this is a lot of momentum.  So that's amazing.  That's been a while.  Yeah.  
**[0:13:44-0:13:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:13:44):**  And then now what's your position now?  What's your relationship with that company in Zambia?  Are you still very, very much involved or you mentioned management team or are you also,  I would say on your way out because it is going or what's your, what your connection  still with, with this is maybe, maybe to talk about the relation between grounded and, and,  
**[0:14:05-0:14:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:14:05):**  and these companies in our portfolio, we refer to them as operating companies.  In the beginning, we were very much involved.  We were small teams and also on the ground, we didn't have a lot of resources that has  changed.  It was a big step for grounded.  
**[0:14:20-0:14:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:14:20):**  In Zambia, we, we build a much stronger teams on the ground and much more staking on.  Whereas we as grounded take more of a, we support finance for these of course we work  a bit on strategy.  If they export, we work, we obviously support on that.  We support on the legal side, but much more of the operations happens on the ground, much  
**[0:14:41-0:14:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:14:41):**  more of the decisions, what they produce, how they produce it.  It's supported by our region, every team.  And one of the biggest transitions we have made is that we've used, we're using our experience  of building these companies from scratch.  And we now working more and more with existing entrepreneurs that are in the early stage.  
**[0:15:02-0:15:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:15:02):**  And I think that's one of the biggest transitions that we've made over the past is we said to  yourself, okay, how can we, how can we scale and how can we optimize the lessons and our  failures that we've made in the past?  And yeah, when, when looking for new opportunities we came in touch with, with, with other entrepreneurs  and there was an amazing click mainly because we all, we, we shared a lot of, we have a  
**[0:15:32-0:15:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:15:32):**  lot of shared mistakes and a lot of shared challenges.  And so you find each other in the, in, in the suffering or in the, in the obstacles  you have, or let's say, let's frame it differently in the recipe seeking of what works in this  context.  And of course you, you have a million stories about that and they have those as well.  
**[0:15:52-0:15:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:15:52):**  So do you have an example of like in these journeys, you, you now actually are sort of  switching from setting these operating companies up from scratch by grounded to partnering  with already existing in many cases, small, but still existing company.  There's already something there.  There is an entrepreneur, there's a team, there's stuff being produced, being sold,  
**[0:16:11-0:16:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:16:11):**  being lost in some cases.  And you partner with them to say, okay, how do we, how do we bring this to the next regenerative  level or the next business level as well?  Like how does that process work?  You meet them at a fair, you meet them at, at, at like trips.  
**[0:16:26-0:16:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:16:26):**  How do you find these, these how do you say diamonds in the rough, in the rough, I think  is the, is the term.  How do you find them when they're not so shiny yet?  Yeah, via several channels.  I think if you work in in an African continent for 10 years you, you always have a network,  
**[0:16:46-0:16:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:16:46):**  but also on trade first, literally you see company supply and produce from Africa.  People reach out to us on how to, you know, we want to be far more regenerative.  Where do we start?  But to give an example, and maybe also links to your question that you started, do you  see a change in the acceptance of region every year, the more adept of the world to that.  
**[0:17:11-0:17:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:17:11):**  And so we had a company, the first company that we've, we partnered up with, with an  existing entrepreneurial team was a Dutch spice entrepreneur.  And then Tanzanian spice entrepreneur, they started working together.  He was a spice farmer and yeah, the Dutch spice trader invested in him slowly buying  some produce and getting it into Europe.  
**[0:17:38-0:17:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:17:38):**  And when one of our marketing team members was talking to him, he said, yeah, we need  to, I see the problems in the world.  He's actually of the generation that would normally not be so interested, but I think  he's a unique person and said, no, we need to work differently.  I want to make an impact.  
**[0:17:56-0:18:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:17:56):**  And if I want to get, I see the problem in the spice industry, the problems of using  pesticides is enormous.  EU is toughening regulations.  So there's huge problems in India.  I think in India, a lot of organic credit, a lot of organic organizations have lost licenses  
**[0:18:14-0:18:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:18:14):**  because of some, also pesticide residues.  And he said, yeah, we need, we need alternatives.  And if I want to, I want to be sure that I get sustainable spices out of Tanzania, I  need, I need this part to be covered.  And that's how we started talking, looking into the company.  
**[0:18:40-0:18:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:18:40):**  They needed to raise finance.  Yeah.  And eventually we said, yeah, we've, we've raised finance for companies that only existed  on paper.  You have an amazing business.  
**[0:18:52-0:18:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:18:52):**  But yeah, that company was set up in Tanzania in a way, I think very pragmatic.  You just start and see, and there was a lot of interest from buyers.  They were scared about their current sourcing areas.  You know, it's spicy, a lot of one sourcing, main sourcing area for one crop.  And they said, yeah, we want to diversify.  
**[0:19:17-0:19:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:19:17):**  We see the risks.  So that business picked up, but when we came in and we tried to partner up and he said,  okay, we don't, we're not consulted.  So we want to be part of this company.  And so we tried to figure out how can we become part of the company in the end, re-raise capital  
**[0:19:37-0:19:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:19:37):**  to invest in this business.  And that's also how our investment company was born.  And we'll talk about that a bit later.  It's a nice bridge, but let's unpack the spices a bit further.  But yeah, we saw this business and I think it took us about, yeah, it took us a significant  
**[0:19:54-0:20:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:19:54):**  amount of time and effort and resources to build a strong foundation for the business  to almost redo the business from scratch in some of the business fundamentals.  So finance, legal, bookkeeping.  One of our colleagues moved out there to live in, to live next to the factory and to live  together with the entrepreneur to support him on some of the aspects that he wasn't  
**[0:20:23-0:20:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:20:23):**  really, yeah, he didn't really come across in the past, so to speak.  So he was really good with sourcing the produce.  He was a spice farmer himself.  So he knew quality, he knew how to get it, how to pack it and together with the Dutch  spice trader, how to process it, they get it EU ready.  
**[0:20:44-0:20:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:20:44):**  But that took so much of his time that I think all the admin was just laying there and we've  done all, we already done that, asked for new permits.  We supported them on getting the organic certification with some support of the Dutch government  do out throughout that process.  So that was super helpful.  
**[0:21:06-0:21:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:21:06):**  And in the end, yeah, we managed to get everything in order, raise some investments into this  company, become a co-owner of the business where indeed we again support a bit on strategy.  Our region, every team is supporting their own region, every team so that they set up  in house and ideas.  So what in the spices are the biggest challenges?  
**[0:21:26-0:21:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:21:26):**  Like where would you like, where are they now, this company or where they're sourcing  from and where could that go to in terms of growing practices?  Is that super complex agroforestry systems?  Is it, what is, what do you see there to make that transition that the entrepreneur wanted  to get rid of a lot of the inputs and a lot of the risks and a lot of the fragility in  
**[0:21:50-0:21:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:21:50):**  the system?  What do you see, where could the spices system go to?  Like, I don't know, describe it for us, let's say visually, because we're obviously an audio,  like what should we imagine when you say a spice farmer?  Well then it's different around the world, but in Tenzen, yeah, what you see and where  
**[0:22:09-0:22:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:22:09):**  the challenges are, where the opportunity are, first we choose spices because it's actually  in many instances a great agroforestry crop.  But that's also where the challenge is because what you see is that if you, is that, you  know, natural forest would first be partly cleared for some under canopy growth of pepper  or cardamom.  
**[0:22:32-0:22:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:22:32):**  And if you don't replenish that system, you will see it deteriorates over time.  That's been replaced by other crops that are less high value, more of the canopies is cut  and eventually you're left with cassava fields.  And after the cassava, after a couple of years of cassava, your soil is drained.  Now the advantage of these more tropical climates is that the region agri is generally a bit  
**[0:23:05-0:23:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:23:05):**  easier, the more water, the faster it grows, the shorter the cycles, you have more growing  seasons.  So obviously the benefit as well is that if we create a market for pepper and now for  organic pepper and try to work with the farmers to establish new plantations, eventually in  areas that are were previous spice areas, if we can bring them back into production,  
**[0:23:30-0:23:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:23:30):**  you can automatically create some form of an agroforestry system.  Now for us, obviously this is long trajectory and it starts with trying to maintain the  current plantations.  So get up production.  Another example is there's a wilting problem.  
**[0:23:50-0:23:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:23:50):**  So Tanzanian government organisations are providing organic sprays for that.  So that's super helpful, but the big problem is a lack of composting, proper moisture management  on these plants.  So I think our region agri team is working hard to find some small, make some practical  interventions, how you can prevent that problem from starting in the first place.  
**[0:24:20-0:24:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:24:20):**  So I think these transitions and what we've learned in the past, these are very long timelines  and it starts with some of the quick wins, getting momentum with the first group of farmers  and then getting the same thing to a new group of farmers, but with your first group slowly  advancing and yeah, it would be great if one day we can get that cassava fields back into  thriving agroforestry production areas because they would make much more money on that if  
**[0:24:48-0:24:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:24:48):**  we do it properly.  And if they don't have to sell out their pepper, you know, one month before harvesting, because  now sometimes they're selling at 30% of the value, just one month before harvesting because  they don't have the cash flow to get through that last month.  And the classic trader farmer issue.  
**[0:25:06-0:25:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:25:06):**  Exactly.  So those are the gains and it's a long trajectory, but we're taking it step by step, farmer by  farmer.  I think the company sources for about 2000 farmers and I think what they do amazingly  and what we would have done wrong probably if we would have done it from scratch is they  
**[0:25:26-0:25:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:25:26):**  really work well within the current system, within the middleman, within the traders,  taking it step by step.  We would have thought, no, this needs to be radically different, which is super impressive  and impressive.  And that's where I think the local entrepreneur and his skills really come into play and say,  
**[0:25:44-0:25:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:25:44):**  no, you know, you don't want these guys.  You need these middlemen.  They know quality.  They know where the farmers are.  They know what good farmers rely on farmers.  
**[0:25:52-0:25:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:25:52):**  And if we can incentivize them a bit and get a relationship to pay a bit more at a certain  time and compensate him for that.  And so they're working really well within the system step by step.  And I think that's, yeah, that's super impressive and also really realistic of what they can  do today and what they can do tomorrow.  
**[0:26:10-0:26:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:26:10):**  But having this strong dot on the rise and you know, this is where we're going to and  we're doing it step by step.  And I will put in the show notes, we did a very interesting interview earlier, I thought  on Centropic Agroforestry or how complex agroforestry can be.  But also how, what the potential is of all the different layers.  
**[0:26:30-0:26:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:26:30):**  And also I think a good friend of the show, Massimiliano sent a video on, I think it was  disease on coffee and how that was caused by basically having the coffee plant in the  wrong spot in the height basically of the system while it was catching too much moisture  and was getting sick because of that.  So there's so many of these little things that if a system is done properly and properly  
**[0:26:54-0:26:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:26:54):**  is a really weird word here, but there are many things you can avoid, but you have to  really understand, well, like where does the pepper want to be and where does it thrive  compared to the other plants in the system and how do you make sure, first of all, to  keep it obviously in a way that it doesn't deteriorate towards cassava.  And then how do you make a system where the pepper actually thrives?  
**[0:27:14-0:27:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:27:14):**  And those are questions we've asked ourselves.  I mean, we've asked ourselves recently and probably a long time ago, but in the last  20 years, maybe not so much in these systems.  Like what is a thriving pepper system?  I don't know if many people can answer that unfortunately, but it's a research that we  
**[0:27:30-0:27:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:27:30):**  need to do because we need to know how to, and then how do we bring it back at speed  to grow these systems and not have to wait 20, 30 years.  It's fascinating R&D in an already, let's say functioning system that is going and there's  being peppers being exported.  It's not that you have to start from scratch like you used to do.  
**[0:27:48-0:27:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:27:48):**  So that's a big shift.  And are you, I mean, this is a natural bridge towards GIC, let's say towards like doing  this partnering with and investing in existing companies more often.  When did this realization came?  Was it with this example on the pepper side?  
**[0:28:04-0:28:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:28:04):**  Like it's like, wow, there are actually entrepreneurs where we can add a lot of value.  We can skip some steps and probably actually avoid some mistakes we would have otherwise  made if we would have gone into pepper, organic peppers, et cetera.  Like when does that realization came and where is that now?  What is GIC and where is it going to go if it's up to you?  
**[0:28:23-0:28:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:28:23):**  Yeah, so GIC stands for the Grounded Investment Company.  And it came indeed from raising capital for this business.  There's always been a bit of a push from investors to invest at a broader grounded level.  But since we've always set up companies from scratch and with close partnership with other  NGOs, existing partners, we've always raised that capital on an individual level.  
**[0:28:55-0:28:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:28:55):**  Which makes running grounded difficult.  I think like the holding company or the company above it and you mentioned your legal team,  your region team, your sourcing team, of course, now, grounded ingredients, we'll talk about  it later, is separate now.  But there's a lot of support you give that is coming from a centralized team that has  
**[0:29:15-0:29:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:29:15):**  to be paid for.  So if all the money flows to the different operating companies, it's going to be tricky  for you guys or that was tricky.  Yeah, no, 100%.  But it's that, but it's also from investors.  
**[0:29:34-0:29:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:29:34):**  You know, they want to be part of the...  But it's also these companies now they are further down the line.  So they have passed a certain state, they have some revenue.  So it makes it interesting again for a new group of investors.  And it makes it also more eligible for an investment company.  
**[0:29:55-0:30:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:29:55):**  And I think secondly for us, if we want to work with these organizations, they need capital  and they don't need all the capital upfront, but you know, to start up and going into a  new direction and expand the business.  If you have some money ready and you don't have to, because with this spice company,  Trien, the challenge was that we didn't have the money upfront.  
**[0:30:19-0:30:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:30:19):**  And I think it would have saved us about half of the time.  So about eight or nine months in all of the trajectory.  If we would have had the money or at least part of the money to make an initial investment  and close a deal and get on.  So the GIC is the combination of investing, but also with an active support arm.  
**[0:30:42-0:30:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:30:42):**  And that's what I've said in the past, a lot of investors wouldn't step into a company.  Although we see a company with a lot of potential and a great entrepreneur.  But a spice company in Tanzania is far away from any.  Other investors see two guys that see a lot of risks.  They think, okay, they see books being, you know, there's this difference.  
**[0:31:11-0:31:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:31:11):**  Admin is not there.  It's not there.  The admin is missing behind the books or yeah, organic certification is now pending for a  while or and yeah, especially in every case.  It gives you the investor, it gives the opportunity to step into a structure.  
**[0:31:33-0:31:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:31:33):**  Can we call it a fund?  No, it's not a fund like a structure that then invest in turn, invest in these kind  of the spice example, the pepper example we just mentioned, and then more like you invest  in a portfolio of these kind of companies and add of course, a lot of support.  I mean, it's not just putting a few hundred thousand in spices and then good luck.  
**[0:31:53-0:31:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:31:53):**  No, I mean, what you mentioned now, it's the full thing on restructuring, on admin, on  organic certification, on region, on the ground, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.  But do you call it the fund?  Like how do you call it as a structure?  Yeah, we call it an investment company because it's doing more than simply investing.  
**[0:32:13-0:32:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:32:13):**  But it is also a bit of fund alike.  So you can, if you call it a fund, but we always try to frame it as a company because  it's a traditional company is a traditional funds.  You know, people thinking about express that management fees and this, but there's a lot  of funds, traditional funds active in Africa, and I think they're missing out on a lot of  
**[0:32:38-0:32:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:32:38):**  opportunities.  Because they're not investment ready yet.  Not investment ready.  And you see a lot of Western EU entrepreneurs and don't get me wrong, TechFlow and I are  part of it that they want to make an impact and why can you make an impact in Africa?  
**[0:32:56-0:33:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:32:56):**  And they have a lot of things in order, you know, when it comes to reporting strong strategy  plans, strong business plans, strong impact plan.  How do you get there?  But they, and also struggle on you know, getting operations up.  You know, in Africa, it's not the business plan that is the biggest challenge of making  
**[0:33:17-0:33:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:33:17):**  a good business plan to be because that challenge is a good execution and you need a strong  local team.  So I would argue that's almost everywhere the case, but that's like, it's very nice.  Everything sounds nice on PowerPoint, but especially in agriculture, like the context  locally, like if you, it sounds nice on PowerPoint to do certain things in Australia, but good  
**[0:33:37-0:33:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:33:37):**  luck doing it if you're not deeply embedded there or in Italy or in the Netherlands as  we know well, or in Ecuador.  I mean, this is not running a SaaS platform somewhere that you can almost run, I wouldn't  say from everywhere, but if your internet connection is okay, you sort of can.  This is yeah, you have to dance the local dance, otherwise it's just going to go flat  
**[0:33:59-0:34:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:33:59):**  on your face.  And we've seen many people going flat on their face.  I think you've seen many as well.  So you say they're missing out because it's not in that perfect clean order.  The PowerPoint doesn't make complete sense yet, or is not there, but the business is  
**[0:34:12-0:34:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:34:12):**  there and the opportunity is there.  Yeah.  And maybe I'm also now a bit harsh, but it's also our experience.  And you know, we're very selective in the companies we work with because they have to  fit exactly in the type of experience that we as a team have.  
**[0:34:28-0:34:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:34:28):**  And we are also able to do it and able to see through and focus on these companies because  we have set up very similar companies.  We can't do this in a different sector or we can't do it in the energy sector.  There's probably maybe some entrepreneurs there as well, but we wouldn't be able to  do it because we don't have that specific experience.  
**[0:34:51-0:34:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:34:51):**  So it's also the experience that allows us to make some blends between being an investment  company and a business developer.  When it's so specific, are you worried that you're not going to find many?  Like how likely, how many companies are you going to have in this company?  What's your, like, is it a five, 10, 50 and how easy is it to find the perfect one?  
**[0:35:20-0:35:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:35:20):**  Not perfect doesn't exist, but like this spice example in like the pepper one, like how big  is your pipeline yet and how many do you need?  Yeah, I have to say I was frightened sometimes to say, is this just a perfect example and  are there many more?  But the goal is to do about one a year, two a year.  
**[0:35:42-0:35:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:35:42):**  Now especially in the early days, about one a year.  And it's two ways that we have to make sure we also get a success out of the businesses  that are part of the investment company.  But I think we can close a second year before the end of the year.  I'm not going to deep into that, into the tea business.  
**[0:36:06-0:36:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:36:06):**  And I'm actually surprised.  We set up a business development team or pipeline team set up a temporarily office in East Africa.  So they switch a bit around Africa, set up temporarily offices and operate from that  location for six to eight weeks.  So that's also maybe answering a bit of your question, how we find them.  
**[0:36:30-0:36:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:36:30):**  Yeah, I was a bit relieved to see so many of these companies in our sweet spot.  And I am now very confident that we can do more than one a year if we raise the capital.  But in the end, it's not about the total volume.  I think we take it step by step, company by company.  But I think if we would bring it up to five, six over the coming four years about then,  
**[0:36:59-0:37:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:36:59):**  I think we're doing very well.  It's also companies with significant opportunities for scaling.  So that can absorb, you know, maybe initially need between 300 to $500,000 investment, but  eventually can absorb three to $5 million investment within the next five to 10 years.  So because there's a huge amount of supply available on either of these companies we're  
**[0:37:25-0:37:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:37:25):**  looking into.  Yeah, and the market for teas, spices, coffee, cacao, but also mixed farm operations are  some of the operations we now look into.  These markets are so big.  So there's, for now there's enough opportunity and it's finding the right entrepreneur I  
**[0:37:46-0:37:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:37:46):**  think is more important.  And yeah, so far so very, very proud of the achievements of that of our pipeline team.  I think it's super impressive also how not only finding them, but also working together  with them to jointly make a business plan to present to our investment board into the  investment company.  
**[0:38:12-0:38:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:38:12):**  So that's amazing.  And you mentioned the investor side.  How is that going?  How are investors responding to a fund not being a fund?  And because you said this was partly because investors have difficulty investing directly  
**[0:38:28-0:38:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:38:28):**  into these companies, unless they're really on the ground, unless they understand everything  and then they probably potentially don't need you.  How is that being raising capital for, not for one company that you've always done until  now, but for a different suite of companies and a number of unknown companies yet.  You can raise of course, for the Pepperone, for Ground Ingredients and Honeybush, but  
**[0:38:52-0:38:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:38:52):**  not for a few others yet.  They're not known yet.  Yeah, maybe tea.  But so how has that journey been or how has that switch been for you to start raising  this capital?  
**[0:39:01-0:39:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:39:01):**  Yeah, there's been a huge range of different viewpoints, reactions, obviously.  But one of the luxuries we have is that we have a couple of partners that really walked  the journey alongside.  I think you once gave us a couple of years or five years ago, the advice to bring some  investors into your theatre, keep them up, take them along the journey.  
**[0:39:29-0:39:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:39:29):**  And so now part of the outcome of the journey is they said, no, don't raise too much capital  up front.  Go with an anchor investment, raise an investment to your first investment and raise a bit more  investment when you have another opportunity.  So we do more case by case with each round raising a bit more than we need.  
**[0:39:47-0:39:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:39:47):**  So slowly but surely working with larger rounds so we don't spend so much time.  So that means you raised the one for the spices and now you're going to start talking about  the tea potentially, but you have a bit of time to do that.  But of course, you want to have the money sort of almost ready when you go because otherwise  you have the same problem as before where you had to wait for the money to come and  
**[0:40:09-0:40:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:40:09):**  the company wanted to move.  So it's chicken and egg.  Yeah, that's what we call the product market do.  It's always what comes first and you have to build them simultaneously.  And that's what we're doing.  
**[0:40:21-0:40:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:40:21):**  And I think it's been, yeah, it's just we're just a bit lucky that, you know, the winds  are full in the sails on the first opportunity and on the pipeline.  So yeah, sometimes you need to be a bit lucky.  And since those things going really well, we can it's easier.  It gets more traction, becomes more tangible.  
**[0:40:46-0:40:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:40:46):**  But we see we have a couple of investors that for which we still too small.  So, you know, there's huge amounts of money from each source is committed to Africa, but  that allows for larger ticket size.  We are still very conservative in what we promise.  We don't want to overpromise.  
**[0:41:04-0:41:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:41:04):**  So we initially said about four to seven percent net return, meaning that two out of five companies  need to be successful.  But given now seeing how it goes, the type of pipeline and where these companies stand,  I think it's more realistic to assume that three or four out of five companies are going  to succeed or not that three out of five companies would have to liquidate after a second or  
**[0:41:28-0:41:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:41:28):**  a third round of investment.  So we've been very conservative, too conservative, I think, in our first instances, also driven  by our own experiences and knowledge.  And we know how difficult it is.  No.  
**[0:41:41-0:41:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:41:41):**  So I think we've always had a bit of a model try to.  Yeah.  On the promise over deliver.  And I think we've now that's that's maybe scared of maybe we've been too conservative.  So we've been more optimistic there.  
**[0:41:59-0:42:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:41:59):**  But still, they're promising about 10 percent net return to investors for going into in  Africa.  That's that's still not super high, although there is potential that it can be much higher.  But, yeah, we all know what happens.  It can be a regime change or everything can happen.  
**[0:42:19-0:42:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:42:19):**  We've seen it all.  Severe droughts.  Look at the north of Kenya.  If that happens in one of our areas, then, yeah, there's not a lot we can do.  So but basically what it comes down to is that a lot of the huge amounts of money are  
**[0:42:36-0:42:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:42:36):**  basically become unavailable because they're distributed from funds to funds to funds.  So even if their impact and let's say, two, three percent or four percent return target  on the top, when it's filtered down to the smaller investment funds with management layer  after management layer, you know, they already need 15 to 20 percent return.  So we really target family offices, people that want to combine financial return with  
**[0:42:59-0:43:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:42:59):**  impact return.  We are not there yet that we can provide the same financial return as the traditional private  equity and deliver on the impact.  We we don't see that realistically happen in the short term.  So that means you get a lot of impact through these businesses.  
**[0:43:20-0:43:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:43:20):**  But it also has a different risk profile as well.  I mean, there's a different risk profile there.  I think people really under I mean, you're selling real stuff.  It's there will be demand for coffee, tea, spices, etc.  If you're in a private equity fund, the risk is that nothing comes back in.  
**[0:43:37-0:43:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:43:37):**  I mean, the risk profile of certain payment app software things, etc. is very, very, very  different.  So I don't think it's very fair.  Plus, I mean, in agriculture, people have to understand where we're operating in very  degraded landscapes where we extracted a lot of value over the last, let's say, hundreds  
**[0:43:54-0:43:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:43:54):**  or in many cases, thousands of years.  So there is a I wouldn't say a debt to pay, but there is a debt to pay there.  There is money that needs to be resources, compost, organic matter, whatever you want  to call it, that needs to flow back into that we cannot extract immediately or maybe we  cannot extract ever.  
**[0:44:09-0:44:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:44:09):**  So there is something there on returns that if somebody promised you 25% on regen ag,  I would ask a lot of questions.  And because there is a debt to pay, we have to replenish the soils we have extracted so  much and the communities we've extracted so much value and capital from.  So let's not kid ourselves.  
**[0:44:31-0:44:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:44:31):**  And a return is possible, but it's not going to be 20 plus, 30 plus or whatever the amount  is, unless you maybe are in some technology companies.  I mean, there, I see some possibilities for a short amount of time.  We had an interesting interview with Mark Lewis of Trailhead Capital hunting for unicorns,  but then you have, you're investing in a very, very narrow, I'll put the link below, in a  
**[0:44:53-0:44:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:44:53):**  very, very narrow part of the regen ag movement.  If you're an ag, yeah, it's going to be different.  I mean, I think a full grown old forest has a growth rate of 3% or something.  So that might be the optimum at some point when ecosystems are mature, that's what we  can harvest.  
**[0:45:10-0:45:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:45:10):**  And that's it.  And, but let's not kid ourselves with crazy returns, but I imagine that's very, very difficult  for you having to explain that to your investors and say, yeah, but I can go somewhere else  and get this, of course, on paper, I get at XYZ, et cetera, et cetera.  So it's a, yeah, it's a difficult dance.  
**[0:45:27-0:45:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:45:27):**  Yeah, 100%, but that's also why you and your podcast is so important.  And I think that's a good thing to spread this message over and over and that it's not  only coming from us, but from a lot of different persons.  So that's helping us tremendously.  So please, please keep spreading that word.  
**[0:45:51-0:45:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:45:51):**  And we are trying to show that risks are lower because in the end value is total return or  profits and risks.  And with our approach, we try to de-risk investors.  We do have investors that say, yeah, I was hesitant to make the step to Africa.  You know, it's still this, this idea that you know, that people in Africa, it's difficult  
**[0:46:15-0:46:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:46:15):**  sometimes.  Can you trust people in Africa?  If I'm sometimes at a party and say, can you trust them?  And then I tell them, well the biggest challenge that we ever had was a European company that  didn't promise on buying the produce at the price they promised.  
**[0:46:32-0:46:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:46:32):**  And later on, they turned out to use fraud scandal into that in that company.  And so I said our biggest, we have ever been, you know, what's a decent word, screwed over  and you have a decent, sorry, apologies, but scammed, scammed was with a European company.  And if you have the right procedures in place and we've been around the whole.  That's of course the issue that a lot of the money is far away outside Africa.  
**[0:47:02-0:47:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:47:02):**  We keep talking about like, it's one country beyond the continent, let's say, because it  has been extracted in the past.  It sits in very shiny offices, very far away from the place where it has been extracted.  And are you working with local family offices, local, I mean, African family offices, South  Africa and Zambia.  
**[0:47:19-0:47:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:47:19):**  Like, is that something that is happening on the impact side, something that you of  course would love to, because they are much closer to the reality and you don't have to  explain these kinds of things at parties.  Like, is that something that starts to rise as well?  Like there are local money flowing into these kinds of things?  
**[0:47:38-0:47:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:47:38):**  More and more, a lot of the African wealth is still first generation.  And I think if you look back to European family offices, you see significant differences through  generations.  Actually today there's an article in the newspaper about it and the challenge and invite into  traditional family offices between generations.  
**[0:47:58-0:48:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:47:58):**  But especially in South Africa, you see with new generations, yeah, you see the change  and actually we've just raised our first investment capital from South African family offices.  One of actually the largest, I think, South African family offices, they invested in our  Honeybush company with a very flexible instrument because they see, they want to change how  we sell our businesses, how we run businesses in Africa.  
**[0:48:29-0:48:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:48:29):**  And they say that this Honeybush company provides a great opportunity to build a new industry  and to build it in a different way.  We've talked about Honeybush in the past in our previous podcast, so I won't go into detail  too much.  But, you know, these are family offices that, yes, for generations have been working in  
**[0:48:52-0:48:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:48:52):**  Africa and have been successfully investing throughout the continent.  They are 100% aware of the trade-offs about and they see not only the risks, but also  the opportunities.  And, yeah, I've once met a family office, another Dutch family office, they were one  of the first who went to China.  
**[0:49:15-0:49:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:49:15):**  Yeah, and they now look to Africa and they see opportunities.  But I think that's still a small amount, a smaller group.  But what helps is that the younger generation really sees Africa also for its potential,  but also for its impact potential.  But just the differences between the groups are huge and I think the vast majority still  
**[0:49:43-0:49:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:49:43):**  is probably run by people over, you know, that are more senior than you and I, let's  say, more experienced than you and I.  That's not annoying to many people listening to this.  Yeah, but there is definitely in the family office business.  Because our 60 year old spice trading partner is a front-rider.  
**[0:50:04-0:50:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:50:04):**  Usually with age, there is, I mean, with different generations and with age, there is logically  because you are older, there is a certain resistance against change, a certain resistance  against we always have done things like this.  So we are always doing things like that.  I think many farmers who are listening can attest to that if they're talking to their  
**[0:50:23-0:50:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:50:23):**  different generations, let's say their parents, and unless you had very, very forward thinking  or crazy parents, even organic is already tricky or messy fields are not the way we  do it.  Like the season only ends in the Netherlands, that's a nice saying, when the plow is cleaned  and stored away and all the fields are nicely dark and turned.  
**[0:50:44-0:50:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:50:44):**  And that's the same in family office in managing money.  Every shift in, oh, let's look beyond risk and return and also to impact is a very fundamental  shift.  And it's not going to be easy for most people to join that if you've done differently for  20, 30, 40 years.  
**[0:51:00-0:51:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:51:00):**  I mean, let's not get ourselves.  And if you're a grown up in a different way and you've traveled the world and you've seen  what other ways are there, of course, and you're 30, then it's very, very different.  Not easy because you might not have the control.  But yeah, you can definitely be sort of the quote unquote activist shareholder that with  
**[0:51:17-0:51:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:51:17):**  a very small percentage of the shares, try to move the gigantic company or the family  office or the gigantic farm.  I think the models are all the same.  Yeah.  I think there's a big role for family offices that are front runners on this to show other  
**[0:51:35-0:51:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:51:35):**  family office how they are doing it, how they engage with the different generations and  different models and how they slowly transition.  And we try to get them to go out and visit our businesses.  We say, just come out and see, see for yourself.  I can't.  
**[0:51:53-0:51:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:51:53):**  I remember last time we talked like there's a 100% success rate when people visit.  Like then it's yeah, you cannot not invest after.  Not that because you forced them to, but because it's so interesting and you fall in love with  the companies.  So that's, but yeah, South Africa, Zambia, Tanzania is far literally and figuratively.  
**[0:52:10-0:52:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:52:10):**  So especially in these crazy COVID years, it's been difficult to travel, but you're  hopefully you're getting a few people are like, let's say they're on the fence to come  over, see it.  And then, and then they can sign and get some money flowing back into the continent and  back into the soil.  
**[0:52:26-0:52:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:52:26):**  Yeah.  But I have to say it's what you say.  People come, they often invest.  But that's also the challenge because the people that are more, that are actually thinking  upfront, Hey, I'm going, this is a serious opportunity.  
**[0:52:40-0:52:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:52:40):**  They come and then, but I want people to come out that are really doubting.  Then I really think, Hmm, I'm not sure.  I don't think this getting those people to commit time out of their busy lives to visit.  And hopefully I can join them with a nice safari or visiting big falls or whatever.  Try to, to get them out and to see for themselves.  
**[0:53:00-0:53:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:53:00):**  And I think that's for us one of the challenges because it is so far away.  And to see the difference between, between the farmers.  But also it is challenging because I've also been on some of these trips and have seen  only the good stuff.  And I think we also, we've also, I've also seen, yeah, family officers say, yeah, we've,  
**[0:53:27-0:53:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:53:27):**  we've done trips of this and you only see the good things and you don't see the bad  things.  So yeah, this comes to the good, the bad and the ugly, but to everybody bringing people  out show reality because we now seriously have people say, yeah, we've, we've done this  in the past.  
**[0:53:43-0:53:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:53:43):**  We were super enthusiastic and we super disappointed by the actual results.  So it's also something that's coming to us as an industry.  Of course.  And I want to be conscious of your time.  We can talk for hours on the good, the bad and ugly and much more, but just as a very  
**[0:53:57-0:54:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:53:57):**  brief recap, how is Grounded Ingredients as we promised during this interview, how is  that going?  It launched after we talked last time.  What has been happening with, what is first of all Grounded Ingredients and what has been  happening the last, let's say 13 months?  
**[0:54:12-0:54:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:54:12):**  Yeah.  No, yeah.  Grounded Ingredients was for us a way to basically change a bit of the current middle segment  in the value chain.  The current wholesale companies, these companies are, especially for example, in Germany, there's  
**[0:54:32-0:54:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:54:32):**  a tremendous amount of family companies that buy produce from all over the world, blend  it, get it up to a minimum standard and sell it.  Now if you are, they provide a great low cost, reliable, same tasting, meeting minimum standards  product.  We're talking about tea or what are we talking about?  
**[0:54:55-0:55:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:54:55):**  We talk about tea, we talk about spices, we talk about the high-end cash crops.  Yeah.  Yeah.  And with coffee, the good thing about coffee, it's, in your podcast is often referred to  and we refer to it in one of our previous podcasts, like the winification of the industry.  
**[0:55:13-0:55:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:55:13):**  So you see coffee from a certain source, a certain farm, a certain...  You're trying to basically supply the next winification of the things after the coffee  bean, like bean to bar, the whole movement.  The biggest drive for the transition to Regen Agri is quality and the current system doesn't  give a much better price for a better quality.  
**[0:55:42-0:55:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:55:42):**  We as Rauner are not a business to consumer people, so to speak, but there's amazing brands  that want to play a big part in changing the food system and over the whole.  So from Kombucha to tea brands to coffee brands, they do an amazing work, spreading work, but  they hit so many barriers for them to source.  You know, coffee companies, one thing, but the tea company, any tea brands, maybe they  
**[0:56:10-0:56:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:56:10):**  have 50 to 100 ingredients in their portfolio.  So how do they source it?  We initially set up grounded ingredients to provide a platform for some of the suppliers  and processing companies in South Africa that we were inspired by.  We've came across so many also in a pipeline where not all of them, you know, we work together  
**[0:56:34-0:56:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:56:34):**  with, but we were super inspired about the impact, the agricultural progress that they  make from super innovative Roybal's farmer to a super innovative beekeeping farmer, which  tried to try to get organic, which is almost impossible for beekeeping for many, many multiple  reasons.  But we wanted to provide them a platform and that was a start of grounded ingredients.  
**[0:57:00-0:57:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:57:00):**  But now it's actually that's more of a showroom.  But what the result has been is that especially from the US and from some EU brands, we are  now talking to take off part of their sourcing.  So we become more than...  They outsource the sourcing to EU basically like for this part of our portfolio of ingredients  
**[0:57:20-0:57:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:57:20):**  that I need to buy, which is not just this type of tea, but it's also all the other ingredients  because I'm making these funny mixes and infusions, etc.  Like please source it for us with the high quality standards and all the agriculture  practices and the good stories because obviously these brands need stories, but it's not that  they can do 50 tea ingredients throughout Southern Africa or East Africa.  
**[0:57:42-0:57:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:57:42):**  That's impossible for...  It's possible for the Unilevers of this world, but not for these smaller, very mission focused.  It's not that they have people just doing that.  That's not relevant for them.  So they end up sourcing from the commodity side of things, which is a shame because that's  
**[0:57:57-0:57:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:57:57):**  not why they started.  So they basically outsource.  They basically tell you, okay, this part of the portfolio, please go and find it.  And you say, okay, let's get going.  That's it.  
**[0:58:08-0:58:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:58:08):**  And then we try to bundle it.  Obviously, we pick our customers at this stage to see, okay, where's the overlap in portfolio  so that one or two sourcing managers can check it.  We also started providing some of our region, every team capacity to these suppliers by  these buyers paying a small premium on it.  
**[0:58:28-0:58:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:58:28):**  That goes to our region agri team.  We've also have a...  That's another thing we set up our own region agri finance, transition finance facility  to do more research and more support to these types of supplies.  Also subsidize that a bit where we raise some money from other family offices to subsidize  
**[0:58:45-0:58:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:58:45):**  that.  But indeed they say, okay, this is our sourcing list.  Yeah, we want to be traceable.  Two out of 50 products are now traceable.  There's not.  
**[0:58:57-0:59:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:58:57):**  And then we say, okay, we know that these products we have in our portfolio, we know  good suppliers or for these products, we think we can find good suppliers.  And yeah, then we take on a bit of a more traditional role and we say, we buy it, we  store it, we bundle it, we ship it, and we keep it ready for you when you need it.  But we try to combine it with full transparency and saying, this is what we've bought from  
**[0:59:19-0:59:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:59:19):**  the farmers, this is our cost, this is our market fee, this is our fee for the region  agri facility.  And yeah, we've been inspired by some of the businesses to come up with a name that they  say, if you source enough, you go directly to your customer, but we believe that we can  add a lot of value.  
**[0:59:37-0:59:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=0:59:37):**  So there's obviously conflict between sometimes our wholesale company and you would say between  some of our operating companies.  But what we see is that our wholesale companies often much better in supplying these companies  and cheaper and more affordable because they bundle the ingredients, bring it all together.  So then it's for our operating companies more interesting to sell via that route.  
**[1:00:01-1:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=1:00:01):**  But we also say to the customers, one day, if you want to buy so much of black pepper  and you can go straight to go straight.  So that's a bit of where we work on.  And I think these brands have, if you have your own such a brand, you need to spend 80%  of your time on telling the story, going out to the public.  
**[1:00:22-1:00:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=1:00:22):**  That's time that we don't, that's something we don't do.  You tried that, you were flirting with that years ago.  I remember you were flirting with that, but decided that's not your role.  No, it's amazing.  I think for, I see amazing work in the Netherlands for livestock farmers that have their own  
**[1:00:40-1:00:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=1:00:40):**  milk fresh to the market, but with these longer chains, chains that we are involved in and  the wide range of products.  And because I'm not an Instagram person, maybe.  So yeah, somebody else needs to do that.  And everybody has a role to play.  
**[1:01:03-1:01:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=1:01:03):**  And you know, even if we would have a successful own brand, there's so much volume here, maybe  0.1% of the volume.  But if there's hundreds of brands, you know, using our ingredients and using, well, not  our ingredients, the ingredients of, you know, some of the top suppliers, and we do have  the skills to assess them.  
**[1:01:20-1:01:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=1:01:20):**  We do have the skills to support the supplies.  We do have the skills to test the produce.  We do have the skills to support them on certification, to support them in the transition.  Yeah.  Let us try and focus on that.  
**[1:01:32-1:01:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=1:01:32):**  It's also an interesting pipeline for our go model.  Yeah.  And if you can connect to markets, I mean, everything changes.  Markets, good prices, okay payment schemes, plus transition, a bit of transition finance  support.  
**[1:01:49-1:01:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=1:01:49):**  And I mean, but yeah, good off-take agreements, good markets, focus on quality and of course,  margin back to the farmers and to the land changes the game.  Like there's no question on that.  Yeah.  And last release, we were raising about three to 400K for this for grounded ingredients.  
**[1:02:09-1:02:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=1:02:09):**  And yeah, it started off more as a platform, but now the good thing is it's more demand  driven.  So we take up a bit of funding, you know, as soon as we need more working capital and  more clients come in.  So there's immediate off-take.  
**[1:02:21-1:02:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=1:02:21):**  So that de-risk that whole business a lot and make sure that the portfolio creation  is much more demand driven.  Yeah.  And it's nice that sometimes, you know, the optimist beats the perfectionist, you know,  we've just started this and we thought, let's put them on the website and people started  
**[1:02:44-1:02:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=1:02:44):**  to buy samples.  And actually, I think most of the sales via the website with samples and then people say,  yeah, but we actually need this and this.  And then we became more of that wholesale company, but more demand driven.  And I think that, yeah, that's all been in a timeframe of about six months that you were  
**[1:03:04-1:03:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=1:03:04):**  running that you go into this and that is almost all 80% of our time and effort to go  to meet the demands for these, some of these clients.  And that's a super mobile luxury to have.  And again, it's a great problem to have.  Yeah.  
**[1:03:20-1:03:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=1:03:20):**  Yeah.  That's yeah.  And, you know, these companies, they value, you know, the origin, they value if there's  differences and if there's a better quality, they don't mind if there's a different taste  of it, there's different vintage for the tea.  
**[1:03:33-1:03:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=1:03:33):**  If there's day-spreading.  The winification again.  Yeah.  The winification.  And, ah, it's a relief to work with, with, with these, these people that really dive  
**[1:03:45-1:03:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=1:03:45):**  into the details and try to understand and come to visit.  But, um, uh, that's if you, how, if you ask me, how do you keep up yet also the energy  of these people to make a change and to spread the word and to tell the story and to provide  people with the best tea or the best products.  And if they then come to work with you on their ingredients, yeah, that gives so much  
**[1:04:09-1:04:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=1:04:09):**  energy.  So that's, um, yeah.  So yeah, it started a bit of an in-house trial, the small scale with a couple of team members  that came up with it and now it's growing like that.  So that's, uh, that's just super, um, super to see.  
**[1:04:25-1:04:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=1:04:25):**  And then you see that the whole industry is changing because I think if we would have  done something similar six, seven years ago, it wouldn't have taken off this way.  The brands would not have asked for this.  And, um, some research, if you see that, that the whole top segment is that growth is taken  off by these type of front runners, you see that the world is changing and that, uh, the  
**[1:04:51-1:04:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=1:04:51):**  new generations, they want a different product.  And, uh, yeah, if we can get great ingredients with full transparency, um, and, and support  these producers with a constant, you know, continuous improvement on Regen Agri because  the nice thing about Regen Agri, you're never finished.  You can always do it.  
**[1:05:10-1:05:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=1:05:10):**  It just theoretically means the quality is never done as well.  Like the winification will continue into, yeah, you're never done reaching, reaching  for the top.  I want to thank you so much guys for this, for this update.  It's not the last time we're talking, you will be back.  
**[1:05:23-1:05:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=1:05:23):**  Um, and with other people of the team as well, there's so much to, to unpack here as this  model has been, uh, and the work at Grounded has been, I wouldn't say shifting, but like  morphing into different forms and shapes.  Every time we talk to you, you've made so many steps forward and a few steps backwards  to learn.  
**[1:05:40-1:05:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=1:05:40):**  Um, so thank you so much for your time and good luck and we'll check in soon.  Yeah, thanks.  Thanks for having us again, not having me this case again, uh, Koon, but, um, yeah,  I would love to come back in maybe a year's time to, uh, to tell more about how we're  doing and keep all of your listeners informed about, uh, the progress and the next hurdles  
**[1:06:00-1:06:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=1:06:00):**  and do's that we jumped through.  Thank you so much for listening all the way to the end.  For the show notes and links we discussed in this episode, check out our website investing  in regenerativeagriculture.com forward slash posts.  If you liked this episode, why not share it with a friend or give us a rating on Apple  
**[1:06:19-1:06:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=1:06:19):**  podcasts that really helps.  Thanks again and see you next time.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  
**[1:06:49-1:06:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=1:06:49):**  Why are we doing this course after a hundred interviews and more than a hundred hours of  audio asking the question how to put money to work in regenerating soils and I've been  following the space since 2011 and recording these podcasts since 2016 we thought it was  time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  
**[1:07:07-1:07:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=1:07:07):**  How have we built our decision making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  What questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  
**[1:07:17-1:07:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=1:07:17):**  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  
**[1:07:25-1:07:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=1:07:25):**  You, the soil builders and investors in this space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management, consultants, et cetera,  et cetera.  
**[1:07:43-1:07:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=1:07:43):**  People that are building soil at scale and the investors who are putting their own money  to work through their family office or as private individuals or people who are putting  other people's money to work through foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies,  et cetera.  Is this course free?  
**[1:07:59-1:08:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=1:07:59):**  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you.  And I'm very aware that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very  different means.  
**[1:08:12-1:08:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=1:08:12):**  So I'm inviting you if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides.  
**[1:08:28-1:08:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=1:08:28):**  So you don't have to ride along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in and what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could  find if you're a soil builder.  
**[1:08:47-1:08:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=1:08:47):**  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  
**[1:09:03-1:09:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=1:09:03):**  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking, click on  
**[1:09:20-1:09:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/gijs-boers#t=1:09:20):**  the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  