### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2022-00-21)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  What does regenerative investing look like?  We talk a lot on this podcast about where to put money to work in soil regeneration,  
**[0:00:21-0:00:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:00:21):**  soil measuring technology, food as medicine companies, compost companies, virtual fencing,  etc.  But we rarely talk about the how.  How do we put money to work using regenerative principles in service of life and the companies  instead of extracting as much value out of the companies in the shortest amount of time?  
**[0:00:39-0:00:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:00:39):**  Today we have an interview with the team that doesn't want to become the largest fund in  regeneration but the most radical one.  This is the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast.  Investing as if the planet mattered.  Where we talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space to learn more on  
**[0:01:00-0:01:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:01:00):**  how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities and ecosystems  while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why my focus on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land and our sea, grow our food, what we eat, wear and consume.  
**[0:01:20-0:01:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:01:20):**  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  To make it easy for fans to support our work, we launched our membership community and so  many of you have joined us as a member.  Thank you.  
**[0:01:35-0:01:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:01:35):**  If our work created value for you and if you have the means and only if you have the means,  consider joining us.  Find out more on gumroad.com slash investinginregenag.  That is gumroad.com slash investinginregenag.  Or find the link below.  
**[0:01:55-0:01:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:01:55):**  Welcome to another episode today with Thomas Hagenhaun, manager and partner of Planetary,  an evergreen investment vehicle based in Denmark.  Welcome, Thomas.  Thank you so much.  Thanks for having me.  
**[0:02:05-0:02:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:02:05):**  And I'm laughing because I'm for sure I butchered your surname, which I practiced in the prequel  and I was okay at it.  And now it didn't, it didn't come out.  Anyway, I'm sorry for that.  But so thank you so much for taking the time this morning to share with us, to talk with  
**[0:02:17-0:02:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:02:17):**  us about your journey into evergreen, I think with some investors, some bells are starting  to ring, but with evergreen investments, and what regenerative investments look like in  the space.  But to start with a personal question, we always love to ask, how did you end up because  I don't think you have a farming background as in you manage the farm or you were deep  
**[0:02:36-0:02:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:02:36):**  in the soil?  Like how did you end up spending quite a bit of time focusing on companies that are looking  after soil or indirectly building soil?  Like how did so become such a focus in your life?  Yeah, I don't think I would have predicted I would end up here.  
**[0:02:54-0:02:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:02:54):**  Based on my history, it's much more growing up in a city and, and sitting behind a computer  for many years.  And I've been part of a Danish tech company that went well.  But I think the first thing that really got me in this direction was Jonathan Serpent  Foer's Eating Animal in 2009, 2010.  
**[0:03:11-0:03:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:03:11):**  And I really just like his like his fiction.  So I also read Eating Animals, and I didn't really know what was waiting in it.  I don't even think I knew it was nonfiction.  But it really struck me very hard about how alienated we were in terms of the animals  we're eating.  
**[0:03:30-0:03:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:03:30):**  So, so after that, I've been much more conscious about the food production system.  But I didn't really do anything about it professionally other than eating whalers meat.  Then I was part of a company that had an IPO in 2018 in Denmark, and I stopped after that  to do something else.  And I didn't really know what to do.  
**[0:03:51-0:03:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:03:51):**  So I went back to university to teach a class on entrepreneurship.  And I told the students they could work on whatever problem they felt was important.  And I didn't really have any expectations about what what they would work on.  I thought maybe something about a Shopify shop or something for the Friday Bar, but  but all of them chose a development goal and most of them within climate or biodiversity.  
**[0:04:18-0:04:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:04:18):**  So so it was like a very clear eureka moment to me that the smartest young people up here,  if you gave them the chance to work on a problem, they chose something about the climate crisis  of biodiversity crisis.  And I knew enough about the early stage investors up here to know that they were not necessarily  concerned about that, that sustainability to them was a cost and something to be, you  
**[0:04:44-0:04:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:04:44):**  know, avoided if we could and not the driver of the business.  So I started myself investing in in some green startups up here that some of them focusing  on food, others were more tech tech place.  And then we then I met into the founders of the Danish organic mailbox company, Orested  and and we did some shout out to the other Thomas for introducing us.  
**[0:05:11-0:05:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:05:11):**  Yes.  Yes.  And and and what I know about soil today is mostly from him and his mindset and his much,  much smarter than I am within soil.  And it's it's been a great privilege to learn from him.  
**[0:05:26-0:05:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:05:26):**  And he's sort of a cheat sheet in terms of of of learning all this.  So the first thing we did was that they had made some community gardens outside their  office and we wanted to try to to spin it out and put it into a company and have many  more community gardens.  So so that was my plunge into to learning a little bit of farming and how to to grow  
**[0:05:50-0:05:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:05:50):**  not really at scale.  It's very small scale, a few acres, but still, you know, seeing how much many practicalities  and how difficult and how much of a craft it is to grow anything organically or biodynamically,  let alone regenerative.  And so we did that for some years and then and it's still running and going fine.  
**[0:06:12-0:06:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:06:12):**  And then we talked about that, that I was also running my investments on the side.  And Thomas also wanted to to pay it forward and invest in a new generation of companies.  So we decided to set up planetary as a as a small fund.  And it's it's it's it's by no means the biggest fund.  It's only something like six million euros to begin with.  
**[0:06:37-0:06:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:06:37):**  But but we set it up to support the next generation of companies.  And and it's not only soil and food.  It's we're trying to be regenerative and more in the sort of John Fullerton sense with where  it's broader regenerative economics.  But a lot of it comes down to to soil and food, obviously.  
**[0:06:58-0:07:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:06:58):**  Yeah, of course, with Thomas, the other Thomas on as a co-founder as well, or as an inspirator,  you're going to end up on food and soil very quickly.  And to take a step back to to that university moment, like when you've got all those proposals  or those those business plans or whatever the students end up writing back, like, was  that a moment you thought, oh, this is possible?  
**[0:07:22-0:07:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:07:22):**  Or was it like, oh, they're very idealistic?  They would work on this.  But like, have you been exposed at that moment already to two examples of companies that  were doing these kind of things?  So you your your entrepreneur mind and your investor mind said, OK, wow, actually, they  
**[0:07:37-0:07:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:07:37):**  they want to work on this.  And I see it as a path.  Or did you see it as, oh, these are very idealistic.  This is never going to work because investors and entrepreneurs and the world is not ready  for this.  
**[0:07:48-0:07:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:07:48):**  Or have you been exposed at that point?  Were you already exposed to two examples?  So you could see like, wow, actually, people want to work on this stuff.  And it could it could like this could turn into companies.  Or were you skeptical?  
**[0:08:01-0:08:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:08:01):**  No, I think both all of all of the above here, because they are idealistic.  And you need to be that still.  I think it's often you sort of a derogative to someone who's an entrepreneur and want  to do something good.  But without the ideals, I don't think it really matters that you're not doing the right thing.  
**[0:08:20-0:08:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:08:20):**  I had seen some companies starting to get traction.  It's probably a stretch to call them regenerative because it's such a high bar.  And what we are doing today is where it's our North Star.  But not all of our investments are meeting that very high bar yet.  I think we and it's a ballad that's moving to us.  
**[0:08:40-0:08:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:08:40):**  But but even back then, I could see that that some of them could think about business models  that could actually support the visions.  And if you can do that, then then great.  The other thing you're saying is, are the people ready for it to get mainstream and  know and most things we're doing right now, you know, the market and consumers of governments  
**[0:09:00-0:09:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:09:00):**  are not ready for it.  But but we have to trust that the people who can envision a future that's actually better  and that people will be ready for it at some point.  And you said we're a small fund, only six million.  I think many first time funds would quote unquote kill for that to get started.  
**[0:09:19-0:09:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:09:19):**  But of course, it's like what?  What is different at the fund?  Of course, we're going to talk about a few of the portfolio companies and the future.  But I think there's a very fundamental piece that we need to to unpack.  And I mentioned in the intro already that the evergreen structure side, like why did  
**[0:09:35-0:09:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:09:35):**  you decide to not only innovate on which companies you invest in, which put a very, very high  bar in terms of North Star regeneration, and not just in soil, but on community and everything.  But also, let's let's make our life a bit more difficult and also innovate on the the  fund structure side of things.  Why was that necessary?  
**[0:09:53-0:09:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:09:53):**  Why is that necessary?  And then let's unpack.  Well, it is actually not making my life a little bit more a little bit harder, much  harder to innovate on the fund structure.  But but I went around and asked a lot of the green entrepreneurs up here.  
**[0:10:09-0:10:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:10:09):**  I also wrote a book about green entrepreneurship.  So I talked to the most progressive founders I could find.  And a lot of them, if not all of them, they said that they didn't really like taking investors  with seven or 10 plus two years time horizon because they knew they would be sold and they  wouldn't really be in control about who would own them.  
**[0:10:30-0:10:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:10:30):**  And they really, really feared about the impacts and and all the work they put into this would  just go away if they were sold to a bad industrial player or something like that.  So just to hear because there's there's one sentence in your deck as well.  That's really interesting.  But you're saying that the most interesting founders from your perspective, the most interesting  
**[0:10:50-0:10:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:10:50):**  companies were very reluctant or even not interested at all to take, quote unquote, mainstream  capital, because which means they didn't take it in many cases means they were growing less  than they could or they didn't take they didn't use the tool finance as they could, because  they didn't want to be sold at seven years or five years to somebody that weren't in  control.  
**[0:11:11-0:11:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:11:11):**  That's that's an issue like that's a or an opportunity, obviously, for Europe.  But that means that there's a whole class of of of companies that are not using the  tool of finance because they don't want to be exposed to the risks of it.  Exactly.  And and to me, that's both a problem and different an opportunity.  
**[0:11:30-0:11:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:11:30):**  And and and that's the first problem we wanted to solve was to be a service to those founders  who actually did have a long term thinking and for them to to be able to to be truly  long term thinking, they need a partner and a fund that also has long term thinking.  It's like in the simple math that if we have if you invest in short term thinking, you  can't belong to thinking it doesn't really add up.  
**[0:11:55-0:11:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:11:55):**  So.  So we decided to do that and we're never going to compromise on that.  And that's the first thing we are promising founders that we're never going to fund and  and our time horizon that's that's crossing generations and not not years or a decade or  two.  
**[0:12:13-0:12:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:12:13):**  And and many people also LPs and institutional investors, they really dislike this because  they're not used to it and and they don't really see an easy way out.  And it is more complicated.  But but, you know, we are working on structures to ensure that people can can get their money  out at some point, including myself, if if we need that one day.  
**[0:12:34-0:12:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:12:34):**  But it is it is a tricky thing, but it's also a necessary thing.  I've also seen in the tech industry how bad a short term venture fund can or how much  it can really mess up that that we see so much pressure on founders that are not getting  anxiety is just out of burnout because there is a pressure no one can or very few people  can live under.  
**[0:12:58-0:13:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:12:58):**  We can see how many of the how many of the sort of problems that are externalized because  it doesn't really fit in the time in a short time horizon, especially in Silicon Valley.  I think that that the generation of companies were created there the last 20 years is not  necessarily those who want the next 20 years.  So you're making a case there that there's there's there's no space, let's say, for a  
**[0:13:21-0:13:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:13:21):**  holistic view if you're squeezed to perform towards an IPO or exit in four years, for  five years, whatever, like the next series you need to raise.  And that treadmill leaves out a lot of things that say plus it's very unhealthy for the  founder.  So there is the need for this.  
**[0:13:39-0:13:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:13:39):**  But I would say I would say the founder side of things probably is very interested.  I mean, there's that quote in your in your deck, like one of the companies you invested  in turned down all investors until now, like they probably got a lot of people knocking.  And until now, they always kept it or closed or just listen for a second.  No, we're not interested.  
**[0:13:57-0:13:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:13:57):**  And so now they're interested in you.  And then the question comes, okay, if there's not going to be an exit, and what will the  returns look like for investors?  Like how do investors get, get some return or returns?  Or how do you structure that?  
**[0:14:09-0:14:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:14:09):**  I know there's some other vehicles like Trilos, Hasen and Evergreen Fund, Aquaspark on on  sustainable aquaculture, I used to work there has one, but there are not many that kind.  So you probably have to explain this many times, like how does how does returns work  if we're not going to do crazy IPOs in four or five years?  Yeah, so so one thing we actually trying and it sounds crazy in the venture world, but  
**[0:14:31-0:14:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:14:31):**  it's to have to create and help create a profitable companies.  So wow, like profit profit.  Yeah, yeah, yeah, simple profit.  And then we'll also get a return every year instead of having a big big exit.  So that's one thing we're aiming for.  
**[0:14:47-0:14:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:14:47):**  And we're not saying we'll never sell a company, it will happen because it will be right for  the founders or, or there'll be another fund or another owner that will be even better  than we can be for them.  So so it's not that we will we are against selling but but we will not take the initiative  to make that transaction.  
**[0:15:04-0:15:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:15:04):**  If the founders feel like like they they need to get out and we can find another fund or  investor or industrial buyer that will be the right steward of this idea.  That's great.  Then the perfect bridge, perfect bridge.  What do you think of steward ownership?  
**[0:15:18-0:15:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:15:18):**  Like what's the movement in Germany, especially we had Armin on the podcast, we will link  it below, we absolutely need to recheck in with them the whole purpose driven and getting  that into basically making companies own themselves.  What is how far is that away from you?  How close is it?  
**[0:15:35-0:15:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:15:35):**  Are you cousins, brothers, what's the or sisters like?  What's the thinking on the steward ownership side?  Yeah, so with one of our investments, the only other owner is actually a fund sort of  a non-profit fund that their only role is to own that company.  But they didn't really have any capital.  
**[0:15:55-0:15:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:15:55):**  So they needed someone to come in along with them.  And that's us.  So in that way, we are cooperating and we see ourselves as a great partner to that.  There are some instruments we are looking at that can maybe take us a bit more in that  direction, but it's back to the sort of inventing on the fun side that if we also introduce  
**[0:16:20-0:16:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:16:20):**  that then getting LPs is even harder for us.  You're going to be stuck with 6 million.  Don't innovate too many things, which seems to already happen.  So on the LP side, like how are people responding to this?  You said it's difficult for them, obviously, because they're used to control and used to  
**[0:16:39-0:16:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:16:39):**  exit and liquidity in different ways.  Or I would say even liquidity on paper, like, oh, there's going to be exits, which very  often never materialize.  But in their mind, especially institutional players, obviously, they have the rule books  that they need to follow.  
**[0:16:50-0:16:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:16:50):**  How have been those conversations and has there been some shift?  Like, are you seeing yourself going to 50 or 100 million?  Are you going to be at 20?  Like what's the feeling or at six?  Like what's the feeling with potential investors, LPs in the structure, in the vehicle or the  
**[0:17:10-0:17:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:17:10):**  portfolio?  Yeah, I think a lot is happening here on the sort of high net worth individuals.  We see a big shift right now.  A lot of or increasing number of people with money, they're really longing to invest where  their values are.  
**[0:17:25-0:17:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:17:25):**  And some of it needs to be sort of in liquid stocks.  And I guess the best you can do there is a good ESG screened portfolio.  But you know, no one really gets out of the bed in the morning and look at that ESG screened  index fund and really get excited about that or really feel that they're making a difference.  So we and other funds like some of them you mentioned before, like Aqua Spark, I think  
**[0:17:53-0:18:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:17:53):**  we're much better at making the transition and the impact tangible, telling the stories  and actually letting them be part of what we do.  So some of our LPs are also taking the board seats.  So we spend some time with them saying that how do we wish to contribute to the boards?  What do we expect them to do?  
**[0:18:14-0:18:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:18:14):**  What do we expect our board members to do?  So we see it as a means of empowered participation.  So our LPs can actually contribute in multiple ways to the portfolio companies we're doing.  And that's very important for us and also comes out of regenerative economics is empowered  participation.  
**[0:18:33-0:18:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:18:33):**  So we're working very hard to make sure that everyone around us, they actually get involved  as much as they can and want to be.  And what's the goal?  Yeah, their goal there with like, do you want to keep this small or what's your longer term?  Like in X years, I would like to be at 50 or 100.  
**[0:18:55-0:18:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:18:55):**  Like when does it also make sense economically to run the fund?  Because of course, there are fixed costs on these things.  Yeah.  And I was here at a number of 50 million.  I always hear five zero, but I don't know.  
**[0:19:06-0:19:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:19:06):**  Maybe in this case, it's slightly different.  Like what do you feel like?  Okay, where we be nice to reach level X at some point?  Yeah, I think maybe something like 25 million euros would be a nice place for us to be.  So we really think about our own impact a lot.  
**[0:19:21-0:19:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:19:21):**  And it's not necessarily about being the largest fund that will give us the last impact.  But it is being able to be more radical than the other ones.  And a year ago, we were merely, I would say, focused on sustainability.  Now we're setting the bar to be regenerative.  And we'll probably move that bar once other investors are also moving.  
**[0:19:45-0:19:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:19:45):**  So we see our role as sort of increasing the spectrum about how can you invest and how  close can you get to philanthropy without being it and still being a for profit fund.  And if we get too big or take too many LPs that don't truly believe that, then it will  be impossible for us to have that role.  So we'd rather have less money, but from LPs who actually really want to support and push  
**[0:20:11-0:20:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:20:11):**  us to be more radical in a good way.  And the other question you had about institutional investors, a year and a half ago, no one would  touch us because of the Evergreen Fund.  Some of them are getting back now and saying, oh, okay, maybe that's not really a blocker.  If you like everything else, then let's look at that.  
**[0:20:32-0:20:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:20:32):**  So I think there is a shift there.  And some of the American VCs like, I think, is it Sequoia?  Sequoia, Sequoia set up an Evergreen.  Yeah.  And that really helped shifting the narrative and they're not really doing it in terms of  
**[0:20:48-0:20:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:20:48):**  regeneration or caring about...  No, they see the returns are there in the long run, I think.  The Evergreen structure, like summer returns take 15 years.  And why would you force yourself to exit before if you're purely profit driven, purely money  driven, but also purely impact driven.  
**[0:21:07-0:21:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:21:07):**  I think it makes a lot of sense for many things.  I mean, just looking at soil or agriculture or looking at agroforestry, it takes years  to build up a system.  Why would you want to get out of year eight if it just starts to get interesting?  And I think that some people started to realize like, maybe this structure is actually limiting  
**[0:21:25-0:21:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:21:25):**  us in terms of impact and returns because we have to get out too early.  Yeah, exactly.  And especially when it comes to sustainability and regeneration that so much depends on governments  and new policy.  And who knows when that will come?  
**[0:21:42-0:21:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:21:42):**  Carbon taxes will be very good for our portfolio, for example.  And when they come.  Yeah.  Yeah.  Yeah.  
**[0:21:50-0:21:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:21:50):**  You need to be around.  And maybe this is a bet to wait and be there long enough.  And of course, that's why you focus on profitable companies that when the tides change and tides  turn, I think is the word, and the legislation comes in, which I mean, on food will come  at some point, a lot of these things will switch and then you need to be around.  
**[0:22:11-0:22:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:22:11):**  It shouldn't be like maybe it changes at year 11 and you just exited everything, which is  just from any perspective, not very helpful.  And especially not for the companies and for you as well.  And I don't think it's too hard to predict sort of the direction we're heading and what  will be necessarily, what will not.  
**[0:22:30-0:22:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:22:30):**  It's the timing and when the crisis will come.  So right now we're facing a huge grain crisis, which means so we invested in a company called  a grain, which up cycles spent grains from for brewery.  And they look a lot better when grain is a scarcity because you've sort of taken input  from nothing and turn it into flour.  
**[0:22:52-0:22:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:22:52):**  And we knew that direction would come at some point because we will see more unstable food  production in the future.  But we don't really know when exactly it will happen.  But we know it's directionally right.  But we want to be there long enough for also to see the upside.  
**[0:23:10-0:23:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:23:10):**  Yeah, which is, I'm always, I don't want to quote Nassim Taleb too much, but the antifragility  of a portfolio, like be ready for these kinds of shocks or profit from shocks.  And in this case, a grain price shock, I think the same with wild farmed that, I mean, if  you farm without inputs or mostly without inputs, and if you, then the rest of the bread  sector, I mean, they do a very interesting grain in grown in permanent pasture.  
**[0:23:43-0:23:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:23:43):**  So without any chemical fertilizer, etc.  So suddenly prices of bread are rising and your your bread isn't rising.  So you're almost getting to the same level, while the quality obviously is a completely  different product.  So suddenly, it doesn't create a status quo, but it definitely shocks the rest of the sector  
**[0:23:56-0:23:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:23:56):**  and not you.  And that makes it, I wouldn't say fair, but much more interesting to look at.  And this is not going to be the last time that that happens.  So in terms of like, deal flow, like how I mean, the LP side, I understand is definitely  needs a lot of education and time to get that going.  
**[0:24:13-0:24:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:24:13):**  But how is the deal flow side?  Until now, have you been surprised, excited, disappointed?  What has been the deal flow side of things in terms of is there way more than you could  do?  What's the status on the deal flow side?  
**[0:24:28-0:24:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:24:28):**  Yes, definitely more than we can do.  So that's also the main reason for getting more, raising more money that we actually  have a deal flow that we want to support.  So right now, we can only handle maybe sort of pursuing two, three, four investments at  the same time, and not all of them will go through, but we're still relatively small.  
**[0:24:49-0:24:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:24:49):**  So we get much more in than we can handle.  And some of it we just reject early because we don't really feel we have the domain knowledge  yet.  We're much better in food and agriculture than we are in energy, for example.  So that's not really focused right now.  
**[0:25:06-0:25:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:25:06):**  And it might never be, but it also matters, but others might be better equipped than us  for that.  But we are getting in a lot and our portfolio companies are speaking quite nicely of us,  which also helps others get there.  And we are getting very fast at sort of stages in the industry, at least here in Denmark,  
**[0:25:32-0:25:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:25:32):**  where if you really meaning sustainability and regeneration, then you go to planetary.  So we get those first.  And yeah, so it's a good deal flow.  And we're mostly focusing on Scandinavia right now because it's easier for us.  But we want to increase over time.  
**[0:25:55-0:25:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:25:55):**  Which means the rest of Europe, like as a continent, is that interesting?  Germany, like what would you see as?  Yeah, Scandinavia is big enough for for for 25 million.  We want to support the founders that are that was radical, but also be in Germany as well  or other parts of Europe, but will probably stay to Europe.  
**[0:26:18-0:26:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:26:18):**  We have a broader mandate because we feel that that that we're still very early and  this is very complex.  And we don't want to make too many fixed decision too early because we're also born to like  like all living systems adapt and learn over time.  And I feel it's silly that you make all the most important decisions earliest when you  
**[0:26:42-0:26:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:26:42):**  have the least information, right?  And the least experience.  So that's why we're also really trying to actually give ourselves some degrees of freedom  to to change these things, things over time.  And because you mentioned it's a nice bridge, actually, you mentioned in your deck, we are  
**[0:26:58-0:27:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:26:58):**  in service of life.  Which sounds amazing.  But can you elaborate a bit on that?  Like, what does it mean to you?  Because I've heard that multiple times coming back, but not necessarily in a financial,  
**[0:27:10-0:27:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:27:10):**  like, let's say fundraising deck from a fund, I've heard it from farmers that are deep in  this movement, like, and it's it's this humbleness that that really is interesting, I think,  and then the relationship with nature and being part of nature and in service of life.  But what do you mean by that when when you put it in a fundraising deck?  And then I would love to know, like the reaction from people when you present this in a meeting.  
**[0:27:31-0:27:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:27:31):**  But first, what do you mean by being in service of life?  So right now, we see the economy as something that's sort of transcending life.  It's something even more fundamental than life, something that's that's on a very special  level in our society that that we care so much about our economy and GDP and, and, and  sort of life is in service of our economy that we need our we need to take care of our  
**[0:27:55-0:27:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:27:55):**  economy first, and then the rest will follow.  And we don't think that's the right way to look at it.  So we want our finance and our investments to be in service of life, not the other way  around.  So so so we use money as to support the life and health ecosystems and not try to monetize  
**[0:28:17-0:28:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:28:17):**  them or be extractive of those, but but vice versa.  And I don't know if it's still very vague way to put this, but but that's sort of our  thinking on this.  And when you I mean, it obviously depends on on the audience, but let's say we're in  a theater full full of full of investors, but let's let's say it's a it's an institutional  
**[0:28:45-0:28:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:28:45):**  one and you you present your your picture fund to present it.  Like, do you get questions on that?  Like what does that mean?  Or have you like these institutional investors now call back?  Like, do they have like, oh, this is this sounds really hippie?  
**[0:28:58-0:28:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:28:58):**  Or do they resonate with that?  Like what's the what's been the response?  Have there been surprises in when you go to that level?  Because this is deep.  This is deep regeneration, John Fullerton, regenerative economy stuff that resonates  
**[0:29:10-0:29:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:29:10):**  with some but maybe not with all.  And do you get interesting questions on that?  Well, I am I see a lot of dead eyes, I think and some for really light off.  So let's say that that between five or 15%, they really get this and they really, really  like what I when I say it and I can't really predict who it will be.  
**[0:29:34-0:29:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:29:34):**  Because they they really have sort of a deep longing inside like, oh, someone finally expressed  what I've been thinking.  But then there are all the or some of the the suits who who don't trust me because if  I don't get up in the morning to to make the most money back to investors, how can they  trust me?  
**[0:29:55-0:29:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:29:55):**  You know, and that's sort of the opposite of, you know, being in service to life, then  we are in service to economy.  And the only thing that matters is the returns we're generating.  But but and that's sort of what we need to flip that we need to generate a return.  And but it's not the most important thing.  
**[0:30:11-0:30:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:30:11):**  It's not why we're doing this.  It's a means to an end and not the other way around.  But but but we do get a lot of pushback on that because people think it's too heavy and  thereby the thing that we don't really understand finance or understand anything really.  It's interesting.  
**[0:30:28-0:30:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:30:28):**  And I don't really the same.  Sorry, go ahead.  No, no, it's just it can be a hard place to be because at some point, you know, when enough  people say that, you know, I can feel insecure about this stuff because, like, OK, they're  really getting upset about this.  
**[0:30:43-0:30:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:30:43):**  But but, you know, that's how it is when you come in with a new paradigm, I guess.  But and and, you know, I do understand finance.  So it's not that that I'm stupid.  Right.  But the companies are doing very well.  
**[0:30:54-0:30:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:30:54):**  Like the proof of the pudding is in the eating and like the investments you've made.  A number of interesting investments with your own money.  That's that's I think people underestimate how much skin in the game is is is changing  perspective.  So it's also like I'm doing it this way or we are doing it this way.  
**[0:31:11-0:31:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:31:11):**  It's been successful.  Companies are doing really well.  Like either join us or don't.  But it's not that you don't have to prove anything.  It will know exactly how do you come on board?  
**[0:31:20-0:31:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:31:20):**  You don't.  And that's fine.  Like there's there's there are other LPs.  But I am imagining other potential piece.  I'm imagining it gets tiring at some point.  
**[0:31:28-0:31:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:31:28):**  And what do you do when you start doubting?  Because you just mentioned in the pre-interview, actually, that you're you made the deck less  VC and more radical.  Like is that an expression of that doubt?  Because I don't think if you were doubting too much, you would make it almost a deck  
**[0:31:42-0:31:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:31:42):**  looking like a traditional VC and then a few things like, OK, it's evergreen, etc.  I remember I'm asking because I remember 12 years ago now seeing the first deck of SLM  partners and Tony Lovell and not mentioning soil carbon in there.  And I asked Tony, why?  Why did you do that?  
**[0:31:56-0:31:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:31:56):**  And he said, I want to be taken seriously actually by a Danish pension fund.  It's a small world.  But and the world has changed, I hope, a lot.  Like this is an asset to to be mentioning that we're building soil.  And at that time, it was a crazy hippie thing to even talk about soil, apparently.  
**[0:32:11-0:32:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:32:11):**  Like what was that?  Why why did you want to make the deck more radical and step away from the traditional  VC deck with with a small regenerative source on top?  It actually started after I talked to a family office advisor who really hated what we did.  Like you just talk trash for 30 minutes.  
**[0:32:32-0:32:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:32:32):**  You barely listen.  And they had so many ideas about how bad this was.  And I was actually I talked to some some of the of the people and you who are even more  radical than or at least as radical as I am.  And they sort of picked me up and gave me the confidence that there are enough people  
**[0:32:55-0:32:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:32:55):**  out there just to go for it.  Because trying to do both, it won't work.  You'll get stuck with the with those advisors too much.  So just, you know, meet them with love.  But but don't try to convince them and then then find the people who actually really want  
**[0:33:12-0:33:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:33:12):**  to do this and then go as far as we can in that direction.  So we could only do that after we talked to some people who actually wanted to become  LPs in the sort of most radical world of them.  And and that's been such a big help.  And I think it shows also how much the ecosystem and making these introductions and connections,  
**[0:33:34-0:33:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:33:34):**  it really matters.  And you're doing that a lot.  Other good people are doing that.  And that's really what's, you know, carrying us forward and giving us the audacity to do  this.  
**[0:33:46-0:33:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:33:46):**  Yeah, I think it's an interesting point.  It's better to go more radical and extreme because you don't get stuck in the middle.  Like you don't get mistaken for another sustainability or SDG fund or a climate fund that put a few  put also a pillar of agriculture like under there, but they're not really doing anything  and are still going for for the same extreme returns or extreme speed mostly.  
**[0:34:13-0:34:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:34:13):**  And just be very clear what you're not and what you are.  But yeah, of course, you need confidence to do that.  So luckily you had the ecosystem around you to support you to take that step.  And it's going to be very interesting, I think, to see who comes out of the woodworks that  is interested in this and is able to make investments.  
**[0:34:30-0:34:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:34:30):**  Of course, I mean, there are many radical people, unfortunately, without the portfolios  or wallets to do this kind of investments.  But let's hope there are enough to to kick start this and show what's what's possible  when when investments are done differently.  And I think you're lucky in a sense that there are some other evergreen structures out there.  
**[0:34:48-0:34:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:34:48):**  Sequoia became very like last year, but also, of course, we mentioned Aqua Spark and Tredos  Bank has a fund or Tredos Investment Management.  And so you're not the first.  At least you can point to others like, look, they're still alive.  They're still alive.  
**[0:35:00-0:35:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:35:00):**  They're doing more than fine.  And so there are many investors that invested have seen these documents before that understand,  OK, there's going to be a lockup period and there will be liquidity, but it's not instant  and et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.  So and what would you tell?  
**[0:35:16-0:35:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:35:16):**  Like, let's go back to that theater now.  Let's let's remove all the institutional ones, except the ones that really understand.  So 10 percent stays.  But the rest is filled with investors that are deeply interested in soil, deeply interested  in in regeneration and are wondering about, OK, how do I start regenerative investments?  
**[0:35:32-0:35:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:35:32):**  Apart from, of course, is not investment advice, but getting in touch if you're interested,  if you're in Europe, et cetera.  But if you're what do you want them to think about or do after they leave that theater?  What should be if we're on stage and we should give them some advice to, OK, if you want  to know more about regenerative investments, you want to start questioning how to put the  
**[0:35:50-0:35:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:35:50):**  money to work, not necessarily where, but where is, of course, also a question.  But let's we say convince you about food and great.  Now let's let's say something about how what would be a good first step for somebody that's  interested in different ways of investing?  I think the first step is to understand what returns meet for them, means for them, because  
**[0:36:10-0:36:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:36:10):**  economic returns is one thing they're looking for, but it's maybe not it's certainly not  the only one and it might not be the most important one.  But but what is it?  Is it the natural resources?  Is it a cultural capital?  
**[0:36:23-0:36:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:36:23):**  Is it social capital?  What is most important for them to to sort of to to generate and help generate and give  back?  And once you sort of start seeing that and also trying to understand the connections  between them and that's still something that's emerging in my head, how how social capital  
**[0:36:42-0:36:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:36:42):**  and natural capital are really related in many ways.  And we thought we would be mostly about climate and biodiversity, but you can't really disconnect  it to to or you can't.  But it's it's not right to do it, I think, to sort of climate justice or poverty.  You know, it all gets gets related at some point.  
**[0:37:02-0:37:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:37:02):**  But but you need some focus points about what's important to you.  That's the one thing.  And the other one is maybe a bit more vague, but it is to to sort of try to get get rid  of reductionism and understand that this is very, very complex, that that that that somebody's  pitching me one trick that we can do or one solution that fixes everything in Fudanac.  
**[0:37:26-0:37:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:37:26):**  I shouldn't believe him or her like that.  That's what you're saying.  Yeah, yeah, yeah.  And and try to sort of understand that or just acknowledge that that this will be sort  of a moving target for you, that some of the early and early investments you'll do will  
**[0:37:44-0:37:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:37:44):**  will maybe be too simplistic or you won't be too proud of them 10 years from now because  you either because more founders will create something more interesting or also because  you are your knowledge wasn't deep enough at that point.  But that's OK.  You know, it's about getting getting started and getting to talk to people and understand  
**[0:38:03-0:38:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:38:03):**  the complexity and the businesses in it.  Yeah.  And I know, you know, it's not the typical, you know, two, three, four, five investment  advice, which are really specific because I don't really believe it.  I believe you can.  
**[0:38:17-0:38:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:38:17):**  I think get started is a good one as well.  I don't I mean, if you like what you said, know that the first few might not be perfect,  don't quote, then then you're maybe more comfortable to do them and learn from them.  And as you said, like nobody knows everything at the beginning.  Probably we know very little.  
**[0:38:35-0:38:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:38:35):**  And so as you're on that journey, make sure their feedback looks, make sure you keep an  open mind, make sure.  But yeah, don't.  I see that with many investors in general.  When they start on their impact journey, they wait for the perfect one to come along, which  
**[0:38:49-0:38:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:38:49):**  obviously never does and can take them three years to make a first investment.  And like you just lost three years of learning.  If you made a few investments, smaller ones that I mean, depending on the returns, the  risks, the capital you have available, but learn from doing and risk it all, obviously.  And make sure you have these feedback loops, have the community around you to support you  
**[0:39:10-0:39:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:39:10):**  as well.  And know that the first few when you look back in 10 years might not be the most the  ones you're most proud of.  But who knows?  Maybe they will.  
**[0:39:20-0:39:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:39:20):**  Yeah.  And I might be going out of a limp here.  But one thing that has sort of been been a big thing in my head recently is that that  I think what it really means to to invest regeneratively or trying to is very subjective  because it is very, very complex.  
**[0:39:39-0:39:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:39:39):**  When you get rid of the reductionism, then there are so many different parameters and  it's so interdependent that at least my head can't really, you know, get it all right.  And I think other people, it's the same problem to them.  So so people I really respect and I know they come from the same places I do and they want  the same thing.  
**[0:39:59-0:40:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:39:59):**  We get to radical different conclusions on different investment opportunities.  Is this good or bad?  And it really depends on how you weigh sort of efficiency versus maybe animal welfare.  Or there are different criteria and you can't get them all.  But you're still all going in the right direction.  
**[0:40:18-0:40:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:40:18):**  And I think we have to acknowledge that and not point too many fingers about, oh, but  they invested in that.  And because we are all trying and, you know, no one is investing in coal or fossil fuels  or like no one is doing anything obviously bad.  But but there are different different sort of ideas about what an ideal future looks  
**[0:40:38-0:40:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:40:38):**  like and and the investments will follow from them.  And there's not one right or wrong way to do this.  And if you think there is, then you will never make any investments.  Yeah, probably it's good that there are different views or visions on the future because it  would be a bit odd if we all have the same same vision, the vision about that.  
**[0:40:57-0:40:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:40:57):**  I would start to get worried.  Yeah.  Yeah.  And just just an example that that I talk to to one I respect a lot who invested in  some fish farming, which is a very efficient way to sort of create a protein for human  
**[0:41:14-0:41:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:41:14):**  consumption.  You know, you can take the waste and put it into into the soil and for the nutrition.  So you can almost create a closed loop in it.  But but I come from a place that and that's also back to the respecting life that that  I really prefer plant proteins that and I don't think we should make animals sort of  
**[0:41:35-0:41:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:41:35):**  a means to our ends.  So I wouldn't make that investment.  I get why he's doing it.  But but to me, it's not sort of it's not my path.  What regenerative looks like.  
**[0:41:44-0:41:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:41:44):**  But it's not that I'm making any claims about my past is the right one.  Yeah, I think it's like with many, like, especially on animal protein.  I mean, we've had many conversations here on the podcast.  Like, I would always ask the question, what's the the the service of the animal in that  case is to make fertilizer is to make like what's the role of the animal in regenerating  
**[0:42:09-0:42:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:42:09):**  a landscape, which could be a seascape as well.  And I think it gets very, very exciting if it's just between quotes and quotes.  And we still have to do that.  But create more efficient protein.  I think there's you're going to be fighting things and it's going to be difficult to I  
**[0:42:23-0:42:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:42:23):**  mean, close the loop is very tricky because there's a lot of feed that needs to go in.  Which type of animal are you growing?  How do you interact?  What is the complexity?  What is the diversity?  
**[0:42:32-0:42:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:42:32):**  I mean, is it indoor?  I mean, there's there's some but I think that if the goal is to regenerate a bay somewhere,  suddenly I think bivalves and oysters and mussels make a lot of sense maybe together  with certain fish.  And so what's the how do we use quote unquote, the tool of animals to regenerate and not  
**[0:42:50-0:42:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:42:50):**  just make it a bit cleaner?  I think it's an online question that we hardly ever ask.  And they are amazing at doing things that we can't like ducks yesterday in interview  I said geese, but ducks are amazing at grazing and create very interesting protein both in  the eggs and the meat.  
**[0:43:06-0:43:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:43:06):**  And it shows that I'm really not a regenerative farmer, obviously.  And ruminants are doing something we can't turning grass into something but of course,  that can be done extremely extractive and extremely regenerative if you do it well,  but it really I mean, it's us that need to make that choice.  And unfortunately, many, many times we didn't make that choice on let's say the right side,  
**[0:43:27-0:43:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:43:27):**  or at least the non creating life side, I think in service of life, you make different  choices with these kind of investments.  And it's not easy, but at least the direction is clear.  And I think we see more and more people that Okay, what's the direction of life or creating  something that's slightly cleaner, slightly less pollutant, slightly more this and like,  
**[0:43:47-0:43:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:43:47):**  yeah, I don't think that's we don't have time for that.  We need to do it, but I'm not getting excited about it.  No, me too.  And we see a lot of those with tailpipe solutions, you know, a better tailpipe for for a diesel  car, right?  
**[0:44:00-0:44:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:44:00):**  And it's, you know, it's better than not having it, but it's also Yeah, someone who invented  a machine to soak out methane from from cows, but it only works indoor.  So like, it's only the worst, the worst kind of animal production, you can facilitate with  that.  And then, yeah, so we really, we, I know, you've talked about this in previous episodes  
**[0:44:23-0:44:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:44:23):**  as well about, you know, how much do you trust tech and how much you don't trust it.  And I come from the tech industry.  And to me, that's the tech solutions are often an expression of a reductionistic understanding  of what needs to be done.  So it's not that we are against tech, but but we're not the ones who just invest in  
**[0:44:43-0:44:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:44:43):**  an app and hoping for that to solve everything.  We really like that it has a connection to the physical world.  And to flip the question, then what what is tech that you're getting excited about?  Or have you seen tech that you get excited about?  We can talk a bit about a few of the portfolio companies, obviously, as well.  
**[0:44:59-0:45:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:44:59):**  But like in terms of tech, do you see tech out there that you're either invested in or  not invested in?  But in general, you're getting interested in or excited about when, of course, with  your tech background, but also with your deeper generation focus now?  Because I really like plant based proteins, I think fermentation is a technology that's  
**[0:45:20-0:45:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:45:20):**  that's, that's under use.  Would you call it a technology?  I mean, it's more approachable.  That's sort of, you know, for to some a paper, a piece of paper as a technology, like it's  a sort of definition is all an investment fund.  
**[0:45:32-0:45:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:45:32):**  I mean, if you take the if you take the Greek definition of technology, where of course,  I don't remember where it comes from.  But I think even a vehicle like an evergreen structure is a technology.  And looking at your current portfolio, I mean, I want to be conscious of your time as well.  And I've somebody question, but just to describe a few, like, how's the diversity, first of  
**[0:45:50-0:45:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:45:50):**  all, because that's, of course, a company, a question people would ask.  And like, what are you mentioned the grain company?  What are some others you you always like to bring up when people ask, Okay, this sounds  all nice.  But how does it get concrete?  
**[0:46:03-0:46:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:46:03):**  Like, what did you invest in already until now?  And what kind of cool things are you are you backing?  Are you part of?  Yeah, yeah, yeah.  Be a partner of a service.  
**[0:46:13-0:46:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:46:13):**  Yeah, that's what we're trying to do.  Sorry, my language is still very feisty.  Yeah.  Oh, mine is too, but I'm at least we're trying here to do it the right way.  We invested in a company called Beyond Coffee, which is growing mushroom on spent coffee  
**[0:46:30-0:46:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:46:30):**  grounds.  And I think they have a very holistic way of circular way of producing.  So they take coffee grounds and grow the mushrooms and that and then they take take the mycelium  resin and create some very good compost out of it.  So they I think they are doing all steps right, which we're very impressed about.  
**[0:46:54-0:46:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:46:54):**  And you know, it's it's not really technology heavy to to create mushrooms.  So so what we also really like is is business model innovation.  And they created some mini farm.  So they they they grow the mushrooms at their farm, which is all local only serve 20 25  kilometers radius.  
**[0:47:16-0:47:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:47:16):**  Then they create another farm after that.  And then they put them in some mushroom fridges and canteen so they can grow there and people  can see how much room is growing and how beautiful it is and hopefully get inspired to eat more  plant based.  So can we get to a discussion like is a mushroom plant or not?  
**[0:47:34-0:47:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:47:34):**  Like it's sort of another kingdom, but it's for sure one of the most stunning things coming  out of nature.  Like if you see mycelium grow through those coffee bags and through those.  Yeah.  And it's a day or two like an explosion of life coming out of those.  
**[0:47:47-0:47:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:47:47):**  It's really magical.  If you haven't done it at home, find a local producer.  And because this is yeah, we drink the coffee, we throw away I think 99.5% of the coffee  grounds, the rest is your coffee.  And it's still it's a very good soil management.  
**[0:48:01-0:48:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:48:01):**  But you can first grow oyster mushrooms or mushrooms in general and then use as a soil  management and something you can easily do at home with children, etc.  So go and do it if you didn't do it yet.  Sorry.  Yeah.  
**[0:48:13-0:48:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:48:13):**  And another investment we just made is called Biomix.  It's some researchers from a Danish university.  So they created a small bio trap.  So they go out in the soil and they catch the good bacteria there and then they go home  to the bioreactor and they feed it some organic inputs and then they actually scale it and  
**[0:48:35-0:48:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:48:35):**  they can take out a lot of the bad fungicide in it.  So it's good enough for organic farming and it's a way to use bio fertilizer from pretty  local inputs.  I think it's a really interesting business model.  It's still rather early there, but I'm really excited about the potential, at least from  
**[0:48:59-0:49:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:48:59):**  the lab studies, from how much it can actually improve yield in organic farming.  And so basically you're investing both very early and slightly later stage or is it mostly  early or what are you normally comfortable with?  Yeah.  And so mostly early if we use that.  
**[0:49:19-0:49:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:49:19):**  But we also invested in a company called Aurian, which has been leading biodynamic grain produce  here in Denmark.  And I'm almost 40 and Aurian is older than I am.  But you know, they never raised a dollar.  So you know, what stage is that really?  
**[0:49:37-0:49:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:49:37):**  It's their first round, but still they're very experienced.  Yeah, exactly.  And that's the company that has stewardship ownership mostly besides us.  And they couldn't really move on because they needed funding and they didn't really have  access to that.  
**[0:49:57-0:50:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:49:57):**  And they got a lot of offers from other funds and they rejected them because they didn't  really believe they would care about their values and keep it as the founders intended  in terms of being biodynamic.  And they're really interested because they buy most of the biodynamic grains in Denmark,  but they also set up production for legumes, which we need a lot more of up here.  
**[0:50:25-0:50:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:50:25):**  So if a startup had come just on the legume side and saying that we're ready to process  this, then we would be all ears.  Then this company came around and much older, but still all the right values.  Then I think it's a great fit.  So probably better even because they are in business.  
**[0:50:47-0:50:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:50:47):**  They have set up their value webs, their Mercedes and they are selling.  They know, I mean, the chances, the risks are so much lower if you're around for more  than 40 years that you're around for another 10 is pretty likely compared to a startup  that could disappear tomorrow, literally.  Yeah.  
**[0:51:05-0:51:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:51:05):**  So it's also good to balance risk, I think in a portfolio.  And I know that that's usually not how it works because then you have pure VC, which  is very high risk.  And then you have some later stage funds, which are less risky.  But we still we have a hard time finding those who really believe this enough for us and  
**[0:51:29-0:51:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:51:29):**  we also have a right idea that we are maybe a little bit stage agnostic.  We want meaningful ownership, but we could get that in this case.  So we don't want to be too locked in by saying that we only pre-seed the seed owner series  at a stage.  Yeah, sure.  
**[0:51:47-0:51:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:51:47):**  And to switch it a bit in terms of, I mean, you're saying 25 million would be a nice amount.  We want to stay as radical as possible.  Let's say crazy life event, you're suddenly in charge of a billion dollar or a billion  euro fund and it can be as radical as you want it to be.  So you have all the possibility to choose the longest time horizon possible, liquidity  
**[0:52:10-0:52:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:52:10):**  is up to you, et cetera.  It has to be investments.  What would you focus it on?  What would be your priority sectors?  Could be in food and ag, obviously it could be anywhere else.  
**[0:52:19-0:52:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:52:19):**  What would you focus on?  Would it all be in legumes in Denmark?  What would you, or in special tech that we don't know yet to bring complexity to farms,  what would you focus on if you had that access to that kind of portfolio?  I think I would split it in two buckets.  
**[0:52:42-0:52:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:52:42):**  One I wouldn't really expect to make any profit from, that would be facilitating a conversion  of land to regeneration or restoring ecosystems.  And the other half I would invest in companies that would sort of create services for those  working to convert the land.  And obviously those companies could also sell to other regenerative farmers.  
**[0:53:07-0:53:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:53:07):**  So I think being able to create a large local ecosystem where people would get the right  people who actually want to convert the land and maybe also be small hole farmers, whatever,  there are many things we can do in terms of creating more regenerative agriculture and  restoring ecosystems.  But then creating all the companies around that who can create those services.  
**[0:53:32-0:53:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:53:32):**  And some will be more tech than others.  But I think that would be really interesting to try to create that local ecosystem and  make sure that the entrepreneurs, they have access to the farmers and they really understand  what they need.  And when you say services, could it be food companies as well that buy from these, that  
**[0:53:51-0:53:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:53:51):**  buy food rotations, for instance, that would be an amazing service for many, many farmers  and not just one cash crop and mean services in the broadest sense of the word?  Yes, exactly.  So it could be food companies, it could be robots for weeding or whatever the farmers  would say they needed in order to be able to do that job probably and protect the soil  
**[0:54:14-0:54:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:54:14):**  and the biodiversity.  And I think if you could get the right people together here and make sure that there were  enough money to sort of support conversion of land while giving the opportunity to smart  people to innovate around that, I think that would be really, really powerful way to spend  a billion euros or whatever we have here.  
**[0:54:33-0:54:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:54:33):**  And you would focus it mostly or predominantly say here in Denmark where you're like in your  local context.  Do you see that potential there mostly or would you would here be somewhere else?  So I think Denmark is a very bad case because we sort of grow up all our land.  So I think we have a lot of work to do up here that can be used other places in Europe.  
**[0:54:55-0:55:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:54:55):**  But I think there is a sense in choosing a place and creating a community there.  So it could be in Denmark, it could also be Germany or other places.  It doesn't really matter too much where it is.  But I think it's all it's about creating the solutions that also work locally.  And then let's see where can where else can this be applied?  
**[0:55:16-0:55:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:55:16):**  Because I think one thing we're also starting to learn that that the last 40, 50 years in  large scale globalization, we have seen the same solutions applied everywhere.  And that might not be the right thing going forward.  We need more, more local solutions.  And some of them can scale globally.  
**[0:55:35-0:55:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:55:35):**  Some of them needs to be adapted.  Some of them shouldn't be scaled.  And that's OK.  But but I think keeping it to one place would be good.  And then we can copy that model about spending a billion dollars to other places as well  
**[0:55:50-0:55:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:55:50):**  and see what's right in that ecosystem.  And we take your fund away.  I mean, people know this question is coming.  But if you had a magic wand and you could only you could change one thing, one thing  only in I would say in the regeneration space could be on the investment side, could be  
**[0:56:07-0:56:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:56:07):**  global consciousness, could be better taste.  It could be all land should be steward owned.  It could be anything.  And what would you change overnight?  I think I would really like to to make humans not like meat anymore, to turn everyone into  
**[0:56:25-0:56:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:56:25):**  a vegetarian or vegan.  In my end and in my mind, that would help solve a lot of problems of all this extraction  we're doing this world.  So so if we could could sort of free ourselves from industrial meat production, then we could  free up so much land because we don't need all the the feed going into those animals.  
**[0:56:48-0:56:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:56:48):**  And we could could end so much suffering and and hopefully also be a bit less alienated  to our food, because I think industrial farming is only it only works when we're alienated  from from how it's done.  So I think that that would would help us in many different ways.  And do you think that would be because I have this conversation often, that would be enough.  
**[0:57:12-0:57:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:57:12):**  I'm afraid that if we stop eating meat overnight, that the law that I think partly it doesn't  exist because we like to meet, I think it exists because there's very, very cheap input  available from grain and soy, etc.  And I'm sort of afraid and they already do so to a certain extent, find their way in  other things like glucose for corn syrup or ethanol or some other destruction, which obviously  
**[0:57:35-0:57:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:57:35):**  saves the animals.  So that's great.  But like, would that I don't know if taking away the CAFO operations, which should end  tomorrow, would also end the system of destruction of all the you say it could free up a lot  of land, which it could and that's always the eco modernist approach, but it also could  
**[0:57:51-0:57:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:57:51):**  not like it also would be maybe they find another way to burn that stuff.  And let's say the landscape doesn't change, except, of course, that there's a lot less  animal suffering.  But you could argue there's a lot more because we keep dosing those fields in chemicals and  plowing and killing an amount of life and wildlife on those fields that is that is enormous.  
**[0:58:12-0:58:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:58:12):**  Like, would that would that be the entry point?  Because I see from a lot of plant based protein sites that it's not grown at all regeneratively.  And we're sort of hiding that like where the ingredients come from.  I told you, you could only do one thing.  So I'm making the question way more complex, obviously, now and opening a can of worms,  
**[0:58:31-0:58:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:58:31):**  but I'm afraid that it's that it's too reductions are too simplistic.  But maybe that's the way I asked the question.  I don't know if it would fix it.  And we just find another way to to create an enormous amount of extractive ingredients  to to go somewhere else to go to salmon.  
**[0:58:46-0:58:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:58:46):**  And of course, that we won't do animals anymore.  But like, we'll find another way to to squeeze the system in the wrong way.  Are you scared about that?  Like pushing plant based, like singular plant based on in that way?  Yeah, of course.  
**[0:58:59-0:59:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:58:59):**  And I think it's a totally valid point you're raising here.  And and, you know, when we only have one, one solution, it does get reductionistic.  And I think most most solutions, stop asking this question.  Yeah.  No, no, but but you know, it will only work maybe if there is a good CO2 tax or you know,  
**[0:59:18-0:59:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:59:18):**  you limit how many fields you can grow, you know, set some radio about how much can be  found and how much cannot.  But but yeah, so that would be an entry point.  But no, of course, it wouldn't be enough.  Just like a CO2 tax is a very efficient, efficient way to sort of reduce carbon.  
**[0:59:36-0:59:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:59:36):**  But you know, it doesn't really work in isolation.  And none of these solutions do.  And that's the problem about all these crisis that that it is.  So that's a question I wanted to ask actually on slide eight in your deck, you might be  changing this.  
**[0:59:49-0:59:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=0:59:49):**  So when people see it, it's different.  But there is a carbon tunnel vision slide, which I've seen a lot on LinkedIn, etc.  But so basically, what is your point that you're trying to make with with the carbon?  That our singular focus on carbon is maybe also reductionistic?  Like how how does it go down with with investors?  
**[1:00:06-1:00:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=1:00:06):**  Like when you put that slide on, which is quite early in the day?  Yeah, no, they get surprised because, you know, to them, the crisis we're facing right  now is a carbon crisis.  And that is one of the crisis and probably not the largest one, to be honest.  So so and you know, if you get a report for your portfolio, you know, it will be about  
**[1:00:27-1:00:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=1:00:27):**  carbon intensity and it will only focus on carbon.  There is nothing else right now and no other metrics in terms of sustainability.  And and to me, that that's that's a really big problem.  But it's also a very big opportunity.  I saw some statistic about how much money went into eco venture money, which funding  
**[1:00:48-1:00:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=1:00:48):**  went into ecosystem restoration versus electric vehicles.  And you know, it's it's yeah, no, it's nothing.  You know, you can barely see the ecosystem, ecosystem restoration funding on that chart  compared to just electric vehicles.  And then, you know, you get to carbon capture and storage and P.T.X. and other stuff on  
**[1:01:06-1:01:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=1:01:06):**  top of that.  So so to us, it's such a great investment opportunity to invest in regeneration and  sustainability outside the carbon space.  And that much more funding will go there in the coming years.  So being there early, you know, not too early.  
**[1:01:25-1:01:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=1:01:25):**  We need to keep the companies alive until other realize that we also have other problems  is much more attractive right now, because we can see how much funding and how crazy  the valuation valuations are for some of the electric vehicle companies, for example.  Now, absolutely.  And I think on the warming side, like water vapor and biodiversity and really vegetating  
**[1:01:48-1:01:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=1:01:48):**  the earth is if you're really worried about global warming, that's where you should focus  on and people are coming around and there's much more attention now for and for evaporation,  et cetera.  But it's carbon is a very small part.  It's a big problem, but a very small part of a much bigger problem we have and we're  
**[1:02:02-1:02:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=1:02:02):**  facing and people are coming around to that.  But if you're early enough and you can stay around, that's the place where you would like  to be.  I want to be conscious of your time.  I know you have to go relatively soon.  
**[1:02:13-1:02:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=1:02:13):**  I opened a can of worms, two can of worms, probably at the end of the conversation, which  means we need to check in again.  We mean we need to sit down and unpack many of these and other investments you've been  making at that time.  So I'm looking forward to that.  
**[1:02:27-1:02:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=1:02:27):**  I want to thank you for your time this morning and looking forward to unpack the evergreen  structure of Planetary in the future.  Thank you so much for having me and having this conversation.  Thank you so much for listening all the way to the end.  For the show notes and links discussed, check out our website, investinginregenerativeagriculture.com  
**[1:02:50-1:02:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=1:02:50):**  forward slash post.  Thank you so much for listening all the way to the end.  For the show notes and links we discussed in this episode, check out our website, investinginregenerativeagriculture.com  forward slash posts.  If you liked this episode, why not share it with a friend or give us a rating on Apple  
**[1:03:07-1:03:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=1:03:07):**  Podcast.  That really helps.  Thanks again and see you next time.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food.  
**[1:03:30-1:03:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=1:03:30):**  How to put money to work in regenerating soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while  doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to put money  to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011 and recording  
**[1:03:46-1:03:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=1:03:46):**  these podcasts since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  
**[1:04:01-1:04:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=1:04:01):**  What questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  
**[1:04:08-1:04:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=1:04:08):**  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  You, the soil builders and investors in the space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  
**[1:04:24-1:04:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=1:04:24):**  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management, consultants, etc.  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  
**[1:04:44-1:04:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=1:04:44):**  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very different means.  
**[1:04:58-1:05:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=1:04:58):**  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  
**[1:05:14-1:05:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=1:05:14):**  so you don't have to ride along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  if you're a soil builder.  
**[1:05:33-1:05:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=1:05:33):**  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  
**[1:05:49-1:05:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=1:05:49):**  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  
**[1:06:06-1:06:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/thomas-hogenhaven#t=1:06:06):**  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  