### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2022-00-09)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  Learn how a journey which started in the environmental bubble of Arizona in the US led to a high  end fashion career with shows for Gucci, Prada, front covers of Vogue and much more.  
**[0:00:25-0:00:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:00:25):**  Where our guest of today was exposed to the incredible destruction of the fashion industry,  which awoke an activist in her.  She dove deep into the issues and found solutions which all tied back to the soil.  Now she continues to be a model for the high end fashion industry, but she uses her voice  and her position to push for sustainable materials and practices, which are there.  
**[0:00:44-0:00:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:00:44):**  And while at the same time acting as a global ambassador to promote biodynamic farming and  explain time and time again why it holds the solution to the issues we face, the climate  crisis, biodiversity, water, health and more, and she has to explain time and time again  why it's not a farming practice for quote unquote hippie weirdos.  Enjoy!  
**[0:01:05-0:01:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:01:05):**  This is the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast, Investing as if the Planet  Mattered, where we talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why my focus on soil and regeneration?  
**[0:01:30-0:01:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:01:30):**  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land and our sea, grow our food, what we eat, wear and consume.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  To make it easy for fans to support our work, we launched our membership community and so  
**[0:01:49-0:01:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:01:49):**  many of you have joined us as a member.  Thank you.  If our work created value for you and if you have the means and only if you have the means,  consider joining us.  Find out more on gumroad.com slash investing in RegenAg.  
**[0:02:03-0:02:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:02:03):**  That is gumroad.com slash investing in RegenAg.  Or find the link below.  So welcome today to a very special interview with the Greenpeace Ocean Ambassador, founder  of the charity Dirt and model and advisory board member of the US Bidynamic Demeter  Alliance and friend of the show, Arizona Muse.  
**[0:02:24-0:02:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:02:24):**  Welcome Arizona.  Hello.  It's so great to be here.  I'm a longtime listener of the show and it's just such an honor to be chatting with you  officially now.  
**[0:02:35-0:02:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:02:35):**  And of course people can Google you.  There's a nice interview with Elle magazine actually, which I'll put in the show notes  as well.  But just to briefly, also not that briefly if you want to, a bit of your background.  How did you roll into modeling first of all?  
**[0:02:50-0:02:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:02:50):**  And then when did this, I would say sustainability side first started?  And then of course we'll go into the regenerative biodynamic side.  But what started your sustainability journey?  Was that one moment?  Was that seeing certain things?  
**[0:03:04-0:03:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:03:04):**  Was it a gradual story?  What was the trigger there to, because I think you can stay in the fashion industry for a  very long time without looking at the sustainability side, but you decided to face it head on basically.  Okay, since you're asking, I'll tell you a bit of my life story.  I was born in Arizona, which is where I got the name.  
**[0:03:23-0:03:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:03:23):**  My mom is English and she was pregnant in the desert, in the Sonoran Desert in Tucson.  And I think just was overwhelmed by the pregnancy maybe, but also by the beauty of the desert  and decided to name me Arizona.  Then I grew up in Santa Fe, New Mexico, which is highly populated by environmentalists.  So I thought my worldview was that there are too many environmentalists.  
**[0:03:44-0:03:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:03:44):**  I'm going to go and do something more radical, like go into fashion.  And so I became a model and then I realized that there was more for me and I found my  passion at age 26, 27.  And my passion is environmentalism, going right back to where I came from.  And of course I learned what you would imagine that environmentalists are not overpopulated  
**[0:04:10-0:04:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:04:10):**  in the world.  It's actually quite an underdog position to have taken and I love it so much.  The work I'm able to do as an activist, I now call myself an activist proudly because  that's what I'm doing.  So I'll go back a step.  
**[0:04:23-0:04:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:04:23):**  I was invited to a lunch on biodiversity.  This was the first moment for me when I was, I think 26 or 27 that I realized, wow, why  isn't this word biodiversity being used?  Why did you accept that?  Why did you accept the lunch?  
**[0:04:37-0:04:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:04:37):**  I'm imagining you were invited for a lot of different things, say no to, and said no to  a lot of things.  It was pretty random.  It was pretty random actually.  It was a friend who invited me to, yeah, as you say, a charity lunch and I'd been to many  
**[0:04:49-0:04:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:04:49):**  and I just went and I was surprised that this word biodiversity wasn't being used in front  of me frequently.  In fact, this was the first time that I was really engaging with the word biodiversity  and going, wow, why not?  Why aren't we talking about this?  
**[0:05:03-0:05:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:05:03):**  This seems really important.  So that for me was my beginning moment and then I started to research fashion and as  you can imagine, found a lot of negative information, but also a lot of non-information.  This was seven years ago and it was still relatively unknown that fashion was causing  an immense amount of damage to ecosystems, human welfare, through the dying process,  
**[0:05:28-0:05:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:05:28):**  the growing process of fibers and leather, the tanning process of leather and all the  transport that's involved.  So there is immense, not to mention the packaging as well, immense waste and a lot of opacity  around that waste.  I didn't even know, though I had been at the core of the fashion industry for such a long  
**[0:05:49-0:05:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:05:49):**  time, I didn't even know how clothes were made and that really shocked me too.  I was like, well, again, why not?  Why don't I know this stuff?  I've been in the showrooms and in the fittings for the shows of the biggest, most amazing  fashion houses in the world.  
**[0:06:04-0:06:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:06:04):**  I got very lucky and my career went super well straight away and I've done campaigns  for Prada and Chanel and so many of the other big fashion houses and been on the covers  of Vogue for years and that is kind of crazy that I managed to do all of that without ever  realizing the impact that this industry was really having.  So I started to educate myself and I could never go back.  
**[0:06:29-0:06:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:06:29):**  I now say in my activism, knowledge protects you, knowledge protects you from making poor  decisions, from making decisions that cause harm to the environment and to the people  around you.  The knowledge isn't scary, weirdly.  I can tell you I am happier than I've ever been.  
**[0:06:47-0:06:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:06:47):**  I am more excited about life than I've ever been since I became an activist about climate  change, about the climate crisis that we're all living through and that we're all causing  in some way or another.  I mean, have you flushed a toilet ever?  Do you eat food?  
**[0:07:04-0:07:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:07:04):**  Okay, you're a part of the climate crisis.  It's all of us and I think it's nice to just get that out there with a smile and a laugh  because until you admit to yourself that you're causing problems, it's very easy to just kind  of pretend they're on the other side of the room or the other side of the world even worse  and that it's not really up to me.  
**[0:07:26-0:07:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:07:26):**  I'm just one tiny drop in the ocean.  I can't really do much.  I don't really have a big impact.  All those little things that we tell ourselves, it's just not true.  Each one of us has an immense impact.  
**[0:07:36-0:07:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:07:36):**  I'll give you my plastic water bottle example that I love that if I make it a policy in  my life that I don't drink water from plastic bottles, that means I will save thousands  of plastic bottles over my lifetime.  Suddenly you realize it makes a difference.  Whereas that one time that you're like, oh, I'm not going to buy the plastic water bottle.  
**[0:07:55-0:07:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:07:55):**  You're like, oh, it doesn't really make a difference.  But over the course of your lifetime, it makes an immense difference.  Now think of your bathrooms.  How many do you have plus your kitchen sink?  Do they all have plastic soap bottles sitting there next to them or do they have bars of  
**[0:08:10-0:08:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:08:10):**  soap that were unwrapped and that sit on soap dishes?  Now imagine those three or four bathrooms maybe and the kitchen sink and over the course  of your entire lifetime, wow, that's a lot of plastic bottles.  So just always think about plastic battles.  Probably actually in restaurants, et cetera, or with other people, let's say the plastic  
**[0:08:32-0:08:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:08:32):**  bottle becomes sometimes a plastic battle, but it's very, very interesting.  And the signaling effect I think is super strong.  And I want to take it one step backwards because you said I became a model.  I went into the heart of the fashion industry.  Did you do that with the idea of stepping away from the environmental, let's say scene  
**[0:08:49-0:08:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:08:49):**  or bubble you grew up in, or was it really, okay, I want to be as far away as possible,  or I want to learn maybe among an industry that's not really known.  Like did you do it with an idea of on the sustainability side or just I want to be far  away from home.  I want to go into a very different lifestyle, a very different.  
**[0:09:07-0:09:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:09:07):**  And then what happened there to sort of pulled you back to the environmentalist.  Was there a trigger?  Was it because you could have done the modeling, quote unquote thing for a long time without  ever worrying about the waste.  But something triggered there, not the biodiversity lunch, I think it was already before that,  
**[0:09:22-0:09:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:09:22):**  that like, wow, this is a very, very wasteful industry or an industry that really needs  to look in a mirror literally and see what's happening.  What triggered that?  Or did you know that already from basically where you grew up?  So my entrance into modeling, like many models, was very random.  
**[0:09:40-0:09:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:09:40):**  I happened to be a certain height and I happened to look in quotes pretty for this era.  I mean, look at how beauty across the ages in history has really changed so much.  So it's really very random and I really mean that I just happened to be in the right time  in the right place.  But also it's caused a lot of problems in my life.  
**[0:09:57-0:10:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:09:57):**  So I don't want to say that I'm I'm grateful for some of the things that it brought, but  it also brought me down in many, many ways emotionally, physically.  It's not a job that builds people up and it's not an industry that builds people up.  And that can cause a lot of problems.  And just my self-esteem was extremely, extremely low, which is contrary to what you might think  
**[0:10:19-0:10:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:10:19):**  of a model.  Like I looked at all the pictures of me and just saw the problems and the flaws.  I didn't think of myself as being, wow, amazing.  Oh, she looks so good.  Not at all.  
**[0:10:30-0:10:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:10:30):**  So it was causing immense kind of trauma on my mental health and the way I thought of  myself, which was paralyzing.  So I also feel like this moment where I found this purpose in life was tremendously valuable  to me as a person, my growth, my development.  It's just it brought me out of that, which was and now I can move and I can think and  
**[0:10:53-0:10:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:10:53):**  my brain works so much better.  And it's really it's amazing to me to realize that you can, one can, anyone can really find  themselves later on.  Like I didn't I was quite directionless in my 20s and didn't really know.  I had absolutely no idea what I wanted to do.  
**[0:11:12-0:11:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:11:12):**  And I was in a very high powered career that was taking so much time.  I mean, to give one example, in Milan Fashion Week, you have drivers because the public  transport isn't great.  And you say my driver drove for one hundred and twelve hours that week.  That means that I was working one hundred and twelve hours that week because my driver  
**[0:11:33-0:11:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:11:33):**  would drive me to all the appointments I had and wait outside while I had the appointment.  And then I'd get in the car and drive again.  It's a whole culture, the model driver culture during Milan Fashion Week.  And actually, for let's say the public transport in Milan is pretty good, but of course, not  that fast and not that direct.  
**[0:11:48-0:11:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:11:48):**  You can have it even.  Oh, yeah.  Sorry.  No, I'm not.  It's not like Milanese public transport at all.  
**[0:11:53-0:12:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:11:53):**  But yeah, if you have to do 120 hours of work, you cannot go subway and train in, bus in  and out.  You need a driver.  And that's that's a lot of hours.  I think people forget that they see the pictures and they don't see.  
**[0:12:08-0:12:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:12:08):**  I mean, in general, they see the piece of fashion, they see the piece of food, they  see the picture and they don't see a hundred hours that go into that.  Or the 65 people that go are in the background on every shoot and that nobody sees.  It's this industry is so enormous when it comes to energy, human energy, fossil fuel  energy and just and time energy.  
**[0:12:34-0:12:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:12:34):**  It's really, really a big deal, which is why it carries such tremendous importance in the  face of climate change and the solutions.  And there are incredible solutions that are being found in the sustainable fashion industry.  And at the moment, it still seems like the sustainable fashion industry is separate from  the normal fashion industry.  
**[0:12:54-0:13:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:12:54):**  And my dear friend and mentor, Ursula de Castro, the founder of Fashion Revolution, has a great  quote where she says she would prefer that the sustainable fashion industry were just  called the fashion industry.  And the other one was called the unsustainable fashion industry.  And I just I think that's such a perfect encapsulation of the future we need to move to.  
**[0:13:15-0:13:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:13:15):**  Like this, what we do needs to become normal.  Do you remember the first time you saw like potential solutions?  Because you started to go deep into, let's say, the issues, quote unquote, not actually  the issues of the fashion industry.  You said, I stumbled upon or I found many solutions and different materials and things.  
**[0:13:35-0:13:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:13:35):**  And do you remember that first one that you said, wow, it's actually possible to do it  in another way?  And do you remember that moment?  Like, OK, this is this potentially is a positive story and not just let's make it a bit less  dirty or a bit cleaner, but still it is in effect, it's fossil fuel, nylon, etc.  
**[0:13:53-0:13:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:13:53):**  Like, do you remember stumbling upon an example there that really triggered you into into  the positive side of things?  Definitely.  On my birthday one year, September 18th, I met someone who became a tremendous mentor  of mine, Nina Morenzi, who started the Sustainable Angle.  
**[0:14:09-0:14:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:14:09):**  And the Sustainable Angle is a London based organization whose advisory board I now sit  on and whose sources sustainable materials for the fashion industry from all over the  world.  She's been doing this for almost 12 years now.  It was not cool when she started at all.  
**[0:14:23-0:14:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:14:23):**  But she came from a degree in regenerative agriculture and she was reading about cotton  and she realized, wow, this needs to change.  We cannot continue growing cotton like this with all the water irrigation and all the  pesticide and herbicide uses in order to make clothes that are sold for far too little money  and do not reward anybody along their supply chain.  
**[0:14:47-0:14:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:14:47):**  So she set up the Sustainable Angle and it is providing a service that is invaluable  to the fashion industry because many designers, if they start to learn about sustainability  and they want to make a change, it was almost impossible to do so before the Sustainable  Angle because looking for sustainable materials was like searching for a needle in a haystack.  And they were impossible to find.  
**[0:15:08-0:15:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:15:08):**  They were not gathered into one place.  So Nina has the Sustainable Angle where you can source sustainable fabrics all year round,  but you can also go to the Future Fabrics Expo, which is once a year.  It's coming up in June 2022.  Very exciting in London.  
**[0:15:21-0:15:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:15:21):**  I love it.  It's a hub of innovators.  There's so many sustainable materials and they're the suppliers who make them, who you  can talk to at their booths, but also seminars all day long with speakers from all over the  world, digital and in person, talking about incredible innovations and solutions.  
**[0:15:40-0:15:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:15:40):**  Some of them are not yet on the market and some of them are commercially available.  And so these materials, just to describe, she stumbled upon cotton as an enormous polluter.  So how, what do you replace cotton with or how do you do cotton differently?  Or maybe they're two different questions.  What are examples of materials you're very excited about?  
**[0:16:01-0:16:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:16:01):**  We're talking now in spring 2022, stuff that is commercially available, which means at  a certain scale, not enormous, but maybe at a certain scale that if you're running a fashion  brand or you need materials and like what are exciting ones you've seen coming out over  the last period?  Well, the straightforward answer is that organic cotton is a much better solution than conventionally  
**[0:16:23-0:16:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:16:23):**  grown cotton.  There are restrictions on irrigation and also there won't be the use of heavy duty chemicals.  But a more exciting answer is that look first where you are localized.  So are you in a desert?  Cotton is a thirsty crop, but also likes hot weather.  
**[0:16:40-0:16:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:16:40):**  It's a disaster for climate change basically.  So it's grown all over deserts and it's irrigated with water that should never have been pulled  out of the river nearby.  So going to crops that replace cotton that are grown in wetter climates where you don't  need to irrigate such as flax and hemp, those crops are amazing for European countries because  
**[0:17:00-0:17:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:17:00):**  they can be and used to be grown widely all over Europe without any fertilization and  without any irrigation.  Unfortunately, what happened fairly recently in the last 40 some years is that all the  processing equipment for hemp and for flax was bought by Asian countries, mostly Asian  countries.  
**[0:17:30-0:17:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:17:30):**  So it doesn't any longer exist in Europe.  So this is one of the contributors to why Europe doesn't grow its own flax and hemp  anymore.  Sometimes if you buy a piece of garment that is called kind of Belgian linen, usually it's  not even grown in Belgium.  
**[0:17:45-0:17:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:17:45):**  It may be processed in Belgium still, but the growing is very likely to have happened  in India or in China and the processing will have happened there too, which is great for  localization of processing.  The processing equipment should always be near to where the material was grown, but  we need to get that back into Europe.  
**[0:18:04-0:18:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:18:04):**  So whether it's building new machines for Europe or buying them back and distributing  them more evenly around the world, that would help hugely to reduce our reliance on cotton.  And something interesting happened in the US around cotton, horribly and interesting,  is that it was really used as a defense mechanism to bring down the lives of people of color  in the US.  
**[0:18:30-0:18:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:18:30):**  It was weaponized because originally in the US, again, hemp and flax were grown widely  and they're very resilient to drought and wetness and they're just an amazing crop  basically.  And the processing can be done locally without any chemicals.  And then they were replaced by cotton, which is a hugely vulnerable crop.  
**[0:18:49-0:18:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:18:49):**  And so it needs pesticides and herbicides and it needs different machinery and it needs  irrigation and it needs lots of tending.  It's much more time intensive.  So this is historically a really big deal in the social history of the US.  The perfect solution for slavery basically.  
**[0:19:04-0:19:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:19:04):**  That's the answer.  If you want to tie people to the land and chemicals to the land, you use cotton.  In service, it works really well and it worked really well.  So moving away from cotton is important socially and environmentally and in terms of logistics  and transport.  
**[0:19:24-0:19:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:19:24):**  We don't need to be growing so much cotton.  We can reduce our need for cotton by transitioning to these other materials.  And that may not be 100 percent.  The feeling of hemp is different than cotton.  It can be refined to be smooth, but also you can just blend it with cotton.  
**[0:19:41-0:19:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:19:41):**  So you could reduce your cotton intake by half by just blending it with with a hemp  material.  So that is is a really fantastic solution.  Also, hemp for fiber needs to be separated away from hemp for CBD and THC because if  you see them as one plant and one species, you're you're going to outlaw hemp, which  
**[0:20:04-0:20:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:20:04):**  is again what happened in many, many countries.  People were required to stop growing this traditional fabric material because of the  FDA's of the world, because of the drug administrations of the world who said, no, no, no, you can't  grow that anymore.  And everyone's like, yeah, but it doesn't produce a drug.  
**[0:20:20-0:20:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:20:20):**  And they're like, it doesn't matter.  It's the same family.  It's the same family.  You know, just like these kind of big stupidities that in the end changed the course of history  in such a dramatically negative way.  
**[0:20:32-0:20:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:20:32):**  We need to examine this and look at how we can how we can fix that and how we can go  back to growing these fashion materials that are so much easier on the environment and  on human welfare as well.  And do they fit because I'm really not obviously a fashion material expert like flax and hemp  and linen to a certain extent as well.  
**[0:20:56-0:20:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:20:56):**  Do they fit into these in the rotations we would like farmers to do?  Like this is an easy, I would say, plug in, quote unquote, almost to do that today.  Also produce food is like, where does the fiber rich come from?  Is it you harvest or food or fiber when it comes to flax?  Because I think you can flex it, you can also eat them.  
**[0:21:13-0:21:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:21:13):**  Like how does it would that look like in Europe, for instance, would it be a relatively easy  way to integrate them?  Of course, then there's the processing, which has to come, which probably needs some new  machinery, smaller, more localized, etc.  So that I'm imagining with a lot of the new robotics, etc. that should be possible.  
**[0:21:31-0:21:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:21:31):**  But does it fit easily into into the current rotations that many organic farmers and biodynamic  farmers need to do to keep to keep their soil going?  Is it is it an easy sell, let's say to to the farming community, or at least the advanced  farming community?  About the question of food and fiber, we should definitely ask about an economic farmer because  
**[0:21:51-0:21:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:21:51):**  I don't know if it's the same species of flax that makes linen as you can eat the seeds  in the oil.  It could be.  I don't want to answer incorrectly.  But from an investment point of view, I can answer that question and say one need for  
**[0:22:06-0:22:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:22:06):**  investment is to invest into the infrastructure of the processing of these materials.  Like I mentioned before, we need to build new machinery for Europe or we need to buy  the machinery back from the country.  And the brands are there too, like the brands are there, let's say the machinery would be  invested in and would be built.  
**[0:22:23-0:22:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:22:23):**  Do you see strong interest from brands that want this transparency coming from Europe,  that wants this localized stream?  Is there the potential of offtake?  Which is the same discussion in food, obviously.  Yeah, we should bring back this, we should grow this.  
**[0:22:39-0:22:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:22:39):**  But always the question is, OK, is there at least a front runner market ready to buy these  things, which makes it a lot easier to sell to farmers?  Sustainable fashion is a hot topic now.  Everyone's interested, everyone wants to participate, but brands don't have the money to buy this  machinery.  
**[0:22:57-0:22:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:22:57):**  It's super expensive.  It's like millions of euros are needed to invest in this machinery.  It's not cheap.  They're very big machines.  They process a lot at once.  
**[0:23:05-0:23:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:23:05):**  And it's a hefty investment to buy one even and then to the logistics around it.  So we need financing for this to work.  We need, in general, in the sustainable fashion movement, it's relatively small businesses.  And in the unsustainable fashion industry, it's relatively big businesses.  So right now, we need to encourage the big businesses to move into the sustainable fashion  
**[0:23:31-0:23:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:23:31):**  industry to start putting their orders in and behind and guarantee or commit to making  orders once these technologies become available and to just express their interest.  That would help so much.  So that's I think activism is the answer for that, is getting people to talk about this  and getting people to be inspired by the idea that they can change the world.  
**[0:23:54-0:23:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:23:54):**  And this is what I love about the consulting that I do to transition fashion brands to  become more sustainable is the look on people's faces when you explain to them how they can  be heroes.  And I mean that they can literally change the world through their business.  But right now they're causing problems with it.  
**[0:24:09-0:24:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:24:09):**  And it's not as difficult.  So describe how it works.  They ask you to become a consultant or I'm imagining you also give your opinion, let's  say unquestioned when you're unasked when you're in these meetings.  You say, did you know that you could become a hero or how do you approach that when you  
**[0:24:24-0:24:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:24:24):**  are, let's say, in a boardroom of a large, large, semi-large fashion brand?  I definitely start chatting about it on photo shoots all the time.  And this is a question I get asked a lot, actually.  Like, how do I feel and how do I reconcile working with brands who are causing damage,  who are not sustainable, working with them as a model with my activism?  
**[0:24:47-0:24:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:24:47):**  And at the moment, I still feel like it's necessary to take modeling work with brands  who are not sustainable because it gives me an access point that I would never have otherwise.  I mean, it's just it's incredible to walk into a shoot and be with head designers and  CEOs and chat all day, chit chat chat about how amazing sustainability is and what they  can do and all these fun innovations around materials and how it just isn't as difficult  
**[0:25:11-0:25:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:25:11):**  or as scary as they may have thought.  And one big issue in consulting now is screenwashing that many, many businesses are starting to  feel like they can just talk about sustainability, whether or not they've done anything.  And my biggest piece of advice for that for anybody is only talk about the things you've  already done.  
**[0:25:32-0:25:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:25:32):**  Do not talk about your ambitions and do not celebrate your ambitions because an ambition  is something in the future.  Net zero in 2050 and nonsense like that.  That you've never done.  Yeah.  
**[0:25:44-0:25:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:25:44):**  So you will get criticized on that because the press now and the media are so much better  educated than they were even last year, even three years ago.  People will find you out because also consumers are educating themselves.  They want to buy from businesses that are doing something better and at least are showing  the progress that they're making.  
**[0:26:02-0:26:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:26:02):**  And setting ambitions and targets is not the same as making progress.  I've even seen situations from very big institutions that I probably shouldn't name, but who have  increased the gravity of their ambitions without even explaining what they've already achieved  on their ambitions from last year.  I'm like, what?  
**[0:26:23-0:26:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:26:23):**  That makes no sense at all.  That makes no sense.  And I'm supposed to sit here and clap?  That's not okay.  That is not progress.  
**[0:26:33-0:26:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:26:33):**  So yeah, greenwashing, I think that's the biggest solution is just don't talk about  anything that you haven't done yet.  And has it shifted?  In food you see that, let's say the smaller or medium sized companies, we just had an  interview, it might be out already when this will air, with Grounded, with Gijsboers and  
**[0:26:53-0:27:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:26:53):**  on really regeneratively grown or used regenerative practices, pepper and other spices and tea,  et cetera, from Sub-Saharan Africa.  And they supply to a lot of brands in Europe that they see these middle sized brands that  really want transparency, want this good story, but also want certain quality and certain  size because they're not tiny, tiny startup.  
**[0:27:15-0:27:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:27:15):**  They're not an enormous unilever, but they're sort of in the middle.  And they seem to really be taking off.  They're growing fast.  The consumer is really embracing, the front runner consumer obviously is embracing, are  embracing these brands.  
**[0:27:28-0:27:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:27:28):**  Is that happening as well in the fashion side?  Like that the consumer starts to, and does the big brands start to worry because they're  actually starting to choose other things?  Do you see that as being, is the pace increasing?  Because of course the small ones were always there, but are they starting to become slightly  
**[0:27:44-0:27:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:27:44):**  a bigger force in the space and thus more serious?  Or are we not there yet on this sort of tipping, almost tipping point, I would say.  So what seems to be happening in fashion is that when these bigger businesses get involved,  they usually want to do a capsule collection with sustainable materials, which is kind  of annoying if I may say so myself.  
**[0:28:04-0:28:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:28:04):**  Which means they do one collection with materials, but they leave it out.  They do one tiny collection.  It's not even their main collection or their whole season.  They just do six pieces with one sustainable material and then they get to enjoy the PR  off of that.  
**[0:28:19-0:28:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:28:19):**  And it's just not real.  It's not truthful and it's not honest.  So I don't suggest that brands do this.  It's more impactful to say, if you're a big brand, just change your lining material.  Make sure that you're sourcing organic lining for your entire collection.  
**[0:28:37-0:28:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:28:37):**  What is lining for every fashion dummy that's listening?  I used to think that a coat say is made of wool.  Okay, done.  No, not at all.  A coat is made of a wool outer.  
**[0:28:48-0:28:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:28:48):**  It has plastic buttons.  It has a lining made of probably Lyocell or silk if it's expensive.  It has fusing to keep the lining together with the outer material.  It has shoulder pads.  It may have a zip as well.  
**[0:29:01-0:29:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:29:01):**  It may have come in a carrier bag made out of a synthetic polyester.  Like, wow, so many materials.  So imagine an entire collection of a really big business.  They've used a lining, a fashion business, they've used a lining material, which is usually  made from trees or from cotton.  
**[0:29:17-0:29:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:29:17):**  Trees would be Lyocell or a sustainable version is Tencel.  And they buy that one material in huge quantities because they're going to line their whole  collection with it.  So that makes an impact.  When you change-  
**[0:29:30-0:29:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:29:30):**  So that's the entry point you would say, okay, the lowest hanging fruit.  I would say that's the best one.  Take your biggest spend as a fashion brand, whatever material that is, your highest quantity,  your highest quantity order and change that.  You won't get the biggest PR impact though, because who wants to tell a story about all  
**[0:29:46-0:29:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:29:46):**  this lining that's sustainable?  Like I get it from a PR point of view, it's not as valuable, but it's truthful and it's  honest and that's you making the biggest deal, which I would argue that consumers now do  want to hear stories like that.  That's actually a more interesting story because it educates as well.  
**[0:30:00-0:30:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:30:00):**  It doesn't misguide the consumer.  Another story that I wanted to tell off the back of this question is about how these businesses  that are larger can start to really, truly support their supply chain and the farmers  down at the bottom end of their supply chain.  Bottom not being derogatory at all, but bottom being baseline, like at the beginning of the  
**[0:30:21-0:30:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:30:21):**  story where the materials were grown.  Build relationships with them that go beyond just visiting the farm.  This I've heard from farmers a lot, especially I'm thinking particularly of an amazing farm  in the US that is 10,000 acres in Northern Montana on the border of Canada.  It's incredible what they're doing.  
**[0:30:40-0:30:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:30:40):**  They are really working at the cusp of, at the height of regenerative agriculture.  They want to transition into biodynamics.  They're working with a lot of biodynamic methods already.  So they are finding that the businesses that source their crops are really interested in  the ways that they're growing.  
**[0:30:58-0:31:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:30:58):**  They even want to come and visit the farm and make sure that they're really growing  them in these regenerative ways.  But they don't want to make any different a commitment to this farm than they would  any other normal supplier.  So in fact, what they're doing is taking a lot of time away from the team when they  
**[0:31:13-0:31:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:31:13):**  come and visit.  They're not paying for those visits.  They're not adding value to the farm by visiting and they're not making commitments that are  regenerative in the economic side of things.  Meaning that they're not taking advantage of-  
**[0:31:28-0:31:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:31:28):**  They want to take pictures and that's it.  Yeah.  They're not, they're not experimenting with CSAs, community supported agriculture.  They're not buying ahead of time.  That would be the most helpful thing is what I'm finding for farmers is that farmers just  
**[0:31:43-0:31:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:31:43):**  imagine if you were growing something and you had to pay for the whole thing to be grown  before you got money for it.  Oh wait, that's our normal system.  That's what every farmer has to do.  Potentially three to six months later after you harvest it and you don't even know-  
**[0:31:57-0:31:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:31:57):**  It's not fair.  Sometimes against prices, et cetera.  No, no.  It's not fair.  Better off take agreements is one of the keys, but a big key, let's say to unlocking money.  
**[0:32:08-0:32:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:32:08):**  You mentioned just one step back to biodynamic.  Do you remember when you stumbled upon biodynamic?  It feels like the next phase.  You were going deep into materials.  Do you remember the first time you heard about biodynamic farming?  
**[0:32:22-0:32:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:32:22):**  What did you think and what was it really like?  What was that meeting with biodynamic?  Let's say how was that or how did that happen?  I went to Steiner Waldorf schools.  I knew about biodynamics as a child and spent the night on a biodynamic farm when I was  
**[0:32:36-0:32:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:32:36):**  10 in the US in Tucson, Arizona and Santa Fe, New Mexico.  I knew about biodynamics my whole life and always thought it was great and then forgot  about it when I went into fashion.  When I started my sustainability journey, my mom reminded me.  I was learning that everything in fashion, all this information that I was gathering  
**[0:32:58-0:33:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:32:58):**  kept leading me back to soil.  It's all grown for us in soil.  My mom at this point said, oh, why don't you go and spend some time on a biodynamic farm?  Remember those?  I started to do just that.  
**[0:33:08-0:33:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:33:08):**  That was when I fell in love with biodynamics, realized it was a climate solution and started  Dirt, this charity that I now run, which is aiming or is there to support soil regeneration  globally.  The way that we do that is by supporting biodynamic farming initiatives all over the world.  Very global and creating demand for biodynamic produce, raising awareness about what biodynamics  
**[0:33:35-0:33:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:33:35):**  is because there are so many confusions around what biodynamics is.  Let's unpack.  What would you...  I would love to hear some of those stories, but let's start with anybody that doesn't  know.  
**[0:33:46-0:33:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:33:46):**  I'll put some links in the show notes below.  How would you describe biodynamic farming for, let's say on a photo shoot, you're being  asked by the CEO, I heard about this biodynamic farming.  What would you tell him or her?  Unfortunately, some usually him, what this type of farming or what this approach almost  
**[0:34:03-0:34:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:34:03):**  to life actually is?  What is it to you and how do you describe this normally to somebody that really doesn't  know anything about this type of agriculture or agriculture in general?  Biodynamic farming is one type of agriculture that can be used in any setting on land.  It doesn't have to be to grow crops.  
**[0:34:24-0:34:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:34:24):**  It can be used to afforest an area.  It can be used in ecosystem regeneration.  It can be used to repair a mining scar.  Biodynamic farming is a richly nutritious way to farm soil.  It centers around composting and you need animal manure in order to build the most robust  
**[0:34:46-0:34:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:34:46):**  compost which feeds the micro life under soil.  What's special about biodynamics that goes beyond its techniques and it could be said  that biodynamics is an umbrella of regenerative agriculture and you can use all the regenerative  techniques like agroforestry or rotational grazing, mobile grazing underneath that umbrella.  What is different about biodynamics is the preparations.  
**[0:35:11-0:35:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:35:11):**  The preparations are nine liquid tinctures that are made on the farm and sprayed across  the farm for very specific uses.  One is sprayed on compost, six of them are sprayed on compost.  One is sprayed on soil.  One is sprayed on the leaves of the trees before they bud.  
**[0:35:26-0:35:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:35:26):**  Things like that, like super specific applications and they're all made of ingredients from  mineral from plants and from animals and with very specific recipes at very specific times  of year.  This is the practice behind biodynamics.  At the end of the time of the making of the preparations, you might bury them for six  
**[0:35:46-0:35:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:35:46):**  months and then dig them up and you've got this incredible rich humus that is just turbocharged  micro life for soil and for fertility and for biodiversity.  What biodynamics sees is that why biodynamics makes these preparations is for the life within  plants.  Because look at a plant, it's green, it's growing, you can sometimes even eat it, you  
**[0:36:10-0:36:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:36:10):**  can smell it.  Everything in it is keeping it alive and we can see that when it dies.  It looks very different.  It's gray and shriveled.  So that's the life force within it and biodynamics recognizes that there is one and you can farm  
**[0:36:23-0:36:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:36:23):**  it and you do that with the preparations.  They work on the non-physical aspect of the plants, of the animals, of the humans and  of the earth.  This is the medicine for the earth that biodynamics has, which is extremely special right now  in the face of climate change and these preparations were developed in 1924 as a remedy for climate  
**[0:36:44-0:36:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:36:44):**  change.  And what happened to biodynamic farming that it would say didn't take?  I mean, this we're starting to find out, like on the let's say the traditional academic  scientific like are slowly catching up with this, let's say, and starting to scientifically  prove all of these methods that there's a lot of it in it.  
**[0:37:06-0:37:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:37:06):**  And it's working at scale, at any scale.  I mean, we've seen examples everywhere.  And somehow, biodynamic farming, the moment you mention it, you always get this chug like,  oh yeah, these are the weirdos in the corner.  And it's really odd because it is such a practical set of practices.  
**[0:37:24-0:37:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:37:24):**  And somehow now it seems like regenerative agriculture is taking off and applying most  of these, talking immensely about fermentation and all of that in life, in plants, in soil,  et cetera.  So why didn't that happen with biodynamic farming?  Like what went, I wouldn't say wrong, but why did it take this weird curve to the right  
**[0:37:42-0:37:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:37:42):**  or the left into weirdo land instead of mainstream?  We have an idea because you've studied this, you've looked deep into this and why did that  turn happen?  I definitely don't have the complete answer for that question, but I can ponder it for  a while.  
**[0:37:59-0:38:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:37:59):**  It's nearly 100 years old.  It's 98 years old right now.  And organic agriculture came out of biodynamic agriculture and that's often misunderstood.  It's kind of talked about that biodynamic agriculture builds on organic agriculture,  but actually organic came out of biodynamics and was a simplification of biodynamics that  
**[0:38:20-0:38:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:38:20):**  served a purpose and has been amazing in marketing and changing the way we think about mostly  food, not fashion as much.  And right now I think we need a more complex solution for nature because nature is very  complex and actually can't be simplified down into one specific formula.  And often, not always, because there are some regenerative organic farmers who are doing  
**[0:38:44-0:38:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:38:44):**  incredible things, but often organic can be just the same formula as conventional, but  a less toxic version than.  So it's still plant the seed, fertilize the seed, harvest the crop, and plant the seed  again.  And it just follows this kind of circle that isn't really full of life and isn't really  
**[0:39:06-0:39:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:39:06):**  regenerating soil nor biodiversity around it.  But to go back to your question, I think that the people who are attracted to biodynamics  are wonderfully humble and don't value shouting about the amazing things that they're doing.  And so that has naturally meant that the movement remains smaller and quite internally facing,  which is quite a beautiful thing when you think about it.  
**[0:39:30-0:39:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:39:30):**  No one's showing off.  Everyone's just doing their good work and it's amazing.  So I invite everyone to get into biodynamics, go and learn about it, go and visit a biodynamic  farm if they want you to visit, obviously.  Be respectful.  
**[0:39:43-0:39:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:39:43):**  Farmers don't always want.  Yeah, and do pay for it or buy a lot of things.  Exactly.  Offer something to them and be really grateful that you can go and spend time with them because  they're amazing.  
**[0:39:54-0:39:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:39:54):**  Biodynamic farmers are the most intelligent people I've ever met or spent time with.  I mean, what this practice does to humans is incredible.  They're on another level of being human.  Their conversations, the way they think, their observance of the land around them.  It's very, very special.  
**[0:40:10-0:40:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:40:10):**  This quality of sensitivity is heightened and heightened when you're doing these biodynamic  practices.  What is very unique about it as well is that it is certified in many places.  Like there is a certification, there is a certain standard that you have to, like before  you can call yourself obviously biodynamically certified.  
**[0:40:31-0:40:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:40:31):**  How did that happen?  And do you think it avoided the pitfalls of organic, which with the certification that  they asked the government to come in, in the US specifically, but in other places as well,  to certify it?  And that led to, of course, a boom in organic, but also, let's say, the loss of the original  
**[0:40:47-0:40:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:40:47):**  principles.  And like you said, it's just a less toxic version in many cases, in some cases it isn't.  In many cases, it's very large scale, relatively extractive, large plowing machines, etc.  It's not viewing the farm as a holistic entity or an holistic organism.  Do you think that biodynamic certification has avoided that pitfall?  
**[0:41:09-0:41:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:41:09):**  The certifying body of biodynamics is called Demeter.  And Demeter exists all over the world and is wonderfully independent of itself in a  way.  And I think that is a protection mechanism that we should really respect.  So there are many, many entities of Demeter all over the world, most of which can offer  
**[0:41:31-0:41:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:41:31):**  the certification, some of which just promote biodynamics.  But basically each territory around the world has its own Demeter.  And that means that communication around the world can sometimes be a challenge to make  it all the same.  But it also, again, as I said, it protects from this unification, this centralization  
**[0:41:52-0:41:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:41:52):**  that can often lead to lower quality everything.  So I really respect this about the biodynamic movement that they have maintained this autonomy  in different regions, understanding that different regions have different needs.  Nevertheless, the standard of the certification is equally as high everywhere in the world.  And what would you tell to investors?  
**[0:42:14-0:42:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:42:14):**  Imagine we're in a large theater, we do this in person and the room is full of or the audience  is full of investors that are curious, obviously, because otherwise they wouldn't have come.  We're talking about soil, we're talking about life, we're talking about really good food  and fibers and materials.  What would you tell them when they walk out?  
**[0:42:32-0:42:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:42:32):**  Obviously, we're not giving investment advice, but when they walk out of that theater tonight  after that, what should they do the next day?  Should they visit that farm?  Should they search for it?  Where would they, where would you send them to learn more and to start getting active?  
**[0:42:45-0:42:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:42:45):**  Not maybe immediately buying a few million euros worth of flex processing machinery,  but where would you send them to learn more where we definitely need more, let's say,  investment resources in this space?  Is it to grow the farms?  Is it to grow the processing?  
**[0:43:02-0:43:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:43:02):**  Where would you send them to start getting to work?  Well, there's something very interesting happening with Demeter and with biodynamics globally,  which is that this is a certified, meaning all these farms are of a similar caliber all  over the world.  Think about carbon crediting and how that voluntary carbon market right now is a, I  
**[0:43:24-0:43:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:43:24):**  guess we could say mess sometimes.  I was going to say the same.  You were?  Okay, good.  It's a bit different, but it's a bit messy.  
**[0:43:33-0:43:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:43:33):**  It's all over the place.  Let's put it that way kindly.  It's all over the place because it's new and there are many conflicting views about it.  First of all, and I'd like to highlight the indigenous point of view or many indigenous  points of view is that the carbon market itself is deeply flawed because it's capitalistic.  
**[0:43:51-0:43:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:43:51):**  So when you put a value on something that is of nature, you are undermining its intrinsic  value without its monetary value and that can be really dangerous.  And let's listen to indigenous peoples because they are the wisdom holders.  They have been protecting our earth forever and a lot of different groups of people have  constantly trampled on their teachings, ways, knowledge, and themselves, their cultures.  
**[0:44:20-0:44:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:44:20):**  So that's just a caveat that I want to share that opinion that we need to take that into  account as we look at the carbon market and the nature market.  And biodynamics has a unique opportunity to be able to look at and consider its nature  value because biodynamic farmers are offering so many services to the public good, so many.  And it's not, but they only get paid for their crops.  
**[0:44:52-0:44:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:44:52):**  And that is something that is just really mind boggling me right now and how I want  to find a solution for this.  These biodynamic farmers deserve to be remunerated for the services that they are providing humanity  and the earth.  And those include things like water absorption and retention on biodynamic farms is so much  
**[0:45:11-0:45:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:45:11):**  higher than neighboring farms, always.  Then reduction in fire because fires don't burn as well on a farm that is absorbing so  much water.  So those again, two very, very good solutions.  They increase quality of life to farmers.  
**[0:45:30-0:45:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:45:30):**  Biodynamic farmers are not as vulnerable to the mental health issues that tragically,  tragically, I mean, suicide rates in farming are higher than pretty much every national  average.  And it's horrific that these are the people who grow everything we need for us.  And yet they're in such an impossible situation, mostly brought on by debt and the debt cycle  
**[0:45:57-0:46:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:45:57):**  comes from the purchasing of chemicals and genetically modified seed and heavy duty machinery,  but they do feel so unwell and so pressurized that they're actually willing to take their  life.  I mean, it's just, this is so not okay.  And as a society, we need to figure out a solution where we can start supporting farmers  
**[0:46:17-0:46:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:46:17):**  in a way that actually makes them feel good about their lives because of the services  that they're providing.  So to carry on with the list of the services that biodynamic farmers are providing, increased  biodiversity on the farm and also farms act as a safe haven for endangered species because  they can come and live on that farm without the spraying of chemicals, for instance.  
**[0:46:38-0:46:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:46:38):**  Whereas the list goes on and on, I've been able to find about 10 or 15 incredible services  that farmers could be paid for.  So I'm thinking about earth assets rather than carbon credits, because the mainstream  climate narrative you may have noticed is in a bit of a carbon tunnel.  People are only talking about carbon and when you only talk about carbon, you don't have  
**[0:47:01-0:47:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:47:01):**  time to talk about any of the other really, really, really important urgent aspects that  we need to resolve in order to avoid a climate crisis.  If we're talking about net zero by 2050, and that's the only thing we do, we won't win.  Even if we sequestered all the extra atmospheric carbon tomorrow, we would still be in climate  change because it is not only a carbon problem.  
**[0:47:22-0:47:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:47:22):**  It's also a pollution problem.  It's also an ocean acidification problem.  It's also a water cycle problem.  A what?  A water cycle problem.  
**[0:47:30-0:47:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:47:30):**  And there are people that argue.  Yes, sure, it's a motorcycle problem too.  But not the biggest one.  You can do some meditation on that, on the motorcycle diaries.  But I think there are people arguing even that carbon is a symptom of a broken water  
**[0:47:48-0:47:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:47:48):**  cycle, of our land being not full of life and thus full of water.  And we should focus on water.  Jena, I will put a link below, we interviewed him, makes a very strong point of most of  the heating comes from a broken water cycle, not from carbon.  To me, we shouldn't worry about carbon, but it is a very small piece or it's a piece of  
**[0:48:06-0:48:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:48:06):**  a much bigger puzzle.  Yeah.  But then how do we compensate for that without becoming the issue again of a capitalistic  system or the issue again of what we've done so many times with indigenous peoples, et  cetera, that we as soon as we put a price on it, let's say we also argue that if this  
**[0:48:22-0:48:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:48:22):**  forest is worth a billion, which Charles Eisenstein just brought up in a previous interview, which  should be out of now, otherwise we'll link it below, then if we pay two billion for it,  we should cut it down and we should develop that mine underneath.  How do we avoid that reasoning of as soon as we put a price on it, it means that when  we pay that price or more, we can do whatever we want with it.  
**[0:48:45-0:48:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:48:45):**  This is a whole different rabbit hole we go into, but what has your research until now?  I'm not saying there should be an answer, et cetera.  How would you approach that when we want to start paying as soon as possible biodynamic  farmers and land stewards for the immense services?  I also don't like the word ecosystem services, but let's say ecosystem services they provide.  
**[0:49:06-0:49:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:49:06):**  How do we start tomorrow without digging ourselves into another hole that we don't want to get  into?  Well, I think that to start in my space is the Demeter certification guarantees a certain  quality of farming, so that therefore it's easier to say these farms are of a similar  ilk and so we can guarantee that this is happening on these farms because it's part  
**[0:49:30-0:49:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:49:30):**  of our certification.  These farmers deserve to be at least recognized.  First of all, just recognize them for what they're doing.  Then a later stage would be to actually pay them for what they're doing and maybe that  needs to come out of subsidies.  
**[0:49:43-0:49:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:49:43):**  Maybe taxpayer money could go there.  I would feel amazing.  If I knew that my taxpayer money were going to ecosystem services that support farmers  to grow richly nutritious food as a byproduct, amazing.  How great would that be?  
**[0:49:58-0:49:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:49:58):**  Because right now I know-  Instead of subsidies that are doing something very different.  Right now I know where my taxpayer money is going when it comes to agricultural subsidies  and I am personally through my taxes paying for the purchasing of immense amounts of chemicals  that are destroying the earth when they're mined, when they're created in a lab, also  
**[0:50:15-0:50:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:50:15):**  in transport, also when they're applied to soil and insects and plants.  It's just crazy that I'm paying for that and I don't want to be paying for that.  I think that is the first shift and I want to recognize that I'm not saying take subsidies  away from the farmers who are using those subsidies to survive.  Not at all.  
**[0:50:39-0:50:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:50:39):**  I'm saying use subsidies to support farmers to transition to farm in a way that's nature  friendly, hopefully biodynamic.  Farmers want to farm this way.  No farmer wants to destroy soil.  No farmer is sitting on their land going, I want to kill all the micro life under the  
**[0:50:56-0:50:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:50:56):**  soil.  Not at all.  Farmers are really intelligent, amazing humans who are just stuck in a cycle that isn't a  system that isn't working and we need to educate out of it and provide exits.  I have two questions that I always like to ask based on that actually.  
**[0:51:13-0:51:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:51:13):**  What if you had a magic wand and you had one thing you could change?  Could be in fashion, could be in land use, could be in general, could be global consciousness.  Most people then say, yeah, I would like to change two things.  I would like to force you to do one thing only, but if you have two, it's also fine.  What would you change overnight?  
**[0:51:30-0:51:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:51:30):**  Tomorrow morning we all wake up and Arizona changed one thing.  What would that be?  Maybe we didn't know that you did it.  Obviously, you don't need the credit.  What if you had that amazing power and responsibility?  
**[0:51:40-0:51:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:51:40):**  What would that be?  I'm smiling now because I'm going to go really radical on you and my activism is quite radical.  I read the most radical people and I love it.  The most radical makes the most sense.  It's the most logical.  
**[0:51:52-0:51:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:51:52):**  What I'm going to say here is get ourselves out.  I would if I had a magic wand, get ourselves out of this domination cycle.  We are conditioned to think that domination is our status quo.  We need to dominate.  We do it in all our relationships, our relationship with the earth, our relationship with our  
**[0:52:11-0:52:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:52:11):**  children, our relationship with our friends and partners, our relationships professionally.  They're all about domination built on domination.  We need to change this around, learn from people like Rhianne Eisler, for instance,  who wrote a whole book on the partnership way, which is one great asset when you're  trying to learn how to relearn, recondition yourself into a more positive way of being  
**[0:52:33-0:52:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:52:33):**  because when you stop living in a dominating way, you have much more space to be curious.  Your creativity can grow and you can make decisions that you would otherwise not have  made.  We need this in the face of climate change because climate change is a human behavioral  problem.  
**[0:52:50-0:52:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:52:50):**  It's not a carbon problem as we were saying.  It's just us.  We need to change the way we think.  There are many, many ways to do this.  Go in and learn from indigenous peoples.  
**[0:53:01-0:53:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:53:01):**  They all know this.  They've been doing this forever.  If you're a white European descent person, you have indigenous roots too.  It took me ages to realize this, but I used to think all the glorious people with brown  skin, they have indigenous roots.  
**[0:53:17-0:53:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:53:17):**  I do too.  Every one of us does.  Look at the Druids if you're from Britain.  They have incredible rituals and ways of thinking that are more distant, so it's harder to find  the European ones because they got wiped out longer ago than the ones in North America,  
**[0:53:32-0:53:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:53:32):**  for instance, in South America.  But that wisdom is what's going to fuel our future.  It's the most exciting learning I've ever done.  Just recently read a book.  Yeah, very, very good.  
**[0:53:45-0:53:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:53:45):**  Read a book.  I wouldn't say I mean, we're used to something on this podcast.  I would definitely link the books of Rian below as well.  I read a book.  I'm going to remember the title probably, Talking for the Trees, I think, or Speak for  
**[0:54:00-0:54:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:54:00):**  the Trees on someone in Ireland that was the last one that got the traditional knowledge.  She was specifically picked by the community that when the last standing forest in Ireland,  which there are not many anymore, and especially now, and she was trained in everything.  She was trained.  She got all the, the full, as we would say now, download.  
**[0:54:21-0:54:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:54:21):**  But of course, then back in the days, she didn't.  And she went into academia and slowly but surely in the US, she basically proved, scientifically  proved all the things she learned already when she was a teenager, which is a fascinating  short book.  I'll put the title below in the show notes as well.  
**[0:54:37-0:54:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:54:37):**  And it was really, it's really interesting that because we need those bridges between  and she was very, very lucky, and we are lucky because she wrote it down.  And some things are because she mentioned a lot of the trees at the end, and a lot of  the recipes, a lot of the healing.  We don't know anymore because it got lost with the Celts, I think.  
**[0:54:54-0:54:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:54:54):**  And but there are still bridges back to that.  Of course, it's longer ago than we would like to.  But I know many farmers that in places start to go deep into old agricultural or architecture  books to understand what was grown here and what made sense in places.  People go back all the way to Roman times.  
**[0:55:10-0:55:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:55:10):**  But of course, we have to go back way further to start seeing, okay, what made sense here?  What was the context?  What was the place like?  What, what grows well together?  What doesn't?  
**[0:55:19-0:55:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:55:19):**  What makes, I mean, a lot of this has been developed, probably lost because it wasn't  written down or it was written down and then burned at some point, or was just told in  oral oral history.  And unfortunately, we lost a lot of that.  But there is still some of that around.  
**[0:55:33-0:55:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:55:33):**  And we need to really make sure we capture it and start reusing it and by that see how  it works and if it works.  Yeah, it holds so many answers and so many tips about what is going to work in the future.  So thinking from an investment point of view, if you're looking for what really is going  to be a climate resilient investment, learn all this about the indigenous people.  
**[0:55:56-0:55:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:55:56):**  I mean, all the secrets are hidden there so that then you can use that knowledge to apply  it to what businesses are available right now to invest into the ones who are aligned  with what indigenous people say those ones are going to succeed.  And it's a perfect bridge to the second question.  People are frequent listeners from the podcast.  
**[0:56:14-0:56:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:56:14):**  If you made it until now, you must be probably a frequent listener.  How would you invest money if you let's say a billion dollars or billion euros?  Let's keep it in Europe for now.  I mean, you can invest it everywhere.  If you had to put that to work, obviously, I'm not looking for the exact euro amounts  
**[0:56:28-0:56:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:56:28):**  behind the comma, etc.  I don't care.  I would care more about what would you prioritize?  What would you what would be the main themes you would focus on in a short time or a longer  time if you had to put this amount of money to work?  
**[0:56:45-0:56:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:56:45):**  Future tech solutions, looking at biomimicry, ocean regeneration, land regeneration, but  not through technological machinery, because that is too costly to build the investment  that it absorbs.  First of all, I mean, the billions that go into making machines to regenerate.  It doesn't make sense.  
**[0:57:03-0:57:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:57:03):**  Just do it with by putting that billion, those billions into people, because people need  jobs and people do better things with money than machines do.  Definitely.  And I would look at simple things like killing two birds with one stone.  For instance, I've been thinking a lot about automobile pollution.  
**[0:57:23-0:57:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:57:23):**  We have roads.  We're not going to stop using them anytime soon.  Instead, what we're doing is building cars that use batteries, but we don't have a good  system for disposing of batteries or recycling batteries right now.  So they're also causing immense amount of problems, even though they are a solution  
**[0:57:38-0:57:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:57:38):**  for air pollution.  But what about just planting greenery on the edge of every single road to absorb a lot  of the pollution so that it doesn't get into our lungs, so that it doesn't get into our  farms, because so many farms are on the roadside.  And what is that doing with the diesel particulate matter in the air?  
**[0:57:56-0:57:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:57:56):**  It's getting on our food.  That's not OK.  It's getting into our soil.  Also, one of the biggest plastic pollutions is tires as they drive on the road and disintegrate.  And that's all going by the roadside.  
**[0:58:07-0:58:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:58:07):**  So we need a buffer on the side of every single road.  And that should be a prioritization for municipalities.  Get a buffer on every road legally and plant it with native species of plants, have it  tended to by local communities, make it a community event.  I think making everything we do into a community event can really increase the power of it.  
**[0:58:30-0:58:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:58:30):**  It's free marketing, but also it brings people together and makes people happier.  And when you go to, I don't know if you go to, let's say agriecology or regenerative  agriculture, even biodynamic, actually, when you go to biodynamic conferences, where are  you contrarian?  Where in your group, in your bubble, let's say, bubble is a bad word, in a positive sense,  
**[0:58:54-0:58:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:58:54):**  where do you think differently?  And it's definitely a question inspired by John Kempf.  Like, what do you believe to be true about biodynamic farming that others don't?  And what do you others in your own scene, because I'm curious where you think differently.  What's the way you stand out when you go to these kind of meetings?  
**[0:59:13-0:59:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:59:13):**  I found that I think of biodynamics at scale.  I think of biodynamics covering all the terrestrial land that humans manage.  And I think that the biodynamic movement hasn't been thinking so big like that.  And I hope that that's going to happen.  And I know there are many, I'm not saying I'm the only person thinking about that, and  
**[0:59:34-0:59:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:59:34):**  I'm not trying to toot my own horn at all.  But I have received feedback from people in the biodynamic movement saying, oh, wow, I  wasn't thinking of it as such a big scale solution.  And so I'd like to run with that and keep going, because it is an incredible climate  solution with so many opportunities.  
**[0:59:54-0:59:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=0:59:54):**  Why do you think that is?  Why is there, hasn't been, I'm not saying you're the first one or the only one, like  you mentioned, but few, let's say talking about, OK, how do we do a region, a country,  an island, a bioregion landscape in these agroecology, life focused, holistic view,  biodynamic farming?  
**[1:00:15-1:00:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=1:00:15):**  Like what has been holding back?  I see it in region in general as well.  Like it's very, we're very much focused on the farm level.  And then sort of what happens beyond the farm gate is like, yeah, but if your whole landscape  is moving backwards, it would be nice if it moves forward.  
**[1:00:27-1:00:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=1:00:27):**  It makes your life a lot easier because your neighbor isn't spraying like crazy or has  been polluting the river.  I mean, you are all in the same system.  So I would imagine there's a lot of work going into landscape scale regeneration and there's  surprisingly not so much happening there.  
**[1:00:43-1:00:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=1:00:43):**  What has been holding back the biodynamic movement to think at scale?  Because it is, I mean, I will link below the interview we did with La Viala in Tuscany.  It's more than a thousand, two hundred hectares under management, plus a lot more forestry.  Like scale is definitely there.  Maybe not so known, but it's there.  
**[1:01:00-1:01:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=1:01:00):**  Like what has been holding back the rest of the movement there to start thinking or dreaming  maybe about scale?  I wonder if it's because farmers are so busy.  They're so busy managing the amount of work and the amount of land that they have.  Maybe it takes non-farmers coming into this space and going, how can we think big?  
**[1:01:21-1:01:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=1:01:21):**  What can I do to help you expand?  Which is the question that I ask every biodynamic farmer I meet.  How can I support the amazing work that you're already doing so that this can become one  of the most important climate solutions out there?  And maybe it takes that.  
**[1:01:39-1:01:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=1:01:39):**  And to wrap up, I mean, I usually ask a final question and then it's never the final question,  but what are you busy with these days?  What are you excited about, let's say over the next month as we're going into summer  2022?  I'm not explaining obviously when you're listening to this, but we're talking spring, early spring,  
**[1:01:55-1:02:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=1:01:55):**  depending where you are, let's say spring 2022 on a Northern hemisphere, which I learned  lately actually that according to indigenous peoples, usually the North was down and the  South was up, which is very interesting from our perspective, but let's spark that for  a second.  What are you excited about for this summer in terms of your work on your activism on  
**[1:02:15-1:02:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=1:02:15):**  let's say the most radical stuff?  What are we, what should we look out for from you and your team?  In terms of what I'm learning about that I'm most excited is I've gotten into the Divine  Feminine.  I feel like that's the next step and it's the one after the domination stuff.  
**[1:02:31-1:02:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=1:02:31):**  It's incredible when you learn about the, well, I'll just leave it there.  It's incredible.  Go and look at the stuff, Mary Magdalene, Hildegard, all of these stories and legends  and the way modern people are thinking about it now, academics as well as citizens, it's  really adding a lot to the way I think.  
**[1:02:52-1:02:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=1:02:52):**  Then also I'm really excited about COP27, which is coming up in November and the preparation  I'm doing for that with Dirt and other organizations, the Biodynamic Association in Egypt because  COP27 is in Egypt and also other organizations that we may be partnering with to raise awareness  about biodynamics.  Excited about my consulting, helping more brands to businesses to transition.  
**[1:03:15-1:03:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=1:03:15):**  I'm also have been wanting to for ages and it looks like it's finally happening, getting  into the investment world.  I've been having my eye on so many businesses for the last seven years of my activism and  watching them all become successful.  The ones that I thought were going to become successful did and the ones that I thought,  
**[1:03:36-1:03:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=1:03:36):**  that's not really a good idea, didn't become successful.  I'm honing in on how to choose businesses that are going to succeed and I'm really excited  about becoming a bigger part of the investing space through conversations that I'm having  that are too fledgling to talk about now, but really excited about how they will develop.  I love the regenerative space and it turns out I have a relatively good barometer for  
**[1:04:02-1:04:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=1:04:02):**  what is going to work and what isn't.  I think that's because I'm working as much as I can to take my ego out of it.  This isn't about me.  I'm doing this work because I love it.  I'm enriched on a daily basis by the learning that I do on a daily basis to educate myself  
**[1:04:19-1:04:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=1:04:19):**  about the climate crisis, about the earth, about human behaviors, about all of these  things that intertwine and interlock.  I think I can see from a really clear point of view because of that.  I'm not in it to win it in a way.  I'm just in it to support because the win is already there every minute that I spend  
**[1:04:39-1:04:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=1:04:39):**  of my time doing this.  Depending on the time, at the moment I don't pay myself at dirt and I work 45 to 55 hours  a week on it.  It's amazing to be able to do that.  I feel so grateful and lucky that my modeling career is allowing me to do that.  
**[1:04:55-1:04:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=1:04:55):**  I understand that most people do not have that privilege and I don't take it lightly  at all.  It's amazing to participate in the gift economy like this, to be giving my time for an organization  that really needs it because dirt is fledgling and it wouldn't be the same if it needed  to pay a CEO right now, which at some point I will need to do that.  
**[1:05:16-1:05:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=1:05:16):**  I will replace some of what I'm doing or all of what I'm doing with somebody else who's  probably going to be way more skilled than I am in some things.  But at the moment it's necessary that I'm able to do this and I love it.  I don't think there's a better one or a better way to end this conversation.  We'll definitely follow up on a lot of this work on the investment side, on COP and all  
**[1:05:37-1:05:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=1:05:37):**  of that.  I hope it's not the last time.  We had you on the podcast and I want to definitely thank you so much for your work and for coming  on here to share and to discuss about the funny parts, the potential, the huge opportunities,  the barriers of biodynamic farming and actually fashion.  
**[1:05:58-1:05:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=1:05:58):**  We learned a lot I think in these episodes.  We very rarely talk about fashion and fibers, which is such an enormous industry.  We're sort of keeping the core.  So thank you so much for what you're doing and for coming on here to share and hope to  see you soon.  
**[1:06:12-1:06:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=1:06:12):**  It was so much fun to talk to you.  Thank you so much always for everything that you're doing and just the space that you give  to everyone in regenerative investment.  It's so important, so important and interesting to listen to.  So thank you for having me.  
**[1:06:31-1:06:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=1:06:31):**  Thank you so much for listening all the way to the end.  For the show notes and links discussed, check out our website investinginregenitiveregagrculture.com  forward slash post.  Thank you so much for listening all the way to the end.  For the show notes and links we discussed in this episode, check out our website investinginregenitiveregagrculture.com  
**[1:06:50-1:06:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=1:06:50):**  forward slash posts.  If you liked this episode, why not share it with a friend or give us a rating on Apple  podcast.  That really helps.  Thanks again and see you next time.  
**[1:07:27-1:07:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=1:07:27):**  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to put money  
**[1:08:07-1:08:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=1:08:07):**  to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011 and recording  these podcasts since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework, what to focus on with the podcast, how have  we picked interviewees, what questions should you ask, what is happening in the space, what  
**[1:08:29-1:08:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=1:08:29):**  should you read, what should you listen, what should you watch, how to approach this space.  For whom is this course?  You, the soil builders and investors in the space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  
**[1:08:50-1:08:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=1:08:50):**  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management, consultants, etc.  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  
**[1:09:09-1:09:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=1:09:09):**  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you.  And I'm very aware that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very  
**[1:09:22-1:09:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=1:09:22):**  different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  
**[1:09:34-1:09:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=1:09:34):**  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides.  So you don't have to write along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  
**[1:09:57-1:09:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=1:09:57):**  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  
**[1:10:13-1:10:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=1:10:13):**  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  
**[1:10:28-1:10:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/arizona-muse#t=1:10:28):**  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  