### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2022-00-13)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  Why are CPG or consumer packaged goods companies so important in the regenerative transition?  And I'm really looking forward to the upcoming regenerative food system investment forum  
**[0:00:23-0:00:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:00:23):**  on October 12th and 13th in Denver, Colorado.  Today we're chatting with Anthony who runs the business development there and has made  18 personal investments into the regenerative food and ag space.  Plus he healed his autoimmune skin disease by nutrient dense food.  This is the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast, Investing as if the Planet  
**[0:00:46-0:00:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:00:46):**  Mattered, where we talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why my focus on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  
**[0:01:07-0:01:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:01:07):**  our land and our sea, grow our food, what we eat, wear and consume.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  To make it easy for fans to support our work, we launched our membership community and so  many of you have joined us as a member.  
**[0:01:25-0:01:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:01:25):**  Thank you.  If our work created value for you and if you have the means and only if you have the means,  consider joining us.  Find out more on comroad.com slash investing in RegenAg.  That is comroad.com slash investing in RegenAg.  
**[0:01:40-0:01:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:01:40):**  Or find the link below.  Welcome to another episode today with Anthony Corsaro, Director of Business Development  at the Regenerative Food System Investment Media Company, but most importantly, the forum,  which is going to happen on October 12 and 13.  I'm going.  
**[0:01:59-0:02:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:01:59):**  I would love for all of you to see you there in person to meet.  So we are very excited to unpack the forum, first of all, but we'll do that in a later  part of this interview.  But also the personal story of Anthony, who has been connected to this place for quite  a bit and is very active in it.  
**[0:02:15-0:02:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:02:15):**  So welcome, Anthony, to the show.  Thanks, Kevin.  Great to be here, man.  Appreciate it.  So as always, the first question, how did you end up focusing on soil?  
**[0:02:25-0:02:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:02:25):**  Yeah.  So my family's been in the food business for almost 100 years.  My grandfather was, you know, an orphan, actually, in Indianapolis.  And he was second or third generation Italian American.  And at that time, there wasn't a lot of opportunities for folks like him.  
**[0:02:41-0:02:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:02:41):**  But produce wholesaling was a low margin, but a decent opportunity to make an income.  And so my dad followed in his footsteps.  I told myself I would never follow in their footsteps.  And then I actually ended up kind of eating those words as a young adult and worked in  the family business after it had been acquired by a private equity firm and learned a lot,  
**[0:03:02-0:03:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:03:02):**  but took a step away after getting great experience there to deal with an autoimmune disease that  I've had since I was about 14.  And through the journey with the disease, food as medicine and environmental toxicity  were really the two biggest barriers to me being healthy.  And I kind of solve those on the sabbatical and on this decade plus long journey.  
**[0:03:25-0:03:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:03:25):**  And I just I don't remember the very, very first thing about regenerative agriculture  that kind of sparked my interest.  I mean, obviously, I kind of watched the biggest little farm kiss the ground.  People were talking about it.  I listened to a podcast with with Dr. Zack Bush.  
**[0:03:39-0:03:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:03:39):**  But it was, you know, the topic overall was just a book I couldn't put down.  And I just got totally captivated by it.  When I was on the sabbatical, I didn't really know what I wanted to do.  And I just couldn't I couldn't stop learning about region ag.  I couldn't stop researching it.  
**[0:03:54-0:03:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:03:54):**  And I realized that, you know, my family had bought and sold millions and millions and  millions of dollars worth of food.  But I had no idea how food was grown.  You know, I knew how to unload it and put it away and repick it and send it out to grocery  stores and merchandise it and sell it.  
**[0:04:10-0:04:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:04:10):**  But I had no idea how it was grown.  And so I kind of got obsessed with with soil health and region ag and just dove in from  there.  And do you remember what like the trigger that healthy food, healthy soil and your own  health is connected?  
**[0:04:26-0:04:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:04:26):**  Because I think many people it's very easy to now talk about it and say, okay, of course,  it's connected.  And we see the reports coming out.  We see books coming out this year.  But it's not such an obvious connection, because otherwise, many more people would make it like,  
**[0:04:38-0:04:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:04:38):**  do you remember in your journey trying to figure out what to do with this autoimmune  disease?  You took a right or left turn at some point and ended up focusing on food?  Like, how did that happen?  Through a lot of trial and error and some really good naturopathic and functional medicine  
**[0:04:54-0:04:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:04:54):**  doctors that finally after banging, you know, it into my head for quite some time that it  was super important.  It, you know, it just sunk in and seeing is believing that that's a saying for a reason,  right.  My disease is skin related, and I just started to look better overall, totally.  
**[0:05:10-0:05:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:05:10):**  And my skin blemishes started to go away.  And so there's just no better kind of proof in the pudding than that.  And that to me is an extremely important piece of Regen Ag overall.  Because if you go to the farms, if you go to a Regen farm, and you go to a conventional  farm in the same day, or the same week or the same month, and you can really see, touch,  
**[0:05:27-0:05:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:05:27):**  feel smell the difference, like, you get it, you don't even need you don't need the research  or any of the, you know, all the other great things that we have.  But once you see touch, feel smell, you get it.  And it could have stopped there, like, is it okay, I fixed it for myself.  And you might, I don't know, do a bit of advocacy work for for maybe people with the same, with  
**[0:05:50-0:05:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:05:50):**  the same issue, and then sort of stop there and continue to work in the food space or  somewhere else, because maybe you were tired with that.  But you didn't like what was the trigger there to say, No, I'm going to actually dedicate  the rest of my career to that maybe the rest, like a good portion of your career to that  to do more than just fixing my own issue.  
**[0:06:09-0:06:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:06:09):**  Yeah, the exact trigger.  I don't know.  I think it just made too much sense.  And I was just so, so excited about it.  And I also started to see really early on, you know, there, there wasn't, I mentioned  
**[0:06:21-0:06:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:06:21):**  biggest little farm, I mentioned kiss the ground.  And I was listening to a ton of your podcasts.  And I kind of noticed, we just needed a ton of education and content circulating about  this topic.  And so your podcast also taught me like, there's all these great pioneers doing doing investment  
**[0:06:36-0:06:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:06:36):**  work in the space, but we still don't have anywhere near the capital from a public or  a private perspective flowing into the space.  And so I think just early on, I saw that void.  And I was, I was in a couple of angel deals outside of food and ag.  And my mom's a pretty seasoned angel investor, both her and my dad.  
**[0:06:54-0:06:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:06:54):**  And I just went to them and I said, Hey, you know, I have I have some capital, would you  guys help help me if I started to look at this space, I really believe that it's the  future of food.  And I really believe there's an opportunity for all the impact, yes, but also solid financial  returns here.  
**[0:07:08-0:07:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:07:08):**  And they really supported that.  And that's kind of turned into what Outlaw Ventures is today.  And you know, there's no there's no teacher in lifelike experience, you got to get your  hands dirty.  And so I think just opening myself up to that deal flow, open myself up to that network.  
**[0:07:23-0:07:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:07:23):**  And then I found RFSI.  And then all these things kind of started to snowball and domino and it turned into  the beautiful thing it is today.  And how skeptical I'm putting words in their mouth, were your parents about this?  They're very seasoned angel investors.  
**[0:07:37-0:07:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:07:37):**  They've seen the food space from inside and from the family side.  And you come with this.  I've seen this documentary, and I would love to invest in region food and ag.  Like what was their honest response to that?  Yeah, they actually got it right off the bat.  
**[0:07:53-0:07:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:07:53):**  So I give both my mom and dad a lot of credit.  I think in that is for a couple reasons.  One, they had saw my transformation from a health perspective and how food, you know,  played a part in that.  I think my mom was also exploring that for herself.  
**[0:08:05-0:08:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:08:05):**  And then, you know, we own a produce distribution business.  So we sold fresh healthy food to people, we didn't sell Twizzlers and Skittles to people,  you know, so we always ate pretty well, I would say, especially versus the mainstream,  we still had the classic, I think 90s children, American sins of fast food and vegetable oils  and some things that I definitely don't endorse now.  
**[0:08:26-0:08:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:08:26):**  But overall, we ate pretty well.  And food, being Italian Americans was always a huge piece of kind of our vitality.  And I think they understood it right off the bat, actually.  And so they supported me a lot.  And I really appreciate that.  
**[0:08:43-0:08:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:08:43):**  And so Outlaw Ventures now grew into, I think, 18 investments.  What's the rationale behind that?  And what excites you in that?  What excites you in a portfolio or the companies you've been working with?  I obviously put a link below on with all the portfolio companies.  
**[0:09:00-0:09:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:09:00):**  So you can dig into that deeper.  What has the journey been like?  Yeah, it's been a true learning journey, which I've really appreciated.  And like I said, there's no way to learn in this life better than just doing.  And so the portfolio 18, like you said, two funds, one of the fund is non food and ag.  
**[0:09:18-0:09:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:09:18):**  And then the other fund is Trailhead Capital, who's obviously a pioneering voice in the  region ag VC kind of world.  And then 16 directs, one is non food and ag and the rest are food and ag.  And within that 15, you have three distribution companies, one the existing family business,  and then two kind of new distribution businesses, two ag tech on farm.  
**[0:09:42-0:09:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:09:42):**  One apparel that's regeneration nation, one apparel that's the non food and ag, one food  service slash food service tech, a little bit of debt into stewards.  So I would call that FinTech and then six CPG or consumer packaged goods, which is where  I kind of saw the biggest gap from an angel side.  So if you're going to do early stage equity, if you're not going to do debt investments,  
**[0:10:04-0:10:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:10:04):**  you really have brands, you have tech and tech can be ag tech, FinTech, supply chain  tech.  But I think we've seen some traditional food and ag VC go into more of the tech stuff because  the multiples are better, the opportunity to IPO is better than in CPG.  But I really think there is this void right now to support growth stage and early stage  
**[0:10:28-0:10:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:10:28):**  CPG and regenerative CPG, which is kind of being discounted because the multiples aren't  as great.  Usually the two to five X revenue.  So they're not as high as some of those tech valuations and multiples, but I think there's  a great opportunity for impact and returns in that space.  
**[0:10:44-0:10:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:10:44):**  And just CPG is consumer producer, no, what is that?  Consumers packaged goods.  Packaged goods.  So it's the package side of things.  It's not the Skittles obviously.  
**[0:10:54-0:10:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:10:54):**  But why is it such an exciting space for you apart from the fact that it's neglected and  not so much money is flowing into, which is always a reason to look at things, but always  also a reason to be skeptical.  So why did you get so excited or are you getting so excited because it's clear that your portfolio  is leaning towards that.  
**[0:11:12-0:11:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:11:12):**  If in the future we'll be doing more investments, I'm imagining it will be in that space.  Like what's the exciting piece both from a return perspective, but also from the regeneration  perspective in the CPG space.  Yeah, a lot.  There's a lot of reasons.  
**[0:11:23-0:11:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:11:23):**  You know what gets talked about a lot in this conversation is we have to create market demand.  We have to create consumer awareness and brands are the greatest vehicle to do that.  So brands that taste great, look great, tell great stories.  I love brands.  I love branding.  
**[0:11:37-0:11:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:11:37):**  I love working on brand strategy and go to market.  So it's just fulfilling for me to help those organizations with those things.  So that's kind of one big bucket.  And I think the second big bucket is you can have the chicken and the egg conversation  of, okay, well, do we need to ramp up production first or do we need to ramp up kind of end  
**[0:11:53-0:11:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:11:53):**  market demand and brand demand first.  And I think we've seen with, has organic scale to the level that we want it to?  No, but you have to have brands, you have to have anchor brands with some scale or a  collaboration of smaller brands, creating some scale together that creates that market  demand and pull through for the products, which is going to create the demand for the  
**[0:12:16-0:12:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:12:16):**  practice implementation and integration on farm.  And how difficult is it to start a CPG brand and to grow it compared to a tech brand, for  instance, or compared to other pieces in this puzzle?  I mean, they're all tricky and all difficult, but I'm just imagining getting into sales  channels like supermarkets, et cetera, or are you actually seeing the biggest potential,  
**[0:12:40-0:12:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:12:40):**  I don't know, is online and go direct to consumer?  Why is it possible now compared to maybe 10 years ago?  We see organic brands, of course, grown.  Many have been absorbed by others and have gotten reasonably slash good returns.  Actually, we have seen some IPOs in the regeneration space, like Vital Farms, et cetera.  
**[0:13:00-0:13:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:13:00):**  So what's different now and why is it such an exciting one, apart from that the consumer  probably is ready or seems to be ready at least, but it still doesn't mean it's easy  to set up a Clif Bar, which just got sold, but something like with reasonable size and  not just a mom and pop company that makes great marmalades, but sells at the farmers  markets and it stays there.  
**[0:13:21-0:13:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:13:21):**  Yeah.  So it's a super cash flow intensive business.  So that makes is one of the big challenging pieces.  And there is this thing in CPG, just like there's in this, you know, regional organic  transition on farm is the valley of death.  
**[0:13:34-0:13:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:13:34):**  And people usually say it's somewhere 24 to 36 months.  And then I think there's kind of individual valleys of death in the scaling from zero  to 1 million, scaling from one to five, five to 10, you know, five to 25, 25 to 50, 50  to 100.  And there's kind of these certain benchmarks, but there's all kinds of good information  
**[0:13:52-0:13:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:13:52):**  around CPG brands and what we really, what that playbook is, right.  To invest in kind of scale those organizations.  But why, why is now the time or what's, what's the, what's the compelling reason to invest  there?  To me is the consumer, like you said, I mean, if you look at the data on growth in the,  
**[0:14:11-0:14:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:14:11):**  in the, in the set and you look at Gen Z, millennials and the kind of products that  they're demanding, this is going to be super important.  And I think, you know, over the longterm, if you look at Walmart, Target, Kroger, all  of these big retailers and the sustainability commitments they have to make, especially  if we get into where they have to publicly report things, it's going to be about market  
**[0:14:33-0:14:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:14:33):**  access, even more than market premiums.  I think there's always going to be a place for market premiums for brands that have the  best taste, the best ingredients, the best XYZ, but eventually Walmart's going to buy  your product because it has a lower carbon footprint or Walmart's going to buy your product  because you use less water like that, that day is coming and may already be here.  
**[0:14:55-0:15:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:14:55):**  And so I think from a longterm resiliency perspective and in a return perspective, it's  going to be about market access.  And so the people that are on the forefront of building these supply chains outside of  the typical, you know, CPG status quo, I think they're going to have a competitive advantage.  And I think that even the larger ones are going to have to start doing that.  
**[0:15:16-0:15:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:15:16):**  I mean, we see that with General Mills and all these other people making these huge commitments  to region I.  And then the other piece, like consumer seems to be there, maybe the supply chain or the  supermarkets or the large distribution seems to be starting to get a head around in terms  of talent.  
**[0:15:35-0:15:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:15:35):**  Like are, I don't know, people that have run this playbook before that maybe were in the  organic space or were in the sort of quote unquote sustainability space or health space,  are they coming into this space and could say, okay, I've shown that I can run a bar  company or I run a liquor company or run a tea company or whatever to that 100 million  or whatever.  
**[0:15:56-0:16:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:15:56):**  Like, do you see the talent coming into the space that we absolutely need?  Because it seems like a very, it's a playbook, but it really helps if somebody has done it  before.  Yeah, I think most definitely.  And I think as retailers continue to support regen brands, we'll see that wave of talent.  
**[0:16:12-0:16:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:16:12):**  I mean, Heather Terry, the CEO of GoodSame Foods is a perfect example of that.  She worked on Nidmore, which was another chocolate company that scaled to a pretty significant  number.  I don't remember the exact revenue number.  And now she's, you know, founding CEO of GoodSame, right?  
**[0:16:26-0:16:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:16:26):**  And trying to grow this completely regenerative small holder indigenous farmer supply chain  for chocolate, coffee, nuts, these great products, I think baking mixes as well that they have.  So I think that's a perfect example of, it's just like climate tech, right?  We're going to see this, we're going to see this wave of talent go from tech to climate  tech.  
**[0:16:45-0:16:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:16:45):**  We're going to see this wave of talent go from food and ag traditional to to regen food  and ag.  I mean, I'm an example of that, right?  Yeah, absolutely.  So and this is very US focused.  
**[0:16:59-0:17:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:16:59):**  Do you see are you following the space outside the US as well or outside North America?  Let's include Canada and Mexico as well.  But do you see the outside, there similar movements or you get approached a lot?  Or what have you seen if you have and if any outside the outside North America?  Yeah, I think I've heard some good things about what's going on in the UK.  
**[0:17:18-0:17:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:17:18):**  I've looked at two or three deals there.  I've looked at a Brazilian deal.  So there's definitely some things going on outside of the US.  But I definitely don't, I wish I had more time to look more in those places than I do.  But you know, once again, it's going to come down to what the consumers demanding, what  
**[0:17:36-0:17:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:17:36):**  sustainability commitments the retailer has made, and then what kind of reporting those  people are going to be required to do it because that's going to that's going to determine  how they purchase.  And let's talk about what's absorbing your time actually, which is the forum which is  coming up.  
**[0:17:51-0:17:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:17:51):**  We're recording this end of summer 2022, actually the end of August.  So it's very soon and not very soon.  So I'm imagining you're extremely busy.  Like what's what's going to happen?  Because I've been there three years ago, or we've been actually three years ago, which  
**[0:18:05-0:18:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:18:05):**  was amazing.  Two years ago, obviously, it was online last year, it was mostly because of travel impossible  to get to the US.  And you've moved places.  Like what's going to happen in October?  
**[0:18:15-0:18:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:18:15):**  Yeah, year four.  Super excited.  I mean, Sarah and Rachel and our team have put so so much work into this event.  So so thankful for them and all their hard work.  But I think it's gonna be a big leap for us.  
**[0:18:27-0:18:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:18:27):**  I mean, we had we had about 180 last year, which I thought was really solid.  Given the I forget what variant at the time had just kind of reared its ugly head, but  people were still very excited to be there be back in person.  We'll have 300 plus this year, we'll have 35 plus speakers, two full days of stuff going  on, you know, nine plus hours of networking.  
**[0:18:46-0:18:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:18:46):**  We've got new fundraising happy hour, we've got pitches, we've got breakout sessions,  we have a new venue, like you mentioned, where we'll have different things kind of going  on more than just one stage.  And that's the only the only thing going on.  So I'm really excited about it.  
**[0:19:00-0:19:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:19:00):**  We're really excited about it.  Super appreciative of, you know, our sponsors and speakers and all the people that will  help us bring it all together.  You know, traditionally, in that event business, everyone signs up late, that's just part of  our business, right?  
**[0:19:15-0:19:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:19:15):**  Half the tickets are already gone.  And I think this Wednesday will be the seven week out Mark, I mean, that's that's unprecedented.  And so it speaks to a few things.  One, the space is exploding, which is great and needed.  And two, you know, we're really taking a step up as an organization and as an event and  
**[0:19:33-0:19:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:19:33):**  hopefully bringing a lot of value to the space.  So we're happy and proud of both of those things.  And for people coming from overseas, let's say, how would you quote unquote, sell it  to them?  Because obviously, it's a long trip.  
**[0:19:45-0:19:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:19:45):**  If you come I remember people came from New Zealand, Singapore, Australia, I saw Bet Glover  there, I think he's going to come back as well.  But they have a big business in the US as well now.  So how would you say for people coming over from Europe or coming from, let's say, South  Africa, or, or places far Argentina, etc.  
**[0:20:01-0:20:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:20:01):**  Why should they absolutely be there?  And just to make sure that it's not a US party by itself?  Yeah, yeah.  I'm definitely trying to weave more kind of international participation into the event.  So I appreciate you teeing that up.  
**[0:20:13-0:20:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:20:13):**  I mean, look, it's it's the one thing like it in the whole world.  So that would be my number one selling point.  And number two, you know, if you are coming from an international perspective, you know,  the majority of the people there will be from the US or from North America.  So you'll have unique talking points to really network with folks.  
**[0:20:30-0:20:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:20:30):**  And, you know, a lot of people in the event business talk about our event does this or  our event does that.  But we have had businesses started from the RFSI forum.  We have had investments made from the RFSI forum.  We have had commercial partnerships made from the RFSI forum.  
**[0:20:45-0:20:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:20:45):**  Those are facts.  Those are not, you know, it's not marketing lingo.  So if you work in the space and you want to get things done, you go to the RFSI forum.  It's a good sales pitch.  Just to shift gears a bit to unpack and of course, I'll put the links below if you want  
**[0:21:00-0:21:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:21:00):**  to sign up and you want to see us there.  Definitely make sure you do.  And you actually do a lot online as well.  So if you cannot make it, there's a lot of online activity going on in general.  Next year, you do a lot in Australia.  
**[0:21:14-0:21:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:21:14):**  You will do actually quite a bit in Europe as well.  And so there's a lot happening online.  Plus, you have one of the best newsletters out there, weekly, which is a nice news update  always.  But what do you feel like, let's say, the second part of 2022 where we're coming out  
**[0:21:32-0:21:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:21:32):**  of or out of, it depends where you are, incredible heat waves and a lot of attention for climate  at the moment, a lot of attention actually for food and ag.  The farm bill in the US is being discussed.  There's a lot of discussion in Europe, obviously around climate and land.  What would you tell, let's say we're on stage at the forum and I would ask you, what would  
**[0:21:50-0:21:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:21:50):**  you tell all the investors here in the space?  Actually, we can do this in a few months.  But what would you tell them, obviously, without giving investment advice, what would you tell  them to look out for or to focus on or to dig deeper into once they leave that room  in Denver and go back to, quote unquote, work, let's say the day after?  
**[0:22:07-0:22:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:22:07):**  What would be your, apart from CPG, obviously, what would be your, go and look there and  go and dig deeper because that needs attention or that's something to dig deeper into?  Yeah, I mean, cliche answer, but take a systems approach and really do holistic due diligence  for what you're looking at.  I think so many times we get caught in the carbon tunnel vision and the carbon silo.  
**[0:22:29-0:22:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:22:29):**  And even there's certain things in region ag that I think we haven't still fully vetted  from a holistic and systems approach.  And like?  You know, I think the whole.  Yeah, just listen, as you can see, we are on video recording this.  
**[0:22:45-0:22:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:22:45):**  You can see him doubting if he wants to go there or not.  I think the whole spraying or no spraying conversation is very nuanced and people have  a really dogmatic approach to that.  Usually one way or the other.  I tried not to because I do think it's really, really nuanced.  
**[0:23:01-0:23:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:23:01):**  And I mean, mainly pesticides, herbicides.  So that that would be one.  Which is interesting for somebody that brought up toxicity at the beginning of this conversation.  Yes.  So there's bright, but there's different, there's different levers.  
**[0:23:14-0:23:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:23:14):**  There's environmental toxicity.  There's soil health.  There's farmer profitability.  And so it's a perfect example of we have to create systems that produce the least negative  externalities and the most value across all those different levers that I just said.  
**[0:23:30-0:23:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:23:30):**  Right.  And when people think about food and ag, I had the great the great pleasure of growing  up in a distribution business.  So I had to think about what's going on with the growers, what's going on with the packers,  shippers, what's going on with us and our our execution, what's going on with the retailer,  
**[0:23:43-0:23:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:23:43):**  what's going on with the consumer.  So I got a great holistic vision where a lot of people grow up in, you know, the silo of  I'm a farmer, I'm this, I'm that.  Right.  And you have to think holistically about everything to make really well informed decisions.  
**[0:23:56-0:24:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:23:56):**  And to me, we got we got into the position that we are in because the system that we  have creates a massive amount of negative externalities.  So every every investment needs to be looked at with, OK, making this change or making  these changes is going to produce less negative externalities.  That's that's really the frame framing that needs to happen.  
**[0:24:18-0:24:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:24:18):**  And that's how I think about that one.  And so let's say there are a few areas which require more nuance, let's say, but other  places that are just completely ignored, the sea blazes there would say, please go and  look in that corner because we need I don't have a solution, but we need need attention,  brains, money, et cetera.  
**[0:24:39-0:24:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:24:39):**  Yeah.  And the thing that I think it's ignored a lot is thinking about all those different  pieces in the supply chain, but thinking about all the workers and laborers in those various  places of the supply chain.  You know, I said on the Modern Acre podcast, you know, a week or two ago, like don't get  
**[0:24:55-0:25:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:24:55):**  into food systems change if you haven't at least work one hourly wage job in food.  And I've I've picked those produce orders like I've worked in our processing department  at the family business.  And it's you really need that experience to ground you.  And so I would encourage all investors to do that themselves.  
**[0:25:12-0:25:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:25:12):**  You know, get out on the farm, do something or make sure you're talking to those people.  If you're not talking to those people or people that have great depths of experience working  with those people in your due diligence process, you're missing something in the due diligence  process.  I would argue to do also do it.  
**[0:25:28-0:25:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:25:28):**  Yes.  Go and pick grapes for a day, go and pick whatever, go and just to like you said, to  ground you and to first of all, see the extreme privilege.  Anybody probably anybody listening to this has and then make sure you you grant your  investment decisions well.  
**[0:25:47-0:25:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:25:47):**  And so what let's say in themes on the forum this year, what are the main things that are  let's say different from last year?  Or what do you would you like to highlight?  What are the big themes that you see that changed over the last 11 12 months since since  the last one came up?  
**[0:26:05-0:26:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:26:05):**  Yeah, so themes overall day one has a really heavy land working capital on farm production  kind of a vibe to it.  And day two has more of a supply chain brand technology vibe.  And we thought that was a good way to kind of divide and conquer.  I mean, look, that's the hardest part about what we do is talking about everything we  
**[0:26:24-0:26:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:26:24):**  need to talk about in the length we would like to talk about it in in just two days.  I mean, region ag is is exploding right now.  And region ag investment is, you know, we once again, we get in our silos, but it's  equity, it's debt, it's grants, it's blended capital, it's production, it's processing,  it's distribution, it's ag tech, it's, you know, it's all these things.  
**[0:26:46-0:26:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:26:46):**  And so and I haven't even mentioned all the different geographies, right, and all the  different cropping systems that we need to talk about it in.  And so we definitely do our very, very best to curate what we think are the most important  conversations to be had.  But those are kind of the two big themes of the days.  
**[0:27:02-0:27:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:27:02):**  I think the biggest change from last year is just we went really heavy panels in one  stage last year to guard against losing people to COVID last minute.  But this year, I think it'll be much more participatory and engaging from an audience  perspective because we still have panels, but we'll have presentations, we'll have fireside  chats, we'll have breakout sessions, we'll have the pitches, we'll have all that networking  
**[0:27:23-0:27:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:27:23):**  time that I mentioned.  So I just think it's going to be an electric event.  So I'm looking forward to it.  And why moving location?  I mean, Oakland, I think was two years.  
**[0:27:32-0:27:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:27:32):**  I mean, one year done online, then last year was was San Francisco slash Oakland.  Now it's Denver.  And what what triggered that?  No, no crazy strategic reason.  I mean, I think when we look at the landscape of investment, Oakland and Denver Boulder  
**[0:27:46-0:27:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:27:46):**  seem to be the two hubs in the United States.  So I would definitely think it's interesting because like California is by far the biggest  production state.  Yeah, if you look at it, but the brand space is happening there.  Maybe.  
**[0:27:58-0:28:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:27:58):**  I mean, trail is located there.  Matt is Matt Capito is located there.  Right.  Replant.  So it makes sense to region.  
**[0:28:05-0:28:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:28:05):**  It makes sense to to be close to that.  And and yeah, and at the end, if you find a good location and a good hotel doesn't and  close to an OK airport doesn't really matter.  Yeah.  You need to be by major airports.  
**[0:28:17-0:28:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:28:17):**  So obviously, check that box.  And, you know, for us, it was really about finding a venue that had that diversity and  just had some of the aspects that we wanted.  And this venue has all those amazing rooms for all that stuff I just mentioned.  It has great natural light.  
**[0:28:31-0:28:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:28:31):**  It has what we need to serve the region ag and food from a catered perspective.  That's what it's going to be like.  Is it going to be catering wise?  Because I remember three years ago, that was the normal, I think, Marriott catering.  Nothing against that.  
**[0:28:43-0:28:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:28:43):**  But it was a normal Marriott catering.  Yeah.  What can people expect?  So really tough part about the events business, if you work with a hotel venue, they were  very rarely ever let you do anything different to the catered food menu, let alone bring  
**[0:28:55-0:28:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:28:55):**  in kind of snacks and packaged foods.  So that's always a challenge.  And that was another reason why we went with this venue was because we've solicited an  amazing lineup of people to bring packaged foods for the coffee breaks, the receptions.  I mean, we're talking ice cream, beer, wine, snacks, coffee, A2, regenerative dairy.  
**[0:29:14-0:29:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:29:14):**  We got it all for those sessions.  And then on the catered side, found a caterer that has a lot of great relationships with  local organic and regenerative farmers.  And then we have a couple of cool brands that are yet to be announced that I think are going  to supply the proteins for both of those catered lunches.  
**[0:29:29-0:29:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:29:29):**  Super, very interesting.  Now, because I mean, it's a challenge.  How far can you push a location?  And of course, making it work in a budget, especially having demands that are not so  normal is not easy.  
**[0:29:45-0:29:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:29:45):**  Exactly.  And so what would you consider success?  After let's say we wrap up the 13th and ask you a few questions of October and ask you  a few questions like after the event, what would you I mean, of course, it would be great  to have deals signed, etc.  
**[0:30:01-0:30:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:30:01):**  But that will probably happen the weeks after.  Like what would you consider a success after the event?  Yeah, I think it depends on who you're talking about.  Right.  If I'm an institutional investor that's there and interested about the space, if I'm going  
**[0:30:13-0:30:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:30:13):**  to make an investment or I really better understand the space and I'm ready to roll, that's a  success.  If I'm a co-head or a fund manager or someone like that and I get a couple of commitments  from people like that or I find a couple of new deals to diligence, that's a success.  If I'm an angel investor, I get educated and I and I place in capital.  
**[0:30:31-0:30:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:30:31):**  That's a success.  Right.  So I think it depends on the profile.  Right.  We have activators coming, which is the people that we call that are getting invested in.  
**[0:30:37-0:30:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:30:37):**  So if I'm a soil health indicator organization and I can partner with two investors to scale  my technology to their fields, that's a success.  Right.  So if I look at Kiss the Ground and Farmer's Footprint and I'm an advocate, but I want  to help spur better success on Farmville advocacy or greater consumer education and I find some  
**[0:30:58-0:31:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:30:58):**  investors to partner with or some activators to partner with.  I mean, it just runs the gamut.  And like I said, we don't want to be an event that's about fluff.  We want to be an event that's about results.  And it's very challenging to do that as just a four year old event.  
**[0:31:12-0:31:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:31:12):**  But we have a track record of doing that.  And so my barometer of success is we go back to our sponsors.  We go back to our attendees and we say, what did you get out of that?  Right.  Qualitative and quantitative.  
**[0:31:24-0:31:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:31:24):**  And that's how we measure success.  And let's flip the question in a sense like, I mean, Outlaw Ventures, you have 18 investments  now and it's your personal capital.  But what would you do actually if you would be in the space right now with a billion dollars,  you had a billion dollars to invest with inflation at this high, probably should take 10 billion.  
**[0:31:44-0:31:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:31:44):**  But let's say a crazy amount of money.  And you can make any investment you would like in terms of length, etc.  What would you focus on?  What would you prioritize?  Of course, I'm not asking for the exact dollar amount.  
**[0:31:57-0:32:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:31:57):**  I'm asking, what would you prioritize if your resources were quote unquote, unlimited?  That's an easy, it's a super easy answer for me.  Vertically integrated evergreen land fund that buys degraded row crop land, transitions  it to multi species pastured livestock and build your own processing, get vertically  integrated, have your own brand that you sell, you know, all those different various meat  
**[0:32:20-0:32:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:32:20):**  products, grass, beef, pasture, poultry, pasture, pork, you know, eggs.  I would do that immediately.  And I would use some of that money to also fund research that shows all the ecological  benefits of those systems and the transition.  And the last thing I would do is I would set aside a portion of that money for media to  
**[0:32:40-0:32:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:32:40):**  show these transitions, tell that story to both consumers and investors to basically  spur more of these systems created.  And because you believe or see or know that, let's say, in the animal protein space, when  done well, that's where interesting returns are both environmentally, but also financially.  Because you didn't hesitate a second you went like, okay, I'm not going for fruits.  
**[0:33:04-0:33:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:33:04):**  I'm not going for coffee.  I'm not going for chocolate.  Now I'm going for animal protein.  Yeah.  What triggered that?  
**[0:33:10-0:33:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:33:10):**  Or what's the reasoning behind that?  Look, a lot of contention on animal protein conversations, right?  Especially kind of the regen versus food tech thing.  But for me, meat consumption and not at all.  Like, I know one of the listeners, what we had on here talking about olive oil actually  
**[0:33:28-0:33:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:33:28):**  is great.  You should follow him on LinkedIn, because every time somebody posts, especially the  chart about beef, the impact of beef of world, what is it world of data, which is extremely  outdated and all the LCA's are already like, they can go into the bin.  But he responds to that properly, like explaining why it doesn't make any sense.  
**[0:33:47-0:33:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:33:47):**  And I applaud him for that, because somebody has to do it.  But yeah, there's a lot of discussion around it.  And you would say, okay, let's go to the heart of that matter.  And let's follow it, research it, but also produce a significant amount of this money  would be actually used to produce a lot of animal protein.  
**[0:34:03-0:34:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:34:03):**  Yeah.  I mean, look, just from a pure demand perspective, demand is growing, consumption is growing.  So I don't think it's going anywhere.  I don't see people eating fake meat and these other alternatives that have been offered  or whatever we're going to grow in a, in a vat somewhere in the middle of nowhere.  
**[0:34:18-0:34:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:34:18):**  And one of the most powerful things for me, Kuhn, in my region journey has been, I went  to see Eric Perner and rep provisions, his, his home ranch in Oklahoma I went to last  summer and he had planted just a really small plot of organic corn and he had left the land  right next to it as perennial pasture that, you know, the cows and the pastured pork and  poultry had grazed on.  
**[0:34:40-0:34:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:34:40):**  And I mean, it's, it's organic corn.  It's good.  It's good.  You know, it looked nice, but bare soil, you know, no water infiltration, no fertility  and the perennial pasture, all kinds of species of grasses, insects everywhere, birds coming  
**[0:34:55-0:34:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:34:55):**  to it.  And we did a little experiment where we, you know, we actually watered it and kind of walk,  watch the lack of water infiltration, but it was just such a powerful experience for  me.  And, you know, ecology one-on-one in North America is that the vast majority of the land  
**[0:35:09-0:35:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:35:09):**  was grazed by bison.  So like we need these animals to have properly functioning ecosystems, but we have to get  on the offensive, I think on the animal protein side, especially on the region animal protein  side of this is the right way to do it.  This is the, this is the benefit of that.  
**[0:35:26-0:35:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:35:26):**  And I think from a land store perspective, you know, I grew up in Indianapolis, Indiana,  which is like the capital of corn and soy everywhere, you know, with GMO seeds sprayed  by a ton of chemicals.  And I drive by those farms and I just see that and it makes me want to cry, you know?  And I think we could provide such a better lifestyle for people in the systems that I'm  
**[0:35:48-0:35:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:35:48):**  articulating as, you know, maybe being another option.  And just to open another rabbit hole.  So what do you think, you're an investor actually, of their investment in, let's say the cell  based meats, region meat.  I got a lot of responses to that interview.  
**[0:36:04-0:36:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:36:04):**  The link below, I think was with Pete overly, but like, what do you think of that approach?  What do you think of that, which is feels at the edge of many things and many people  would say, I will get uncomfortable with that.  But what do you, what are your thoughts?  Yeah, look, venture capital is designed to take the most risk and invest in the things  
**[0:36:26-0:36:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:36:26):**  that are the most out there.  So do I think it's the most purest region thing in the world?  Absolutely not.  And I think the trailhead folks would admit that to you.  And I think they've explained themselves well on your podcast and other platforms, you know,  
**[0:36:39-0:36:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:36:39):**  for that investment.  But you know, I think, I think it's interesting and it's going to be tried.  Yes.  Yeah, yeah, exactly.  And it's like a trade in professional sports.  
**[0:36:49-0:36:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:36:49):**  We don't really know how it's going to work until five or 10 years until the funds over  and we see the impact is made or the return it's created and both really.  So TBD, I would tell you.  And this is a nice way to bring up a question I love to ask, inspired by Joe Kemp.  Hopefully he's coming.  
**[0:37:08-0:37:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:37:08):**  I don't know.  I should check with him.  I met him last night.  He's coming.  I'm already looking forward to that.  
**[0:37:13-0:37:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:37:13):**  But anyway, he always asks, what do you believe to be true?  And he asked in general agriculture, but I'd like to ask about region acts.  What do you believe to be true?  So where are you contrarian?  What do you believe to be true about region act that others don't believe to be true?  
**[0:37:26-0:37:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:37:26):**  So we're at the event at the forum and like where like where do you feel very different  there?  Like even among your tribe, among your people, where do you feel that you think very, very,  very different?  People need to start investing more money faster.  
**[0:37:42-0:37:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:37:42):**  You know, I think many people would agree on that.  But yeah, nothing.  Nothing is more frustrating.  Like I'm a big content person.  I love to talk.  
**[0:37:50-0:37:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:37:50):**  But nothing frustrates me more than people who talk and don't do anything.  And there's a ton of people in the space not doing that and putting their money where their  mouth is and acting and moving very quickly and doing amazing work.  So don't want to cast it like it's the entire space.  But I do think there's also a lot of people that love to talk.  
**[0:38:09-0:38:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:38:09):**  And you know, having been kind of totally ingrained in the ecosystem now since January  of 2021, all I've seen them do is talk.  And so the time for talk is over.  And let's start doing.  So that's really where I'm contrarian is let's learn by failure.  
**[0:38:26-0:38:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:38:26):**  If you talk to any of the regen pioneers from just a pure on-farm production, you know,  they didn't learn by thinking about it really long time on their porch.  They learned by doing it, trial and error, and seeing what worked.  And we have to invest a huge amount of capital in that trial and error with the appropriate  stipulations and kind of things that go along with that.  
**[0:38:48-0:38:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:38:48):**  And if you could wave a magic wand and change one thing into food space or food and egg  space or in general, what would you change?  What would be your one magic wand power change you would make?  Yeah, I mean, the subsidies are an easy answer here.  And I know you get that a lot.  
**[0:39:08-0:39:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:39:08):**  I think it's got to be the answer because they're just so it's just such a non-level  playing field.  But maybe taking it a step further, if you mandated that everyone had to grow food for  human beings, I think that would be that would be a pretty significant radical shift that  would change the way they reproduce food and what we grow in this country.  
**[0:39:31-0:39:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:39:31):**  And I mean, always the scale question comes up and there is some research, I think it's  one of the understanding egg people actually showing like simply the amount of land we  have currently in production for biofuel, animal feed, etc. is more than enough to offset,  let's say, for the animal production side.  Because obviously many people are not obviously many people then easily say, yeah, but we  
**[0:39:51-0:39:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:39:51):**  need to produce this corn for what you just mentioned on the organic corn side.  Yeah, we need to produce these calories and an animal, a cow needs X amount kilos of this,  etc.  Like what do you say to people when they start this?  We need to feed the world.  
**[0:40:06-0:40:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:40:06):**  We need to feed the world rhetoric.  What's your normal response?  I'm asking for myself because we obviously get that a lot.  Yeah, it's all nice and funny.  But it's never going to feed the world.  
**[0:40:14-0:40:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:40:14):**  What do you say to people like that?  Yeah, I mean, I would tell those people look at PepsiCo, look at General Mills, look at  ABM, look at cargo, look at all these people that have massive businesses and are publicly  traded.  And I mean, it's their behinds if this bet on regen ag is incorrect.  
**[0:40:32-0:40:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:40:32):**  And we can argue that it's not regenerative enough or it's not, you know, it's we need  to hold them accountable to do more like I get all that.  And yes, that's all correct.  But like those people being on the region ag train shows you that this thing can scale  or at the very least that the people with the scale are committed to figuring out how  
**[0:40:50-0:40:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:40:50):**  to do it.  So there is no greater indicator that this thing's real.  This thing is going to scale than that to me.  And so what do you say to the people like, okay, but that's those were exactly the ones  that created most of these issues.  
**[0:41:06-0:41:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:41:06):**  Like how do we make sure we don't just repeat, let's say the sustainability movement or the  organic even and don't get the results we need not only in soil health, but definitely  also in societal health?  Yeah, I don't know.  I don't know what the silver bullet answer to that one is.  
**[0:41:24-0:41:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:41:24):**  I think it's just a combination of a lot of things.  I think it's really a nuanced conversation that doesn't have some super black and white  buttoned up answer.  So not trying to be evasive, but I think that will be really hard.  And you talk about land ownership in this country, you talk about power control over  
**[0:41:40-0:41:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:41:40):**  the food system, you talk about social justice and equity.  There's a ton of issues there.  And we need to do more in regenerative agriculture, I think to talk about those things.  I need to do more.  I try to do more there.  
**[0:41:54-0:42:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:41:54):**  But I think it comes down to really, I think you got to start with the ecological consequences  of what's going on, right?  Because that is the commons that we all share.  So one of the things in RegenAg that gets overlooked, in my opinion, and the easiest  way to make an impact is just input reduction.  
**[0:42:14-0:42:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:42:14):**  Like if we just could spray less herbicides, pesticides, nutrients, et cetera, like that  is the easiest, lowest hanging fruit.  And it's honestly very easy to track.  I sprayed four gallons this year versus 20 gallons last year.  And so to me, it's a totally different topic, but it does play a role in that is taking  
**[0:42:35-0:42:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:42:35):**  something that has traditionally been a super singular focused, me, my production system  decision and expanding it to what is the world at large going to kind of see from this choice  that I'm about to make?  And how can we enable and incentivize a better decision there?  And how can we track and how can we make sure to get a lot of the toxicity and a lot of  
**[0:43:01-0:43:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:43:01):**  the fossil fuel, honestly, out of ag as soon as possible because it makes all of us extremely  fragile.  Exactly.  And no, I think it's a good way to end actually.  I'm looking forward to the event as you can hear.  
**[0:43:18-0:43:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:43:18):**  I think if you made it this far, I want to thank you for sharing your journey up to now  and sharing, of course, what is shaping the upcoming one in October.  And I would invite anybody that can make it to do so and hope to see you there.  Thank you so much for your time today.  Thank you.  
**[0:43:38-0:43:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:43:38):**  Thank you, Koen.  Thanks so much for your support of RFSI and having me on and just everything that you  do for our space.  It's super important.  And it was formative in my early journey before I knew what I wanted to do, just be  
**[0:43:48-0:43:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:43:48):**  able to learn from the people that you have on the show.  So I'm honored to be a guest.  Thank you so much for those nice words.  Thanks Koen.  Thank you so much for listening all the way to the end.  
**[0:44:01-0:44:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:44:01):**  For the show notes and links discussed, check out our website investinginregenativeagriculture.com  forward slash post.  Thank you so much for listening all the way to the end.  For the show notes and links we discussed in this episode, check out our website, investinginregenativeagriculture.com.  forward slash posts.  
**[0:44:20-0:44:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:44:20):**  If you liked this episode, why not share it with a friend or give us a rating on Apple  Podcast.  That really helps.  Thanks again and see you next time.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  
**[0:44:46-0:44:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:44:46):**  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to put money  to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011 and recording  
**[0:45:05-0:45:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:45:05):**  these podcasts since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework, what to focus on with the podcast, how have  we picked interviewees, what questions should you ask, what is happening in the space, what  should you read, what should you listen, what should you watch, how to approach this space.  
**[0:45:28-0:45:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:45:28):**  For whom is this course?  You, the soil builders and investors in the space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management, consultants, etc.  
**[0:45:47-0:45:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:45:47):**  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  
**[0:46:03-0:46:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:46:03):**  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you.  And I'm very aware that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very  different means.  
**[0:46:16-0:46:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:46:16):**  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides.  
**[0:46:33-0:46:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:46:33):**  So you don't have to write along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  if you're a soil builder.  
**[0:46:51-0:46:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:46:51):**  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  
**[0:47:08-0:47:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:47:08):**  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  
**[0:47:25-0:47:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/anthony-corsaro#t=0:47:25):**  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  