### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2022-00-20)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  Big funds are being raised but they all quote on quote complain about the missing deal flow.  So we need more project developers.  
**[0:00:20-0:00:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:00:20):**  In some sectors this is a dirty word but here we need people who are disciplined, who put  together the business plan, organize the permits, figure out the seeds or tree genetics, figure  out the irrigation equipment, organize the offtake agreements and while it always gets  delayed, don't take any salary or a very low one for a couple of years.  All of this to create bankable investable projects.  
**[0:00:41-0:00:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:00:41):**  So the investors who are usually far away and have never seen an almond orchard or a  permanent pasture weed system get comfortable and convince their investment committees and  their bank colleagues to give the green light.  So farm after farm, hectare after hectare can start with the implementation of regenerative  practices.  
**[0:00:58-0:01:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:00:58):**  Might not be sexy but it's absolutely crucial.  So enjoy this interview with one of those project developers in France.  This is the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast, Investing as if the Planet  Mattered, where we talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  
**[0:01:23-0:01:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:01:23):**  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why my focus on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land and our sea, grow our food, what we eat, wear and consume.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much more  
**[0:01:42-0:01:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:01:42):**  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  To make it easy for fans to support our work, we launched our membership community and so  many of you have joined us as a member.  Thank you.  If our work created value for you and if you have the means and only if you have the means,  
**[0:01:57-0:01:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:01:57):**  consider joining us.  Find out more on gumroad.com slash investing in RegenAg.  That is gumroad.com slash investing in RegenAg or find the link below.  Welcome to another episode today with Boris Petsky, the founder or one of the co-founders  of Green Pots with a long history in regenerative agriculture, sustainable agriculture finance.  
**[0:02:23-0:02:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:02:23):**  Very happy to have him on the show.  We've known each other for a while and it's finally time to have Boris on the show.  So welcome.  All right.  Thank you very much for having me.  
**[0:02:33-0:02:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:02:33):**  And to start with a personal question, what brought you to this space of, I mean, from  all the different career paths you could have taken in a comfortable office somewhere with  a lot of air conditioning and to be very comfortable instead of out in the field planting trees,  financing trees and trying to get this done.  What led you to this sector?  
**[0:02:53-0:02:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:02:53):**  I was basically given the opportunity to work into agriculture by a friend who was working  for a commodity merchant.  And he told me about a cocoa guy he had met while he was doing his internship on a flour  mill in Cameroon.  And I applied to E-Com.  
**[0:03:14-0:03:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:03:14):**  This was back in 2007 to a large commodity merchant.  And I applied to join their Central Asia desk.  I'd been studying Central Asian and Caucasian studies at St. Petersburg State University  and decided that I maybe could join work and personal interests.  So basically, I already have 15 years of experience in agriculture, we could call agribusiness.  
**[0:03:39-0:03:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:03:39):**  It's a mix between value chain finance and public-private partnerships.  And I worked on three different continents.  So I started as a merchant originating cotton in Uzbekistan, shipping 50,000 tons of cotton  a year through the port of Bandar Abbas in Iran, shipping mostly to textile mills in  Bangladesh.  
**[0:04:00-0:04:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:04:00):**  And given the difficult context back in the days, political context in Uzbekistan, I quickly  moved to Tajikistan, where we were invited at the initiative of the Better Cotton Initiative,  which was maybe a kind of burgeoning concept of region ag, to replicate the coffee model  of a group that prides itself in having more agronomists than the merchants on the payroll.  So basically, provide technical assistance to farmers, increase their yields, increase  
**[0:04:29-0:04:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:04:29):**  their revenues, and become their preferred off-taker.  This is where I...  So I didn't come from the soil.  I came more from the economic...  We all do, right, and we all go back.  
**[0:04:42-0:04:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:04:42):**  Yeah, and I came more from the social aspect because back in the days, Tajikistan, the  farmers were very much in debt after the fall of the Soviet Union, a civil war that followed.  And I think their debt, aggregated debt, was $400 million to cotton genius, to intermediaries.  And basically, these guys were pre-financing the farmers in kind with poor fertilizer,  diesel that was cut with water, seeds were given late, and of course, with a 30% or even  
**[0:05:13-0:05:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:05:13):**  more predatory interest rates.  So the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development came in, refinanced the farmers  at decent interest rates through the banks, and they asked that someone actually buys  the cotton at the farm gate to make sure that the credit cycle was being closed.  So that's how I started, got acquainted with agriculture.  
**[0:05:34-0:05:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:05:34):**  We had lots of agronomists helping the farmers.  Then moved to Mexico in 2011, did two years in a soluble coffee plant, then did another  three years or more in the former Soviet Union in Moscow to sell cocoa products.  And then 2015 or 2014, actually, the war started and Russia invaded Crimea.  We came back to Europe.  
**[0:05:59-0:06:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:05:59):**  I did my MBA.  And this was the emergence of...  There was demand from investors to invest into kind of sustainable land management and  agriculture.  So you had different funds.  
**[0:06:19-0:06:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:06:19):**  You had the initiative of Danone with livelihood.  You had the Clemence Cheneau with Moringa who interviewed.  And the UNNCC was starting the Land Degradation Neutrality Fund.  So basically, they had been given a mandate by one of the three conventions, the United  Nations Convention to Combat Desertification, to basically launch and structure a fund that  
**[0:06:43-0:06:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:06:43):**  would invest into sustainable land management and revert the trends of land degradation.  So these were really five interesting years.  I became the investment director for Latin America.  We did some deals in Nicaragua, in Peru, in Colombia.  Did other deals in Bhutan as well, mostly tree crops.  
**[0:07:09-0:07:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:07:09):**  And this is where basically, I think, a lot was learned.  The UNNCC provided us with a very robust scientific framework and basically, you started having  an interesting consensus between civil society, between academia on how to kind of restore  lands and between restoration, regeneration.  Well, I think then, let's not play on words, but it's quite similar.  
**[0:07:40-0:07:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:07:40):**  So this is how I came basically to setting up Greenplots because after five years, we  saw that there was maybe more...  Not enough deal flow, more money wanting to flow to RegenAg than actual developers and  with an operating background.  And it's especially a matter of personal taste.  
**[0:07:59-0:08:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:07:59):**  I felt more compelled to go back to operations than stay as a financier, which are...  Financiers are useful people, they're the pump of the economy, but it depends on what  you think you're best at or maybe not even what you're best at, but what you like most.  And it was definitely finding land, finding the right irrigation equipment, the right  genetics.  
**[0:08:26-0:08:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:08:26):**  So, yeah, that's how I...  You say something super interesting there on the developing side.  You say there's more money that wants to flow than projects, investable projects to flow  into.  And you happen to really like that development piece, which I think is a very under spotlighted  
**[0:08:46-0:08:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:08:46):**  role in this sector.  We've seen it in renewable energies where the developers have been always the crucial  piece to put all the different puzzle pieces together and then the money will flow.  And of course, some people had to take early risk and now 20 years later or 30 years later,  whatever timeframe you look at, that sector exists.  
**[0:09:04-0:09:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:09:04):**  But it seems to be almost in the region ag and agroforestry space that developer role  hasn't really been filled yet.  And we see it sort of emerging.  I see multiple people starting to take that role.  And what really...  
**[0:09:18-0:09:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:09:18):**  Because maybe for people to understand, what is that role?  I mean, you're saying from figuring out irrigation equipment down to the genetics and buying  and figuring out the land.  To describe that first project in France that you've been on the way now, like what is it  like?  
**[0:09:34-0:09:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:09:34):**  Let's make it as visual as possible because we're on an audio tour, obviously.  And then let's unpack a bit what it takes to put something like that together and get  it financed.  Because of course, we can make a great PowerPoint, but if we don't get it financed, nothing will  be in the ground.  
**[0:09:48-0:09:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:09:48):**  Maybe we'll get back exactly.  This is a very interesting point that ag has never been structured like renewable energy  where at some point 20 years ago, you had product developers come to finance.  They said, look, I've put a data room together.  I've got the permits.  
**[0:10:02-0:10:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:10:02):**  I know it will work.  I've got the technology.  And it's not going to be caused project finance.  I've got no money, but I want to stay as a majority shareholder and please finance us  with kind of long-term and patient capital to make sure that we go through the J-curve.  
**[0:10:16-0:10:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:10:16):**  And this is completely something...  Project finance, the rules could be applied to ag.  So this is what we tried to do at LaGrangea, which is Green Pots first project.  We kind of...  Actually, under the team that has set up Green Pots, we all did a stint with the LDN fund.  
**[0:10:37-0:10:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:10:37):**  So Green Pots is a fully integrated region ag farm developer, specializing in tree nuts  and servicing the growing demand for plant-based products, providing full traceability back  to the farm.  So the first farm LaGrangea, close to Toulouse, is France's largest organic almond orchard.  And we got certified with the French label by Carbone in January with an estimated 4,500  
**[0:11:01-0:11:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:11:01):**  tons.  So that's the farm.  The context was the following.  So as you know, agriculture is a major cause of climate change with being responsible for  roughly 25% of greenhouse gas emissions.  
**[0:11:16-0:11:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:11:16):**  We have 1.3 billion hectares available to feed the world population.  We degrade 12 million hectares a year through deforestation, intensive monocropping, and  overgrazing.  And if you look at France, in France alone, we import 4.5 million tons of soy every year.  It's mostly GM in the sense that it comes from the Americas or South America.  
**[0:11:37-0:11:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:11:37):**  And the same goes for almonds.  Nothing to do with GM this time, but we have a consumption of 40,000 tons and we produce  less than a thousand.  So the system-  Because it's not the ideal climate or because it's not possible or it's possible, it just  
**[0:11:51-0:11:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:11:51):**  hasn't been on a scale.  We did have a larger almond production back in the days, but it's just that sometimes  you shift and we've got a lot of land where it could grow, which is allocated to different  things.  You're in the south of France, you see some huge maize fields, and I don't think that's  
**[0:12:07-0:12:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:12:07):**  the most appropriate crop to plant in this area and in Provence.  You've got some higher value added crops.  So the system won't work any longer.  One we must switch to more plant-based diets and eat more local to leave pressure on land.  That's on the-  
**[0:12:26-0:12:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:12:26):**  And not grow maize, so then it's going to be fed to livestock.  Yeah, exactly.  And that's on the demand side.  And on the supply side, we must transition our agricultural production towards reg and  ag.  
**[0:12:40-0:12:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:12:40):**  Less pesticide and fertilizer use, less water use, more biodiversity and better farm incomes.  This is, I think, the broader accepted definition that's been already kind of carved into stone  by OP2B.  So Lagrange-  Which I know people are listening, we haven't had them on the show.  
**[0:13:00-0:13:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:13:00):**  OP2B is the Biodiversity Alliance, if I have to.  I'll put a link below in the show notes of large, basically all the large food producers  in the world around biodiversity.  I think it was launched by the then CEO of Danone, Faber.  Exactly.  
**[0:13:17-0:13:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:13:17):**  It was Emmanuel Faber, and they had put these videos together with Patagonia.  And I think, can we date maybe, at least in France, we always spoke about agroecology,  so maybe the sustainable intensification of agricultural production.  It was not really a fight, but at some point when you've got a company like Patagonia and  the kind of marketing genius coming with a term like reg and ag and making it spread,  
**[0:13:46-0:13:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:13:46):**  I think-  Sexy, yeah.  Reg and ag has taken over, and I think in terms of marketing, in terms of message, it's  efficient.  And let's talk about the farm then as what is fundamentally different.  
**[0:14:01-0:14:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:14:01):**  Of course, let's talk about the maize field it replaces.  Of course, it's a very different view or very different image.  It's very different food and not feed, but also compared to a non-organic or a non-organic  regenerative almond production, what are the differences we could recognize?  What would we see differently under your trees, with your trees, around your trees compared  
**[0:14:24-0:14:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:14:24):**  to a non-organic one where most of it probably comes from now imported to France?  I think it's important to discuss the baseline as in a carbon product.  So two years ago during lockdown, we came across a farm for sale in Toulouse that had  been producing conventional corn for 30 years, exporting it to Spain's pork industry.  So this French corn was fed to pigs in fattening stations.  
**[0:14:49-0:14:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:14:49):**  These pigs were sent to slaughterhouses and then packed and basically shipped back to  the French supermarket shelves.  It's a bit crazy, far from what you would think of as a definition of sustainability.  It's a bit of agro-economic nonsense.  Actually, it gives the baseline of a product even in carbon terms.  
**[0:15:10-0:15:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:15:10):**  So we couldn't buy the farm.  We managed to secure the farm through a 25-year lease and it was bought by an insurance company  called La Maif in France that had a fund dedicated to basically helping young people settle on  land and they had identified the land purchase as really a barrier to entry.  Which it is.  
**[0:15:32-0:15:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:15:32):**  Yeah.  Yeah, it is because we didn't have 2 million euros, that's for sure.  So basically, we went from that really flat piece of land that had been basically depleting  the soil resources for 30 years and we converted it to first, we entered in April 2021 and  we started rotating crops again.  
**[0:15:56-0:16:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:15:56):**  We planted buckwheat, soy and sunflower.  And then we had winter crops and we planted oats, spelt, winter wheat and others.  So already you try to regain a bit of life.  You did that to have these cash crops or you did it to build up soil life and to prep for  the trees?  
**[0:16:17-0:16:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:16:17):**  No, we did it because first of all, it was not the purpose just to sit back.  And of course, out of the 150 hectares, we plan to have 70 hectares of almonds.  So I would call this farm more of a tree crop player.  That's what we concentrate on.  That's what we know.  
**[0:16:41-0:16:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:16:41):**  And once you reduce your acreage to 70 hectares of annual crops, it's not really worth buying  the equipment.  So you're giving it to a service provider.  Of course, then the margins get eaten.  And first of all, on annual crops, if you don't process yourself or integrate downstream  
**[0:17:00-0:17:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:17:00):**  operations, it's not extremely profitable.  The point is more to get it at break-even.  And as well, as you know, for Regen Ag certification, ROC certification, which we're aiming for  Regen Organic certification, you need to rotate several crops.  So of course, we got that lease for 25 years.  
**[0:17:24-0:17:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:17:24):**  But one condition of the lease was you convert to organic at year one.  So that's what we did.  And once you've got 30 years of intensive monocropping and we came in late, so we planted  in spring while we had to basically we're competing with the weeds.  And it's been very difficult.  
**[0:17:45-0:17:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:17:45):**  We lost money.  We had to compete with Datura and Xanthium, which are toxic.  And our soy got contaminated and was declassed from some tons.  I had to go for animal feed and we're not fit for human consumption.  So the transition, it's true, has a cost because if you kind of treat chemically for 30 years,  
**[0:18:13-0:18:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:18:13):**  the day you stop applying chemicals, it's party time for your weeds.  And we should have maybe planted winter crops before because this year, for example, we  planted wheat and it doesn't germinate at the same time and there's been no competition  and the wheat is perfect.  So we're now in conversion takes three years in France.  
**[0:18:36-0:18:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:18:36):**  We call it C1, C2, C3.  We're in C2, year C2, and next year we can start selling the organic...  We can start selling our annual crops as organic to the crop.  And so this is the annual crop part.  And on the 24th of February this year, we planted the first 32 hectares of the orchard.  
**[0:19:05-0:19:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:19:05):**  We've been working on this product for the past two years with basically good friends,  good Spanish friends, and you know them.  It's Cristobal Aranaga, who runs the nursery Crisara, who used to be the president of Al  Velar for a couple of years.  They came to the farm several times.  
**[0:19:20-0:19:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:19:20):**  Just as a background, I don't know him personally, but we've had common land, we've had a Spanish  project a number of times on it.  I will link below some interviews.  Yeah, exactly.  So this is the man who runs the nursery, which has provided many plants to the common land  
**[0:19:36-0:19:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:19:36):**  project.  So they were quite interested to try to adapt their almond trees, which grow in the kind  of Altiplano in Andalusia, and see how they adapt with the climate frontier moving north.  Why did you take their genetics?  Is that a risk taking genetics from such a different climate or you're sort of calculating  
**[0:19:59-0:20:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:19:59):**  that you might be in a similar climate or there was simply the best genetics around?  No, we're not in a similar climate.  But what was the reasoning going for their genetics?  No, they have many different varieties.  You've got blooming calendars produced by different research centers in Spain.  
**[0:20:16-0:20:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:20:16):**  You've got IRTA in Catalonia, you've got SEBAS in Murcia.  And what we planted was, of course, late blooming varieties because as you've seen in the past  two years in France, we had terrible late frosts.  And we've taken varieties, we've planted varieties that bloom in April.  And in April already in Toulouse, the frost risk is much more reduced than in March.  
**[0:20:42-0:20:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:20:42):**  So and plus it's mitigated.  They're much further south, but they're at a higher altitude.  And even Castilla Mancha this year, Castilla Mancha is right in the center of Spain.  But the altitude is much higher, 600 meters.  And they suffered from late frost this year as well.  
**[0:20:59-0:21:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:20:59):**  So we're a couple months in now.  How is it difficult to say something, obviously, but how have the trees been?  The trees have behaved quite well.  We've got a very high germination rate.  A few losses, we're still counting the losses.  
**[0:21:15-0:21:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:21:15):**  And the nursery, if the nursery helps you plant, normally you have a contract with nursery  where they guarantee 100 germination of the plants.  They would call it a premier feuille first leaf.  Then if it gets eaten by animals, of course, they won't replace them.  It's a different story.  
**[0:21:31-0:21:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:21:31):**  So now that they're doing well, the growth is good.  And we've planted, we're lucky to have the MAIF help us with the structure of the project.  We have some passes were quite, had a high clay content.  And we've had to drain some of them.  This was taken care of by the MAIF.  
**[0:21:56-0:22:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:21:56):**  And we've started with the most suitable areas, which are in Spanish, Franco Arenoso, which  is quite sandy soils.  Because there's one thing that almond trees hate is really being swimming in water, having  the root system wet in water so you get root asphyxia.  So you want to make sure that water flows.  
**[0:22:19-0:22:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:22:19):**  And if you have drains, you're safe.  So now the trees, what you do, you plant them.  They come at a height of 1 meter 20.  That's what's guaranteed.  And then you have your first formation pruning.  
**[0:22:33-0:22:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:22:33):**  You prune them back to 90 centimeters.  You plant them with a tutor.  You put a protector against rodents.  And here you go.  And then what kind of prep have you done?  
**[0:22:45-0:22:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:22:45):**  What kind of soil prep?  What did you do to make sure that you have the highest chance of long term success?  After 30 years of intense work.  There was a competition soil 80 centimeters below ground.  So what you have to do is take what we call in French, the repeal.  
**[0:23:05-0:23:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:23:05):**  You have to plow, you have to go for a deep plow.  And then kind of, so you have to start tilling.  You till once, but big time.  And then it's going to be with cover crops.  So at some point, it won't be touched anymore.  
**[0:23:23-0:23:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:23:23):**  You do that once.  You kind of break that soil so you let the root system go deeper.  And then you kind of clean it with your machinery.  And then it becomes your orchard.  That's it.  
**[0:23:40-0:23:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:23:40):**  And what are the other, let's say, management practices you're putting in place?  You mentioned cover crops.  Are you going to do any grazing?  What's going to happen in between the lines?  How close are they?  
**[0:23:50-0:23:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:23:50):**  What are you looking at?  We're not there yet because frankly speaking, we're in an area which is slightly more humid  than the rest.  But frankly, farming organically in an area which is less dry will have, I think, a few  more treatments to anticipate possible fungus or use copper.  
**[0:24:09-0:24:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:24:09):**  You get to use, what, four kilos a year max per hectare.  That's the rule in France.  So we're not there yet.  We've discussed that we're going to, of course, put some beehives three to four per hectare  because although we have self-pollinating, or I call them auto fertile varieties, you  
**[0:24:29-0:24:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:24:29):**  do increase your yields by putting beehives.  It makes it better.  And I think there's only one species of sheep that doesn't eat your trees.  It's the Shropshire sheep.  But we won't test it this year.  
**[0:24:45-0:24:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:24:45):**  We'll have to wait a bit.  And they're bigger and safer.  You cannot do, unless it's a demonstration plot, you cannot do everything.  No, no, no, no.  But like long term, how would you like to see the orchard develop?  
**[0:24:58-0:25:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:24:58):**  Yeah, yeah, yeah.  Long term, we want to keep it as a pure organic orchard with basically we've planted lots  of hedges because it was completely flat and we got a grant from the Caisse de Dépôt  to plant hedges and maybe one hectare as well of, how can we call it, a climate adaptation  research orchard, a pilot orchard to take some different varieties from Spain and compare  
**[0:25:31-0:25:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:25:31):**  the flowering blooming calendars with valleys that are further south and see how it evolves.  But no, I think the reality is going to be quite classic, full cover crops, which gives  you the highest score in carbon, hedges or what you call them multifunctional hedges.  So sometimes it's good for auxiliaries and yeah, quite simple.  So we would like to farm some in between, maybe lavender, but today we still have to  
**[0:26:11-0:26:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:26:11):**  control the old weeds from the previous user.  And how did you structure it as an investment or how did you structure it?  Because you didn't buy the land, as you mentioned before, but then all this planting obviously  comes at a cost.  So as a developer, how did you structure this and how easy or difficult was it to find the  
**[0:26:34-0:26:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:26:34):**  money to get it into the ground basically?  It's taken time and I've always been maybe back to what we saw.  I always thought that in agriculture, especially tree crops where there's a pretty long and  deep jake, you need to be disciplined and not pay yourself.  In France, we've got a system which is called Macron d'Emission en Coversion.  
**[0:26:55-0:27:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:26:55):**  So I resigned from the UN-backed fund and had two years of a kind of reduced salary  paid to launch my venture.  And we raised roughly 1 million in equity because it looks like it's a very good idea  on paper that you have someone else buy the land for you and leave it to you.  But once you go see the bank, the bank has no collateral.  
**[0:27:21-0:27:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:27:21):**  So they say, okay, it's good that you're starting and that someone has bought the land for you,  but what can you put as collateral against that loan?  So basically, capex is quite high in tree crops.  It's between 10,000 to 15,000 euros per hectare.  So it quickly becomes a 2 million, 3 million euro project.  
**[0:27:42-0:27:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:27:42):**  So 1 million in equity, we just got 1 million in debt from a syndicate of French banks made  of Cadillac Ecole and Banque Populaire.  But because they did not know almond trees really well, it's more in Provence, in Toulouse,  we think we're the newbies.  So they thought that the risk was too important.  
**[0:28:04-0:28:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:28:04):**  So they made sure that they could apply bank guarantees from the European Investment Fund,  from the European Investment Bank to basically secure the loan.  So they've got 80% first loss.  It's called Guarantee Enough in France.  It's a program.  
**[0:28:22-0:28:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:28:22):**  So banks basically apply to the European Investment Fund and they apply guarantees on the back  of the loans they did.  So they don't take any risk basically?  No.  Very little, very little.  
**[0:28:34-0:28:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:28:34):**  Not because Martin, my co-founder and I, we are 20% second loss guarantors.  So for them, they finance innovation, but they didn't want to kind of take such high  risk.  And they asked us, that's good for the carbon additionality.  They asked us to basically put the carbon, not ask collateral, but they said that we  
**[0:29:03-0:29:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:29:03):**  needed to do the carbon project and kind of submit our carbon application to the French  government to get certified.  So we did it.  And then carbon certification is crucial for the numbers?  Is that quite developed in France?  
**[0:29:19-0:29:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:29:19):**  No.  We have an estimated 4,500 tons of CO2 emission reduction.  And at the price today, I think in France, you can sell the label by carbon for roughly  50 euros a ton.  So that's 200K, and so that's 10% of your capex and opex until you reach your kind of  
**[0:29:41-0:29:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:29:41):**  cash flow positive.  So it's not even a cherry on the cake, but it makes it look good.  And it shows that we've made the effort to submit.  We've been good schoolboys with the French ministry.  And how do you see this develop?  
**[0:29:57-0:30:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:29:57):**  I think if developers are listening from the renewable energy space, they will recognize  if they've been around 30 years ago or 20 years ago.  But how do you see this going?  This was the first one, which is always the most difficult, not only from the economic  perspective, but also from the finance perspective.  
**[0:30:12-0:30:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:30:12):**  How would you see a second or third these projects?  How would they ideally be financed or structured?  I believe you need to take advantage of long term debts when it exists and of cheap debts.  This has been the market conditions for the past few years.  I've got no clue if these conditions will prevail in the future.  
**[0:30:35-0:30:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:30:35):**  So that's the problem.  But again, back to some people you had on the podcast, I think you really need to talk  to investors who have in mind that you need patient capital.  It's not for VCs who want to invest into NFTs or the metaverse.  I mean, it's a different ballgame, especially with free crops.  
**[0:31:00-0:31:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:31:00):**  Free crops, if you work well within two, three years, you're in cruising speed.  Tree crops, you get your first harvest in almonds in a year.  You get a symbolic harvest in a year, three, four, five, six, you're in cruising speed  depending on your planting density.  If it's walnuts, I think it's close to 10 years.  
**[0:31:20-0:31:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:31:20):**  Same with pistachios, hazelnuts, it's maybe close to almonds.  It's quite classic.  I think the gearing ratios are roughly 50-50.  If you put one in equity, one in debt is fine.  And once it's in cruising speed, why not have more debt on the operation?  
**[0:31:43-0:31:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:31:43):**  But you have to be very conservative and especially have people not pay themselves too much at  the beginning.  I think it's a rule for every entrepreneur.  You have to bootstrap your company, but especially in agriculture, people, you have to be very  stingy to succeed.  
**[0:32:03-0:32:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:32:03):**  And so what does the next phase now look like?  Apart from obviously managing this farm, making sure that as many trees make it as possible  in the best possible shape, the cover crops get on the arrow one as well.  You're looking at next projects or what is next in terms of the Green Pots initiative?  Because I'm imagining you didn't raise one million in equity for one farm in Toulouse.  
**[0:32:29-0:32:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:32:29):**  This is at SPV level.  Maybe it was a bit too much, but at the beginning, that's how you can convince your investors,  especially you can convince your banks, especially if you don't have the land to put an escalator.  So no, I think now the idea is to scale, not to scale.  We're not planning to build a unicorn.  
**[0:32:55-0:32:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:32:55):**  That's not the idea.  So many people are going to stop listening now.  No, I'm joking.  The idea is really to reach a certain scale.  I cannot tell you how big that scale is to get some interest and to be able to have bargaining  
**[0:33:12-0:33:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:33:12):**  power with maybe distributors or large retail players so they listen to you.  Because when you're small, even 70 hectares looks big in France for an almond orchard,  but it's gardening compared to what the Americans can do with a farm like a company like Pomona,  which has got 40,000 hectares under management.  So I don't know, we'd like to maybe secure, it could be a lease, it could be a purchase,  
**[0:33:43-0:33:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:33:43):**  not the same structure then of course in financial terms, reach 500,000 hectares and plant it.  And I think best is to have a portfolio.  I like nuts because they're non-perishable.  So it reminds me of my ears in coffee and cocoa.  You can store them.  
**[0:34:01-0:34:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:34:01):**  I wouldn't be able to do fresh fruit because I think there's a certain anxiety after 24  hours, you know, that you've only got 24 more hours left before it runs.  I'll stay away from this business.  It's for really artists.  And yeah, portfolio farms, the idea of Green Pots is to scale and build a portfolio of  
**[0:34:23-0:34:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:34:23):**  farms in Europe to basically contribute to food security.  Food security substitutes our production to imports.  The statistics are crazy.  If we enter that discussion, I think France has doubled its fruit and veg imports over  the past 10 years.  
**[0:34:44-0:34:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:34:44):**  So it's really a lot.  And are you scared of, I mean, scared you see climate change as a risk as long-term  fruit trees or this case, the tree nuts, they take a while and they, it's not really easy  to move or possible.  So what would you say, like if investors say, yeah, I mean, annuals, you can adjust quite  
**[0:35:10-0:35:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:35:10):**  quickly at this case, you're sort of stuck for the next 20 years.  How do you anticipate on the risk of climate change?  Toulouse just went through, I think 40 degrees last week for the first time ever.  And so what's your answer when somebody raises that question?  Of course we've had it raised in more than one time.  
**[0:35:30-0:35:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:35:30):**  I think you need to have a certain water policy.  You need to make sure that what you draw on the water reserves is sustainable in a sense  that you should not dig wells.  You should draw on to basically surface waters, which are renewable.  And today this is the case with the river basins of La Garone or even the Ebro River  
**[0:35:56-0:35:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:35:56):**  in Northern Spain.  You've got ample precipitation on the Pyrenees.  There's rain, there's snow, you have snow melts, then it gets back into the rivers.  And basically we get water from the Canal de San Martori, which dates back to Napoleon  III because you had overflows during the meltdown from the Pyrenees in La Garone.  
**[0:36:17-0:36:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:36:17):**  And this was made to divert that overflow and bring it to roughly 30,000 hectares that  are being irrigated around the farm.  So this is really important.  That's why of course I wouldn't go today to the south or some people are going to Morocco.  I think that's quite a risky bet.  
**[0:36:36-0:36:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:36:36):**  I think it's interesting to anticipate the climate frontier moving north a bit.  Don't plant almonds in Scotland today, but there's certainly a trend.  It's pretty hard to quantify.  And yeah, I think again, blue water withdrawal is one of the criteria of the OPWB in the  region ag definition.  
**[0:37:01-0:37:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:37:01):**  In the US, they use 12,000 cubic meters of water to irrigate one hectare of almonds.  We've only got a limited...  We call it La Dotation.  We get an allowance of 6,000 cubic meters per year.  So you can already see that between the French approach and the American approach, you've  
**[0:37:25-0:37:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:37:25):**  got a difference, which is basically mandatory.  It's just regulatory.  We see water use in a different manner.  And in France, you cannot build...  It's impossible to build water storage units.  
**[0:37:41-0:37:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:37:41):**  You need to use what you get.  And if there are water shortages, you can count on the head of region or sorry, the  prefect.  So it's at department level to put on some restrictions.  And this year in Spain, some farms which had water rights up to 8,000 cubic meters have  
**[0:38:00-0:38:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:38:00):**  been restricted down to 1,750 cubic meters around the Gola Al Kivir river basin is close  to Sevilla.  So this is really...  It's coming.  Yeah, it's real.  
**[0:38:11-0:38:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:38:11):**  And for you, like the 6,000 in your calculations, of course, it's difficult to know now.  Is that more?  Just to get an understanding, is that more than enough?  Is that way too much?  Like you can easily make it...  
**[0:38:21-0:38:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:38:21):**  It's nice if it's there, but you can easily make it with way less.  Like do you have that in this kind of system?  Do you have the flexibility to...  Let's say it gets half.  Are you in deep trouble?  
**[0:38:31-0:38:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:38:31):**  There's a very good graph produced by the Catalonia Research Center with water use and  yields when it comes to tree crops.  The correlation is one to one and the more water you use, the better the yield.  But at some point, there's a bit of a plateau in the sense that at 6,000 cubic meters, I  think you've got the optimal irrigation.  
**[0:38:55-0:39:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:38:55):**  If you apply 7 or 8, you're going to be wasting a lot of water, but you're not increasing  the yields.  It's just a marginal increase.  So I think this is the right...  It's our sweet spot.  
**[0:39:08-0:39:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:39:08):**  We can always discuss it maybe a bit less.  And in case there's no more water one day, you have to think it.  This is really the crash test.  We've planted with densities of 6 by 3, so that's roughly 550 trees per hectare.  If things go wrong, you can always take out one tree out of two in the row.  
**[0:39:31-0:39:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:39:31):**  You get back into 6 by 6 and 6 by 6 is very close to the classical Andalusia Spanish density,  which is kind of family farming with no irrigation whatsoever.  Low input, low output, and that's what you get.  So I think you need to have a kind of escape scenario where you get back to non-irrigated.  I hope not.  
**[0:40:02-0:40:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:40:02):**  No, no, of course.  But I mean...  It's been asked, of course.  Yeah, it's been asked and you need to at least be ready and hope that it never happens.  But then you really get into a low yield system.  
**[0:40:16-0:40:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:40:16):**  You can reach yields of 1.5 tons in organic, even higher per hectare.  But if you don't irrigate, it's a tree that alternates from year to year, bumper crop  then low crop.  And if you don't have irrigation, it gets even harder.  So you could get yields down to 300 kilos, 400 kilos per hectare, so then you're not  
**[0:40:43-0:40:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:40:43):**  going to be touching it much.  And then what are you planning in terms of yields?  What are you modeling with?  I think between 1.5 tons, it's very early to say, but you've got people who manage this  quite well.  
**[0:41:04-0:41:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:41:04):**  I've seen Spaniards reach 2 tons per hectare in organic in 6x3.  And today you see a method called the super high density production model, they call it  super intensive, where it basically hedges.  It's like...  And they go over it with a machine.  
**[0:41:21-0:41:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:41:21):**  Yeah, yeah.  And you can just harvest with a machine.  This is a different model.  And what we see that some people are already thinking that it might be a bit too extreme  in the sense that your organic yield curve goes down quite quickly.  
**[0:41:38-0:41:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:41:38):**  When you're farming traditionally, an orchard can last for 40 years.  I think it lasts for 25 if you're doing semi intensive.  But if you go super intensive, you might have a shorter lifespan for your orchard.  Which is something that you can model in, like if it makes sense in that sense.  And of course, it's extremely high input.  
**[0:41:59-0:42:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:41:59):**  We've had some discussions on here and I've had some other discussions.  Shout out to Dimitri of the Regen Agroforestry podcast.  I think what would be very interesting as well is to test that how can you make that  as...  I wouldn't even say regenerative because that sort of suggests that it's a thing.  
**[0:42:14-0:42:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:42:14):**  But how can you apply as many as some of the world is moving to high intensive?  What would that look like if you take extreme biodiversity measures, soil health, etc?  Would that be possible?  Because maybe the hatches only last 10 years or 15 years, but you can model that in.  Would that even be possible to do it without all the chemical input that it currently needs  
**[0:42:35-0:42:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:42:35):**  and all the water it currently needs?  What would that look like?  I don't know.  I don't know if anybody did it yet.  There are trials in super intensive inorganic and without irrigation.  
**[0:42:49-0:42:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:42:49):**  And I think it's...  Let's see.  From what I understand and from what I've seen and all the authors I have visited, I've  driven several thousand kilometers between France and Spain.  The super intensive model works well under steroids.  
**[0:43:05-0:43:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:43:05):**  But if you switch it to organic, it gets confused and you don't get much.  Because you've got all these...  Porta in Gerto, you've got all these rootstocks which are called nanizante, they're dwarfing  rootstocks.  And they need to be pumped up so the tree grows.  
**[0:43:25-0:43:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:43:25):**  So you need a bigger root system to theoretically make that work.  And then what is...  When you're talking organically, you have less choices with fertilization.  So you need more vigorous rootstocks on which you graft whatever variety you want.  But today you've got two main rootstocks in Arnos, which are the GF677, which is a Prunus  
**[0:43:49-0:43:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:43:49):**  and another, Garnem, where you have a bit more fungus in your soil.  But the rootstocks for super intensive are totally different.  This is much more the...  From what I understand, it's much more about being the apprentice sorcerer than the classic  rootstocks you have that are just being multiplied in every nursery that you can find.  
**[0:44:11-0:44:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:44:11):**  And the high intensive guys and girls are saying, yeah, we need to do this because of  labor shortages.  We need to automate.  We need to be able to drive over it with a machine and harvest and et cetera, et cetera.  Is that a thing in the almond?  
**[0:44:28-0:44:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:44:28):**  I know it's a thing in the olive space or some people call it a thing.  Is the labor shortages...  Is that something you're planning with?  Is that an issue in the organic almond industry in France or not at all?  It's true that you need to mechanize in order to be competitive because in Northern Europe,  
**[0:44:50-0:44:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:44:50):**  we are not the cheapest.  Our friends in the South sometimes are cheaper.  So yes, that's a constraint.  And there is as well a constraint of scale or size is that tree crop machinery works  well if you want to make sure that you pay it back.  
**[0:45:13-0:45:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:45:13):**  You working with 50-hectare blocks economically makes sense.  If you've only got 20, it's going to be hard to invest into all the machinery because if  you need to have a tractor that cost you 90,000 euros, you need a sprayer, then you need the  harvesting machine.  You can always adapt and do it the Soviet way as we call it, but you need a certain  
**[0:45:38-0:45:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:45:38):**  scale.  You need scale.  You need parcels that are not too small because if your tractor guy has to turn every 30 meters,  you just go crazy.  Plus you have to leave 8 meters on the sides to make sure that you have a comfortable space  
**[0:45:54-0:45:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:45:54):**  for a U-turn.  So your parcels need to be of a certain size.  And of course, a square is better than some kind of a crazy artistic parcel.  Which many places are unfortunately.  Totally.  
**[0:46:09-0:46:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:46:09):**  And so how do you see that?  What do you see in the future of mechanization?  Is it going to be lighter and smaller and you don't need 8 meters anymore to turn?  Are going to be, I mean everybody's talking about autonomous, robotics, etc.  Do you see anything yet in the nut tree space or is that all pipe dream?  
**[0:46:28-0:46:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:46:28):**  What you see is crazy.  I've seen some Israeli starters that can harvest your apples with drones.  I've seen it too.  This is quite crazy.  I don't know what cost it comes.  
**[0:46:42-0:46:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:46:42):**  But if there's one thing I would dream of is of course electric tractors.  I think the technology is still not there yet or maybe it's just too expensive.  Because that's coming.  If you do your...  Shout out to Michael Hertz.  
**[0:46:57-0:46:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:46:57):**  I will put one link.  He has to come on the show soon.  In the carbon calculation, the 190 liters or 200 liters of diesel per hectare that you  burn every year, you can feel them in the carbon calculation.  You would be much better off with an electric tractor.  
**[0:47:14-0:47:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:47:14):**  That's one thing.  We have used...  We've had some trials with Agrin Culture, which is a Toulouse-based startup.  And they have robots to basically mow in between rows.  We did a demo at the farm the other day.  
**[0:47:30-0:47:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:47:30):**  Still not enough autonomy.  It's the same thing when it comes to electrics or they have a hybrid engine.  Looking very good.  And it's true that someone working...  There's so much work to do on a farm that just going back and forth to do the mowing  
**[0:47:44-0:47:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:47:44):**  and the mulching of the weeds that grow crazy every two weeks.  If we can send rockets to space, I really hope that we can have automated lawn mowers  that have the farmer or the farm manager sleep in the morning or do something else.  Because you've got your irrigation, you've always got a pump that goes wrong.  The day we had the heat in Toulouse, of course, the SD card of the pumps went wrong.  
**[0:48:14-0:48:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:48:14):**  So you always get things to fix.  So spending time...  Driving back and forth, more or less the same, kind of diesel tractor.  Shooting CO2 in the sky while you're trying to capture CO2 with your tree crops.  That's something I really hope we can get out of in the next five or 10 years.  
**[0:48:34-0:48:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:48:34):**  Plus the silence is good.  You do get some for permaculture or horticulture.  You get very nice French tractors called the Sabiagris.  They look like the lunar rover.  Fantastic.  
**[0:48:47-0:48:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:48:47):**  Yeah, and it says Nio.  They're definitely coming.  But the silence would be nice as well actually in the countryside.  You might hear the birds and the insects.  Yeah, exactly.  
**[0:49:00-0:49:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:49:00):**  So not today.  I think we're trying to be at the edge of technology.  We're not a tech company.  We're trying to just speak to the best and say, look, if you want to try your solution,  please come to the farm.  
**[0:49:12-0:49:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:49:12):**  So Genesis Soil Health has done the baseline of our soils.  So they've got different...  They've got different...  They've got different criteria they look at.  So you've got your soil organic carbon, of course.  
**[0:49:27-0:49:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:49:27):**  You've got bacterial diversity.  You've got oxygen availability, zinc contamination, chrome, cadmium, anything.  And the baseline is quite bad.  So we hope that with all the prunings of the trees that we'll do by not tilling, we hope  that...  
**[0:49:45-0:49:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:49:45):**  No, we don't hope.  We're pretty sure that we'll do much better than the baseline because we started really  low.  And you already mentioned one thing that might not be the crucial one.  If you had a magic wand and you could change one thing overnight, so you had one wish that  
**[0:50:01-0:50:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:50:01):**  could go...  That would change in food and agriculture, what would that be?  It could be anything from carbon tax to better taste to stop crazy imports to electric tractors.  But you only can choose one thing.  What would that be?  
**[0:50:15-0:50:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:50:15):**  Well, it's a hard question.  I would ask people to relocate some of their disposable income to food.  I'm not a communist.  My family left the Soviet Union.  But I think that people have forgotten that you've got lots of different ecosystem services  
**[0:50:39-0:50:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:50:39):**  provided by agriculture between water regulation, air regulation, CO2 capture.  I can't remember these statistics.  I don't have them.  I think it's quite famous that in the 50s maybe the share of disposable income that  a household would put in his food was 30%.  
**[0:50:56-0:51:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:50:56):**  And now it's maybe less than 10% because most of it is real estate or other things.  And food has got much more value in it than just feeding people.  We've tried in France, you've got the loi Galim.  We've tried to protect farmers to have some kind of cost plus based formula.  So people are not allowed or retailers are allowed to buy at a price load and kind of  
**[0:51:23-0:51:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:51:23):**  production cost of the farmer.  But I think this is one...  Because the economy is crazy.  You've got bubbles on the internet, on NFT, on marketplaces.  And I still think as everybody says it, you need to see a farmer three times a day to  
**[0:51:42-0:51:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:51:42):**  feed yourself.  So it is a socially important job that has to be valued.  So I think I would campaign for giving more revenues to all people who farm.  Because today I think it's in a modern country, sorry, in a developed economy, it's 2% of  GDP agriculture, primary production, not agribusiness.  
**[0:52:08-0:52:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:52:08):**  And what goes with it?  That's where the real money is, but the direct money going to farms and land is nothing.  And primary production is not financed enough in the sense that for a continent like Africa,  I think maybe 40% of the population is still rural, a bit less.  25% of GDP or 30% of GDP comes from agriculture.  
**[0:52:35-0:52:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:52:35):**  And you've got less than 5% exposure to ag and banks portfolio.  So this is where the money needs to flow.  It's primary production.  I think it's socially important.  That's what the UN have told me.  
**[0:52:48-0:52:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:52:48):**  I didn't invent the statistics and it's vital.  And it's useful.  And we see with what's happening today in Ukraine.  So what would you tell, let's say we're in a theater full of quote unquote smart investors,  both investing their own money, working in the finance sector.  
**[0:53:06-0:53:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:53:06):**  I mean, you've met many of these in the past.  What would you leave them with?  We're on stage where we're hosting an evening and we're doing this in person, which I hope  will happen at some point.  What would you leave them with as a message?  
**[0:53:18-0:53:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:53:18):**  Obviously not giving investment advice, but what would you like them to do or where to  start looking and hopefully investing and putting money to work once they leave that  theater?  Divest from sectors which are not helping the planet for one thing.  That's where you've already got a EU taxonomy.  
**[0:53:38-0:53:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:53:38):**  I think that they'll be under higher pressure.  You've got some champions.  You've got some very good impact investors.  You got some good years, the investors.  I wouldn't be able to quantify what their share of the market or of asset management  
**[0:53:51-0:53:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:53:51):**  is.  I would guess still quite small and very biased again, because I've worked in agriculture  all my life, but it's in this sector, invest money in this sector and especially in prime  production because that's where it's needed.  Maybe stop thinking of double or not triple digit returns, but don't expect paybacks in  
**[0:54:16-0:54:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:54:16):**  two years with super high yield because that's actually not the case.  Although you can make good money, but don't.  Just to be clear, you're not in this for charity.  You're predicting and hopefully realizing good returns.  You can make very good money.  
**[0:54:32-0:54:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:54:32):**  That's maybe not very European, but orchards are being traded by North American funds and  they're very happy with their returns.  What would you do if you are in charge of, let's say, a one billion euro investment fund  tomorrow morning?  What would you allocate it to?  
**[0:54:50-0:54:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:54:50):**  Not down to the euro, but what would you focus on?  Would it be all nuts, tree crops?  Would it be some percentage of experimental things, some technology?  If you had the longest time horizon possible, what would you prioritize if you had to put  one billion euros to work?  
**[0:55:08-0:55:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:55:08):**  First, I would choose a geography that I love, which is Central Asia.  You've got Uzbekistan, you've got Tajikistan, you've got plenty of water in the Himalayas,  two huge rivers flowing, which are called the Amu Darya and Sirdaria.  With one billion and 50,000 euro capex, I think you could do what I'm missing these  years, 200,000 or 20,000 hectares.  
**[0:55:28-0:55:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:55:28):**  You could do a lot.  I would do orchards because back in the days, it was an intensive cotton monoculture that  has ruined the ILC.  That's my first impression.  Buy land and build orchards.  
**[0:55:44-0:55:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:55:44):**  Well, no need to buy land.  Land can stay with the government.  I'm completely agnostic.  I think land sometimes can be totally separated from the operating company.  I think it's-  
**[0:55:55-0:55:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:55:55):**  Unless you have to talk to a bank, yeah.  But you don't have to do it.  In this case, you don't have to do that.  Where's your collateral?  In this case, you don't need it.  
**[0:56:04-0:56:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:56:04):**  Yeah.  No, and of course, we discussed investors.  Back to your previous question, the layered fund structures that some funds have is very  clever because if the public sector cannot subsidize everything, sometimes when they  put 5 or 10% at the bottom of a cash flow waterfall and they are junior to all the rest  
**[0:56:25-0:56:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:56:25):**  of the investors, the investors are very happy to go into a new asset class, which they would  not dare enter on their own.  That's what big investors can do like the EIB or the World Bank.  This is especially for a region like Central Asia where it's still perceived as very risky  and it's much less risky than it was at the fall of the Soviet Union.  
**[0:56:49-0:56:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:56:49):**  It's interesting.  Again, tree crops, not because it's green parts, just because I've worked in this space  for many years, even before.  We have forgotten we always insist in France on horticulture and permaculture, but tree  crops, we've lost the makings as well.  
**[0:57:04-0:57:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:57:04):**  I think it was maybe 2.5% or 3% of our agricultural surface.  We've lost, I think, one percentage point on this.  Relicating these crops to Europe, they capture carbon.  It's pretty easy to follow good practices because very quickly, you will stop tilling.  You will make your soil better.  
**[0:57:28-0:57:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:57:28):**  You will bring back biodiversity because there's much more biodiversity in an orchard than  in a cornfield.  You contribute to the much needed shift towards plant-based diets instead of having soy feeding  animals that are then fed to us.  Or corn shipped to Spain to fed pigs.  
**[0:57:50-0:57:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:57:50):**  Yeah, or they ship our corn to Spain so they ship back pork to us.  Something against pig farmers, but maybe in the future, we won't be able to keep doing  this.  What would you tell?  I hear a lot of people reach out to, like, okay, I don't have a farming background, or  
**[0:58:11-0:58:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:58:11):**  I do and I have some experience now, and I want to get active in this space.  It's very difficult to give career advice, obviously, but what would you tell them?  Focus on tree crops, focus on the project development.  What do you think, Fio, is the missing piece out there that is really missing in the region  X space?  
**[0:58:29-0:58:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:58:29):**  I would say that practice is important.  Before you launch yourself into a project, or it's tempting to leave your full-time job,  it's always good to experiment and to do it.  If you have some savings, just plant a hectare or two with a friend.  That's how we started with Martin.  
**[0:58:48-0:58:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:58:48):**  We tried to plant pistachios at his uncle's farm.  For some reasons, we decided to do something else.  It's important to give it a proper try.  You might not like it, you might love it, you might become very good at it.  This was actually the point I had with Martin when we started.  
**[0:59:11-0:59:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:59:11):**  Many people were coming with concept notes with no background in farming.  As an investor, of course, that's a red flag, immediate red flag.  They say, okay, that's too ambitious, no track record.  That's the first reaction of every investor.  If you develop, albeit small, a pilot and that you can show a pilot that is clean, then  
**[0:59:31-0:59:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:59:31):**  replicating, okay, it's changing the scale of the business can change the nature, but  I think it's a very good start.  Planting a hectare of land somewhere with some friends you can do it.  I think it's great advice.  I might add this question as a regular question because it's something to...  
**[0:59:56-0:59:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=0:59:56):**  I think we need more energy and more people.  We need more people on the land for sure.  We need more people connected to the land and through agriculture.  That's one of the best ways to do that.  I want to be conscious of your time and thank you so much for sharing.  
**[1:00:10-1:00:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=1:00:10):**  I would say early in the journey of Green Pots, but obviously not early in your journey  into tree crops, into agriculture, into finance.  I'm looking forward to check in how it's been developing and where the next farms will be  and how you're going to grow to 500 to 1,000 hectares, et cetera, and of course, grow a  lot of tree nuts in the process.  
**[1:00:29-1:00:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=1:00:29):**  Sure.  Thank you very much for having me and look forward to being in touch.  See you soon then.  Thank you so much for listening all the way to the end.  For the show notes and links discussed, check out our website, investinginregenitivagrculture.com.  
**[1:00:50-1:00:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=1:00:50):**  Thank you so much for listening all the way to the end.  For the show notes and links we discussed in this episode, check out our website, investinginregenitivagrculture.com.  If you liked this episode, why not share it with a friend or give us a rating on Apple  Podcasts, that really helps.  Thanks again and see you next time.  
**[1:01:19-1:01:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=1:01:19):**  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to put money  
**[1:01:37-1:01:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=1:01:37):**  to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011 and recording  these podcasts since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  
**[1:01:54-1:01:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=1:01:54):**  How have we picked interviewees?  What questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  
**[1:02:02-1:02:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=1:02:02):**  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  You, the soil builders and investors in this space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  
**[1:02:14-1:02:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=1:02:14):**  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management consultants, etc.  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  
**[1:02:34-1:02:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=1:02:34):**  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  
**[1:02:49-1:02:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=1:02:49):**  that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  
**[1:03:03-1:03:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=1:03:03):**  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to ride along.  We're gonna look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  
**[1:03:27-1:03:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=1:03:27):**  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're gonna look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  
**[1:03:43-1:03:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=1:03:43):**  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately, that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  
**[1:03:58-1:04:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/boris-spassky#t=1:03:58):**  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  