### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2022-00-27)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  During her time as CEO of Patagonia, it grew to over a billion dollars a year global giant  with a very strong activist focus.  
**[0:00:21-0:00:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:00:21):**  They launched their organic food company, Patagonia Provisions, plus the Regenerative  Organic Alliance together with Dr Broners and Rodeo.  So why after she left that role and that stage, she joined the early stage VC fund focused  on regenerative technologies?  This is the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast, Investing as if the Planet  
**[0:00:47-0:00:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:00:47):**  Mattered, where we talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why my focus on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  
**[0:01:07-0:01:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:01:07):**  our land and our sea, grow our food, what we eat, wear and consume.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  To make it easy for fans to support our work, we launched our membership community and so  many of you have joined us as a member.  
**[0:01:26-0:01:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:01:26):**  Thank you.  If our work created value for you and if you have the means and only if you have the means,  consider joining us.  Find out more on comroad.com slash investing in RegenAg.  That is comroad.com slash investing in RegenAg or find the link below.  
**[0:01:49-0:01:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:01:49):**  Welcome to another episode today with the former president and CEO of Patagonia and  the current founding partner of Regen Ventures.  Cohen Rose.  Hi, Cohen.  It's great to be here with you.  
**[0:02:00-0:02:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:02:00):**  And to start with a personal question we always love to ask.  I mean, I don't even actually I don't know how you got into apparel and that side of  things, but which I would love to hear as well.  But then also, how did you then I'm not saying made the switch, but went in to the world  of soil and the world of food and the world of agriculture?  
**[0:02:19-0:02:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:02:19):**  Well, I was working I've worked in traditional business my whole life in both technology  and retailing.  And I kind of hit this point in my life where I felt like my work was not aligned with my  values.  And at that point, I made the change to move over to Patagonia because, of course, you  
**[0:02:42-0:02:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:02:42):**  know, Yvon Chouinard, our founder, is just a very famous, responsible businessman.  And I felt like I would have a lot to learn from him.  And so that's how I ended up at Patagonia.  And it was an incredible 12 year ride there the last decade, most of the last decade as  CEO.  
**[0:03:01-0:03:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:03:01):**  But, you know, we really got into soil through working a lot on land conservation, ocean  and waterway conservation and advocacy.  And, of course, you know, you come to the realization that the best stewards of the  land are indigenous communities who are local and have a stake in that community health,  right?  
**[0:03:23-0:03:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:03:23):**  They're literally willing to stand in front of a bulldozer to protect their soil.  And with soil and agriculture, it's the most important pillar of human health and well-being.  And we had always been known, Patagonia had always been known as a pioneer in organic  agriculture through their organic cotton program.  But people were adopting organic cotton, but at a pretty low rate because they were wanting  
**[0:03:55-0:03:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:03:55):**  to buy cheap clothes, right?  And so it felt more important to maybe make the connection of organic and regenerative  practices which are so critical to the climate and biodiversity emergency that we face, that  we focus on that.  And Patagonia had always had a relationship with organic farmers and also with carbon,  
**[0:04:31-0:04:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:04:31):**  you know, understanding how farming affected carbon sequestration.  So it was just sort of a natural thing for us to do.  And we started, I founded the Regenerative Organic Alliance back in 2018 with the Rodale  Institute and Dr. Bronner's and a few other organic brands.  We put that together to create a certification that really outlined what regenerative practices  
**[0:04:57-0:05:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:04:57):**  were and would also give the consumer a high bar standard to say, hey, I know that this  is being created at a regenerative farm or regenerative operation and it's also not using  pesticides or synthetic fertilizers.  So that's kind of how we got into soil.  Do you remember like how that, I always like to ask if there was a moment or was a gradual  
**[0:05:21-0:05:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:05:21):**  process because of course you've been focusing on apparel and of course on the sourcing of  the fibers, but that is quite a step to food.  Like it's quite another, it feels like a very different beast or thing.  Like do you remember when it was triggered?  Was it a documentary?  
**[0:05:36-0:05:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:05:36):**  Was it a visit to a farmer that you said, whoa, this is wild?  Well, I think there's, you know, Yvonne was always very interested and I think inspired  by some work that Doug Tompkins was doing in Chile and Argentina around rewilding and  regenerative farming.  Laguna Bianca.  
**[0:05:58-0:05:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:05:58):**  Yes.  Yeah.  And I think that that was an inspiration to him, but how to operationalize that and actually  make that happen.  You know, there were a lot of conversations about how to do that.  
**[0:06:10-0:06:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:06:10):**  And like I said-  After I said that, I mean that farm, I still use that picture as an example because it's  just so incredibly beautiful, but it never was, I think, financially sustainable, which  sort of an underpinning.  We need that as well to convince more.  
**[0:06:25-0:06:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:06:25):**  But the farm, I mean, look for the picture.  I'll put some links below.  It's just like, I think that he called the tractor drivers artist or something like that.  And you can see that like the photos are just spectacular.  And I can imagine, yeah, that serves as inspiration.  
**[0:06:40-0:06:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:06:40):**  Yeah.  And it's like everything else in the US right now.  There's terms like organic and regenerative.  They come under fire directly from the chemical companies and lobbyists.  Alan Lewis uses this great term, the Fibberati, he calls them.  
**[0:07:03-0:07:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:07:03):**  And there's always a status quo that seeks to debunk the benefits of organic and regenerative  practices.  And that's what we need now to fight the climate crisis.  And there's been such good research on organic and regenerative yields being competitive  with conventional yields over the five-year transition period and organic systems producing  
**[0:07:28-0:07:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:07:28):**  yields 40% higher in a drought and things like that.  So there's a lot of good data out there that says we should basically be going back to  these ancient practices.  And that chemical agriculture and monoculture and CAFOs are not good for people or the planet.  And then your tenure ended at Patagonia and you could probably choose any job in the world.  
**[0:07:56-0:08:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:07:56):**  There would be opportunities popping up if you like it or not.  And you decided to join a venture fund as a managing partner or founding partner and  very specifically focus on you mentioned something now like we should go back to these ancient  practices.  But region ventures we've interviewed obviously the founder Dan, I'll put a link below of  
**[0:08:15-0:08:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:08:15):**  the interview as well, is very much focused on the technology side of things.  So sort of feeling, I don't know if that's the feeling, but moving forward and making  big steps into that.  Like what was the rationale behind after all the choices you could make or also not do  anything for a long time is to join this group.  
**[0:08:31-0:08:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:08:31):**  Nothing against Dan because I think he's amazing, but why this choice?  Well Dan and I had worked together and invested together through the venture fund that I founded  at Patagonia, which was working primarily on innovations and supply chain.  And I just felt Dan and I were really value aligned about a few things.  One was the speed and scale with which change has got to happen over the next few decades  
**[0:09:04-0:09:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:09:04):**  in order for us to have a livable planet.  The idea that the kinds of businesses that we should be supporting are founders that  are focusing on restoring the planet and not destroying it.  And that the important thing about, and this is a startup fund, right?  So we're focusing on really early stage companies and the technology has to enable that transition  
**[0:09:40-0:09:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:09:40):**  and can be a tool to really enable that transition.  And so that's why I decided to work with Dan.  I'm also on the board of environmental impact companies that I feel like we'll have.  Will be the brands that will help with this just transition that we need to make towards  electrification, towards changes in means of production, towards this new food system  
**[0:10:08-0:10:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:10:08):**  that we need to create.  All of these are innovations and economic opportunities.  And so it's very exciting from that perspective.  And how is the, I mean, of course we're in a time where COVID has restricted travel quite  a bit.  
**[0:10:26-0:10:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:10:26):**  The last few years, we're recording this at the end of summer 2022.  Let's hope autumn will be less chaotic compared to the last few years.  But how has the journey been?  Because this was started right in the middle or even just before.  How has the journey been as a founding partner of an early stage startup fund focused on  
**[0:10:46-0:10:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:10:46):**  specifically technology in regeneration?  I think what's exciting is that most of the young entrepreneurs that we meet and founders  that we meet, they grew up with this crisis front and center in their life.  They grew up digitally native and with tremendous amount of information and access at their  fingertips to make their own judgments about what's happening to people in the planet in  
**[0:11:22-0:11:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:11:22):**  the old model, in the status quo model, and then what they can do to change it and make  a difference in the next couple of decades.  I think they're really driven by, in the past, Yvonne Chouinard was kind of a lone guy in  the wilderness talking about the importance of environmental responsibility.  We've come a long way from there.  
**[0:11:50-0:11:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:11:50):**  For me personally, I felt like I want to spend the next couple of decades of my life where  I can be useful focused on regenerating and restoring the damage that we've done to the  planet by creating these new economies.  They are new economies.  I think that's the exciting part of it from a business perspective.  
**[0:12:15-0:12:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:12:15):**  I think of that based on products and services and technology that can enable that.  What are some companies or one or two that you are that obviously is public, otherwise  we wouldn't be discussing it.  You're extremely excited about it.  What do you get to work with now daily or weekly that really resembles for you that  
**[0:12:40-0:12:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:12:40):**  new economy piece?  I'll go from big to small.  From big, I'm on the board of a company called Rivian, which is focused on electrification.  They were a clean sheet of paper company focused on electrification.  They're doing an adventure truck.  
**[0:13:08-0:13:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:13:08):**  They did really interesting things.  When they did their IPO, they gave 1% of their equity, put 1% of their equity into a fund  for nature.  I think it makes a commentary and it sets a leadership position of if you're going public  and you're creating this huge liquidity event, why aren't you doing something for nature  
**[0:13:31-0:13:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:13:31):**  right now?  Especially, you depend on it as an outdoor truck company.  These are the pickup trucks that go into most extreme circumstances, which I don't know  if that's a thing really outside the US because I think you could also take a mountain bike,  but it's a huge market for outdoorsy and a lot of transport.  
**[0:13:51-0:13:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:13:51):**  Obviously, I think you have a huge deal with Amazon as well to get the trucks.  I think it's representative of this transition that we need to make to electrification.  I'm also on the board of and we've invested in a company called, Regen is invested in  a company called Meaty, which is a plant-based, mycelium root-based, plant-based food company.  Also really interesting because it's using a very ancient fermentation process essentially  
**[0:14:26-0:14:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:14:26):**  and creating a really nice high protein source, which we will need more of in the coming years,  good protein sources at reasonable costs with a low environmental footprint.  I find that whole space very interesting.  Then on the technology side, some of this early technology that we've invested in, it  runs the gamut between solar-powered robots that are used for weeding and farm support  
**[0:15:00-0:15:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:15:00):**  to mapping technology that's looking at how forest carbon is sequestered and giving us  a way to look at that.  Different solutions around democratizing carbon financing and how that will work.  These are startups that Regen is investing in, which are enabling the transition that  we need to make.  
**[0:15:33-0:15:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:15:33):**  How do you use this model of VCE, early stage seed or pre-seed and series A investing?  How does it work within Regeneration?  We've had many conversations here on the podcast where people say, yes, simply the time horizons  maybe don't fit well, or even the return expectations of primarily software-focused or people that  are used to crazy returns.  
**[0:16:00-0:16:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:16:00):**  How do you feel about that?  Is there enough deal flow that fits that?  Do we even want to fit that model of the crazy scale?  We need the crazy scale.  In impact, absolutely.  
**[0:16:12-0:16:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:16:12):**  But do we also need these exits, are they going to be there and justified as VCE model  in Regeneration?  The way I look at it is, if you're looking at investments in Regeneration and specifically  food systems, you don't have to go too far.  You can follow the money.  
**[0:16:39-0:16:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:16:39):**  Just look at the huge and in some cases, unprecedented valuations that the large food companies have  paid for natural and organic products.  There's a list that I couldn't even name how many, but General Mills has bought a ton of  those companies, Cascadian Farms, they've bought, Denone bought earthbound farms.  You can just go down.  
**[0:17:05-0:17:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:17:05):**  Mostly on the brand side, like the CPG side, right?  Totally on the brand side.  I really think of this as a product from a product perspective because everything does  end up on the plate in some form.  Investing in products grown with regenerative practices, right?  
**[0:17:21-0:17:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:17:21):**  Without pesticides and synthetic fertilizers and stuff, with short ingredient lists and  high nutritional density, that is the future.  If you don't think you're going to get a high return from that, I just think you're not  paying attention.  In citizens, this is interesting to me too, is that citizens are becoming much more enlightened,  
**[0:17:41-0:17:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:17:41):**  right?  Partly because of technology advances and the poor quality of healthcare, right?  People are taking control of their metabolic health and they're eating foods that are more  nutrient dense, that are lower in sugar and fat and kind of all the things that the old  food companies have lived off of.  
**[0:18:04-0:18:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:18:04):**  They'll pay the appropriate price for those products.  They'll also become extremely brand loyal, which is why a lot of the food companies buy  those brands, keep those names, and continue this Trojan horse approach to changing their  portfolio.  Which is a risky approach.  
**[0:18:24-0:18:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:18:24):**  We've seen many examples.  I mean, you've been very involved in the B Corp movement as well, where the companies  were bought and Ben & Jerry's was probably one of the first and many others followed.  They didn't turn out to be the Trojan horse necessarily.  The name is still there.  
**[0:18:40-0:18:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:18:40):**  In many cases, they're better ingredients than others, but also in many unfortunate  cases, the real soul of the company and the real ethics and the impact disappeared when  they were swallowed up literally by gigantic food companies.  How do we prevent that with this new wave of regenerative CPG companies to not simply  quote unquote sell out, which is great for the investors and great for the space because  
**[0:19:05-0:19:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:19:05):**  it creates a lot of momentum, but then maybe the large company doesn't change its sourcing.  It doesn't become the Trojan horse, it simply becomes a horse and nothing really happens.  Which is still okay, but it's not the revolution we need.  No, I totally agree.  I do think that the best brands learn from those acquisitions.  
**[0:19:28-0:19:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:19:28):**  Sure, there are plenty of examples of how they've destroyed them and they're not there  any longer, but I also think that that was a different time.  I do think that the changes in the customer, the citizen are starting to have a greater  impact and you can't always look to the past to say what the future will be.  I think regenerative ecosystems that grow delicious, nutritious food and they also unlock  
**[0:20:05-0:20:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:20:05):**  maybe the distribution around local distribution, that's a winning investment combination.  I think some of these founders too, there's so much going on in the digital space now,  they might be less likely to be dependent on that big company distribution and might  think of going public themselves and creating other ways to create a liquidity event that  are more meaningful.  
**[0:20:37-0:20:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:20:37):**  I think that's also an element too.  I didn't really see any potential in the steward ownership discussion.  I know Organic Grown in the US basically sold to itself and became a sort of forever company  like Bosch in Germany and many others.  To safeguard, I mean still perfectly fine to raise money, perfectly fine to make money  
**[0:21:01-0:21:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:21:01):**  of your investments, but the mission stays locked in and can never be changed even if  the most quote unquote evil company shows up with $10 billion, we're not going to sell  for that because we know the mission cannot be changed.  Do you see a role for that or is that just too far out of the current system?  I think the current system is challenging because the buyer has a lot of flexibility  
**[0:21:26-0:21:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:21:26):**  and there are things that I think that's one of the ways that the benefit corporation movement  has been important because it enshrines the B Corp charter into the legal framework of  the company and says these are the things that this company stands for and will either  contribute to with philanthropy or whatever the model is.  In Patagonia's case, it was giving 1% of sales to grassroots environmental groups,  
**[0:22:02-0:22:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:22:02):**  but I think that there needs to be a better corporate structure around that and I think  B Corp is the closest thing that we have right now, but it's difficult.  It's a difficult thing right now to make change in.  I think the thing that's exciting to me about the entrepreneurs that we get to be in touch  with with Regen Ventures is that they're pretty savvy about this stuff.  
**[0:22:38-0:22:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:22:38):**  They're thinking about it right now when they're getting their first round capital.  They're thinking about who their investors are and are they value aligned and I don't  think that was so much the case before.  Which is hopeful.  I mean, you need to think about it because if you go on a certain path or with certain  
**[0:22:57-0:23:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:22:57):**  investors, nothing against them, but it sets you up for an X amount of years or X amount  of rounds and X amount of valuations and that might be not fitting, let's say, for the overall  strategy or impact you're looking for.  So we need awareness around that.  In terms of, I mean, do you flow in this deep regeneration tech space?  
**[0:23:21-0:23:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:23:21):**  Very simple question.  Do you see enough exciting and also good founders, potential markets and then all of that?  How has that been?  Because it's quite almost like a niche within a niche.  I don't see it that way because I think I come from a background of making products  
**[0:23:41-0:23:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:23:41):**  and running businesses.  And what I see is everyone is trying to figure out how do I get to my net zero goals?  How can I make my supply chain more resilient and stable and good for the environment and  good for the people that work in it?  And everyone is dealing with those issues and they've made public commitments and ESG  
**[0:24:06-0:24:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:24:06):**  is a big part of governance now and that's getting sorted out, the harmonization of these  ESG metrics.  And so that's not going away.  I mean, that is here to stay.  And if anything, there's not enough, maybe not enough deal flow to match the demand of  
**[0:24:32-0:24:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:24:32):**  what is really this sort of mega trend to be able to track and manage projects, to be  able to ensure that the carbon markets are accurate and verified.  All of these transitions that need to happen that we talked about earlier.  So I don't know, I feel very optimistic about that.  I don't feel like it's nichey in any way.  
**[0:25:02-0:25:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:25:02):**  And I think it'll deliver exponential outcomes, both returns and impacts and with less risk  than a traditional VC, I think.  And what would you, I mean, you mentioned a few now, but what would you like if you  had to pick one sub-theme or something you would love to see more of?  Like what are you quote unquote missing in your deal flow database?  
**[0:25:27-0:25:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:25:27):**  I would love to see more companies tackling XYZ.  What's really something you would love to get to see more of?  Well, I think there's so much that we don't know about soil and kind of where we started  the conversation.  It's like soil is a mystery to us, I think, in terms of being able to really be able to  
**[0:25:53-0:25:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:25:53):**  measure carbon sequestration in a meaningful way.  And when we crack some of that code, I think it will be really interesting.  I mean, I'll give you an example.  I'm on the founding board of a nonprofit that's called the Society to Protect Underground  Networks and it's all focused on fungi with a brilliant-  
**[0:26:15-0:26:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:26:15):**  Spawn, yeah, we should have Toby on soon.  You have got to have Toby on because she's brilliant.  I mean, there are trillions of miles of micro risal fungi sequestering carbon around the  world and they're actually going through a process of mapping that.  And it's not just on farms, but in grasslands and deserts and-  
**[0:26:36-0:26:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:26:36):**  Forests and very extreme places, yeah.  There's an amazing video, I'll put a link below.  It's hilarious and very, very cool to see.  So this fungus makes up, in different places in the world, can make up to 50% of the world's  biomass and 75% of the world's terrestrial carbon is stored underground.  
**[0:27:00-0:27:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:27:00):**  We know very little about that.  Toby is working to unlock that.  I think she's the Jane Goodall of this generation and working on how do we unlock this network  in such a way and learn from this network in such a way to make sure that we have a  healthy functioning carbon storage network.  
**[0:27:28-0:27:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:27:28):**  That kind of thing to me is really interesting and there are so many different companies  that could spin out of that idea and be helpful to this transition that we're trying to make.  And so, yeah, I'm excited about that kind of thing and I think that we haven't even  really scratched the surface, but we've got all these great young entrepreneurs working  on it.  
**[0:27:52-0:27:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:27:52):**  And what do you believe?  I'd like to ask this question inspired by John Kemp.  He asked it slightly different, but what do you believe to be true about regenerative  agriculture that others don't?  If you go to a conference, where are you contrarian within, let's say, our bubble?  
**[0:28:08-0:28:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:28:08):**  Well I think I'm contrarian in a couple of ways.  One, I do think regenerative organic agriculture, and I feel like I have to say the word organic  because it negates then using synthetic fertilizers and pesticides, it can feed the world.  We know that there's been enough research that proves it, but there's a lot of junk  science out there funded by chemical companies that's invested in the status quo and it's  
**[0:28:38-0:28:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:28:38):**  got these captive ag schools that say you'll never get the yields, but it's just not true.  And so-  What can we do about it?  We have seen the research, we have the papers, we've had the profitability papers of Dr.  Jonathan Lundgren proving that it's better for the pest, it's better for your insects,  
**[0:28:58-0:29:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:28:58):**  it's better for your yield, it's better for your, especially for your profitability and  all of that.  And somehow, every time this question keeps coming up, like, okay, but it sounds real  nice and cute, but how are we going to feed the world?  Like, really?  
**[0:29:12-0:29:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:29:12):**  Are we still there?  How do we, should we learn from the tobacco, like grassroot movement against it, how they  silence it and still it's going strong, unfortunately, in certain places, but like, how do we unplug  that blockage that we apparently have around yield to profitability that just isn't true,  but seems to be continuing to be true, at least in the general audience's view?  
**[0:29:39-0:29:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:29:39):**  Well, there's a lot of, there's a lot, it's analogous to me, like the fossil fuel industry  and climate, right?  It's very analogous to that.  There's a lot of big chemical interests, like, you know, let me think about once.  Also using fossil fuels, actually.  
**[0:29:58-0:29:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:29:58):**  Yeah.  Yeah.  Yeah.  There's a lot of big chemical interests that, you know, pay for that narrative to be out  there.  
**[0:30:05-0:30:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:30:05):**  I think what needs to happen is that these entrepreneurs, these new, you know, CEOs of  companies that are focused on regenerative and organic need to be more vocal, you know,  they need to be able to have that public debate and have a policy and advocacy, you know,  part of their business, you know, that lobbies just as hard.  The problem is, right, the chemical companies have a lot of money.  
**[0:30:36-0:30:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:30:36):**  I mean, but look at Monsanto, you know, they finally won the battle against them to a degree.  It was so bad that they changed their name and, you know, left the country, right?  I mean, after poisoning our soil for all those years, you know, with cancer causing agents.  So they can be vanquished, although they're sitting in bear right now, but they can be  vanquished with both the changes in the consumer and customer behavior and also, you know,  
**[0:31:08-0:31:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:31:08):**  companies in terms of policy and advocacy.  And that will help move things much faster.  And I don't know if you're seeing this, but to me, it feels like everything is moving  exponentially faster, right?  Because we've been fighting these climate battles for so long and then all of a sudden,  
**[0:31:25-0:31:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:31:25):**  bam, you know, they just things are things are moving, you know, partly because we're  in such a crisis.  Right.  Absolutely.  I mean, if we look at this this summer, I don't think you can pick any place where it  
**[0:31:35-0:31:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:31:35):**  was a traditional summer, a normal summer.  I mean, if you look at the heat waves in India and Pakistan, if you look at the heat waves  in the US and Europe and many other places, if you look at the drought, the flash floods,  everything seems to be happening faster than the worst scenario.  So hopefully, of course, and go and this is probably this is probably the coldest summer  
**[0:31:57-0:31:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:31:57):**  you'll ever experience.  Yeah, this is that's the scary part.  Right.  I mean, that's that's what's terrifying, you know.  And what gives you hope then?  
**[0:32:07-0:32:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:32:07):**  Like, are you with all that you've seen and the fights you fought in the apparel industry  and in the chemical food against the chemical food industry, but still within it because  you were fighting?  And like, what are you optimistic?  And if so, why?  
**[0:32:24-0:32:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:32:24):**  Well, I feel like I'm realistic about, you know, the damage that's been done.  But, you know, I have to say one thing about working in conservation of public lands and  working with indigenous groups that are working on public lands issues is, you know, when  you undam a river, the fish stocks come back, you know, the river comes back to life.  And so I believe in nature's ability to restore and regenerate itself if we stop doing the  
**[0:33:02-0:33:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:33:02):**  harmful things that we're doing.  And it can do it quite quickly.  I mean, we saw that in, you know, in L.A. after a week of, you know, covid lockdown.  I walked outside my house and I was like, I've never seen skies this blue in Los Angeles.  The speed is, yeah, very hopeful.  
**[0:33:25-0:33:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:33:25):**  And so what would you let's say we do this in a theater somewhere and there's a live  audience full of investors, people working in the finance space, people working in this  space.  Where would you, of course, without giving investment advice, but where would you tell  them to look deeper or to dig a bit deeper?  
**[0:33:43-0:33:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:33:43):**  Is it mostly mycelium?  Like, what are places where we definitely need, let's say, more energy, more people,  more resources, more funding, more investments, of course.  But what would you tell them to do in this region?  I can food space, a regeneration space.  
**[0:33:55-0:34:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:33:55):**  Where would you tell them to, OK, go go and explore there a bit deeper and a bit further?  For sure, it is in the soil and it is in that network underneath the soil, which includes  mycorrhizal fungi.  It includes it includes all kinds of issues around soil health and in, you know, from  forestation to grasslands management to, I mean, simple things that sound simple, but  
**[0:34:25-0:34:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:34:25):**  they're they're they're difficult to to implement, but need more energy and financing and innovation  and thinking is just, you know, like pasture raised animals.  Right.  I mean, if we eliminated all of CAFO today, I mean, you'd see water systems restored.  You'd see waterways and rivers restored.  
**[0:34:44-0:34:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:34:44):**  You'd see, you know, you'd be able to fish in your local stream again.  You know, there are so many benefits to like rethinking a lot of these sort of status quo  ways of of implementing our food system.  And so I think I think that to me is really a place, you know, agriculture, food systems.  You know, I think I would generally stay away from like the GMO, CRISPR, science, you know,  
**[0:35:19-0:35:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:35:19):**  gene editing stuff, because, you know, we've had that for years and it really, you know,  it hasn't it hasn't been perceived as anything good for people or the planet.  And you know, I know that there are I don't know how many European nations it is now,  Cohen, that have that have banned GMOs, but it's more than seven, I think, or six or  seven.  
**[0:35:39-0:35:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:35:39):**  So soil is the wealth of our nation and there needs to be a lot more attention put on soil  and the impacts that soil have on our on our life and our health.  And what do you tell me you bring up the animal protein side?  And of course, as a region ventures, you're investing in a number of plant based companies.  What do you tell like a hard core like we're still in the same theater and on hardcore  
**[0:36:05-0:36:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:36:05):**  and the person following a vegan diet stands up and says, Yeah, but what about the animals?  Like, what's the what is your normal?  Because I struggle with that, honestly, that the normal answer, what is your your usual  response to when people really respond quite badly to the potential of grazing animals  and the potential that has in an ecosystem?  
**[0:36:29-0:36:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:36:29):**  What is your usual I'm asking for a friend, a QA me, like, what do you respond to to somebody  that that really focuses on getting all animals out of the food system?  Yeah, I understand that.  I don't think it's it's going to happen anytime soon.  I think that people need to be making huge reductions in the amount of meat that they're  
**[0:36:54-0:37:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:36:54):**  eating and if they buy meat, it needs to be, you know, you know, made in the correct way.  And I'm not saying the burden of cost should be put on people.  But I think that's that's more on regulation and many and, you know, product creation.  But, you know, when I look at like, you know, the example of how it's done well, I think  about Dan O'Brien at Wild Idea in South Dakota, who restored that South Dakota plain that  
**[0:37:20-0:37:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:37:20):**  was destroyed by cow farming that didn't belong on the on the South Dakota plain, restored  the native grasses and, you know, restored the keystone species on the on the plain.  And it's beautiful.  You go there and you can hear the burrowing owls and you can hear all the birds and see  the whole ecosystem restored.  
**[0:37:40-0:37:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:37:40):**  Now, he didn't do that as an NGO.  He's like, I need to make money needs to pay for itself.  So he's selling buffalo meat, but he's doing grass harvesting.  He's doing the most humane harvesting I've ever seen.  Patagonia, we helped to fund fund that.  
**[0:37:56-0:37:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:37:56):**  So you know, I get it.  But I also get that like we need grazing animals on the on the binome, you know, and so grazing  animals done right is good for the planet.  And what role can technology play there?  Like what's the because I don't think you're going to invest anytime soon as we jump ventures  
**[0:38:15-0:38:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:38:15):**  or at least the first fund in in a buffalo herd.  But are there things exciting for you in that animal protein space that could be could be  interesting at some point for VC fund looking at the technology, like the implementation  of technology with regenerative practices?  Well, I think I think some of the interesting technology is the technology that sort of  
**[0:38:38-0:38:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:38:38):**  proves the model out that if you look at, you know, the cow ranch next door to the,  you know, to the ranch that's that's letting buffalo do their their natural thing and roam  around and, you know, help till the soil with their with their hooves and things.  You know, if you if you look at that from a rigorous soil testing method, the the buffalo  ranch is going to sequester more carbon, it's going to create a healthier ecosystem, and  
**[0:39:10-0:39:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:39:10):**  it's going to be better for, you know, weather and climate resistance and resilience.  And I think those are the kinds of things that like technology can help define and create  markets for whether they're carbon markets or, you know, other ways of exchanging carbon  carbon credit.  And I think it's an it's there's there's a lot there.  
**[0:39:35-0:39:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:39:35):**  There's more than I'm sure we haven't even seen yet.  But those are the kinds of projects that I think are interesting.  And if you would be in charge of like, let's say you've raised a billion dollars, or let's  say a large, large amount doesn't have to be only early stage VC, like it could be the  full suite, because I know, then at some point, I mean, there's there are definitely ideas  
**[0:39:55-0:39:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:39:55):**  to to make this a whole suite of funds and suite of approaches, etc.  Like, what would you you do if you'll be in charge of a billion dollars there?  I mean, there should be a return at some point, but it can be very, very long term if that's  needed.  But I'm asking this question to, to understand priorities, like where would you would you  
**[0:40:13-0:40:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:40:13):**  focus this amount of resources and this amount of energy at the end, because money is energy?  And if you if you would be in control of that, let's say tomorrow morning?  Well, that's, that's something that deserves more thought than a, you know, than a couple  of minutes on the podcast.  But I would say that there are certain areas that are really critical, right.  
**[0:40:35-0:40:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:40:35):**  And one of those one of those areas is the fact that a lot of farmers don't own the land  that they that they're farming, it's leased.  And and and there are all kinds of, you know, difficulties for farmers to actually finance  the transitions that they need from chemical agriculture, monocrop agriculture to regenerative  agriculture, and and start to begin to move that meter to building topsoil rather than  
**[0:41:07-0:41:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:41:07):**  destroying it.  So I think, I think working on that, the financing mechanisms for that transition is very important  because it's a multi year transition.  I also think, you know, this cleanly produced this plant, plant based protein is very important  for the future, because, you know, if we were feeding everyone the American diet, why we'd  
**[0:41:31-0:41:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:41:31):**  blow out all of our planetary boundaries, right.  So that that's not the way to go.  You know, besides the large amount of diabetes and other, you know, medical issues that we  have in the US.  So you know, I think that's that's important.  
**[0:41:47-0:41:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:41:47):**  I think this this pasture, pastured animals done correctly.  I think that's that's an interesting space and, you know, innovation needed there.  And and, you know, and I think there's there's a lot that could be done there in an interesting  way.  And I also think, you know, financing the transition through these, you know, carbon  
**[0:42:07-0:42:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:42:07):**  markets and measurement tools and the science that we really need to know.  It's not, you know, what we've had in the past, which is these big, big chemical companies  or big food companies that just, you know, own these agricultural schools and basically  tell them what to, you know, report.  Yeah.  
**[0:42:25-0:42:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:42:25):**  And so the truth of what's actually going on.  So we need, you know, more more sort of interesting citizen science and collaborative science.  And I think we're at a really critical juncture as a species.  You know, we're either going to choose life and innovation and health and learn to live  with nature instead of destroying her.  
**[0:42:45-0:42:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:42:45):**  Or we're going to go the way of the dinosaur.  And I'm not willing to give up yet.  You know, I have hope we can tip the scale towards a more righteous future.  And on the clean, on the plant based one and the clean label, like what needs to happen  there?  
**[0:43:02-0:43:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:43:02):**  Because it feels like the solutions that are currently on the market and getting a lot  of attention also get a lot of criticism from the ingredient side, from the labeling side,  because there are just too many things on the label, and maybe also from the taste side,  to a certain extent, but simply the nutrition, the health.  And also, you can make an argument that they're potentially worse, or at least equally bad,  
**[0:43:24-0:43:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:43:24):**  in terms of sourcing and where their ingredients come.  I'm obviously talking about the GMO, soy, etc.  Like what?  Yeah.  What do you see there?  
**[0:43:33-0:43:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:43:33):**  Is was it sort of a first generation?  I mean, there were generations before and now we're thinking, okay, we actually I mean,  it's not just plant based is not not good enough.  We need to go a level beyond that, because otherwise, we just replace one crap with the  other crap, which is not really helpful.  
**[0:43:46-0:43:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:43:46):**  Yeah, I totally agree.  I mean, that's why I'm really excited about meaty because it's a very short ingredient  list.  It's using fermentation, and it's using something that is basically mushroom root mycelium based.  And it's it's it's very good on the gut.  
**[0:44:02-0:44:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:44:02):**  It's not trying to create, you know, something that looks like meat that that's going to,  you know, wreak havoc on your gut because it's got this long ingredient list.  It's trying to create, you know, fat textures and stuff like that.  You know, it's, it's, it's, it's more simple.  And I think those are the kinds of solutions.  
**[0:44:20-0:44:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:44:20):**  How's the taste?  I'm fascinated by them.  Like what's the day you've tasted it for sure.  Like, what's the taste?  It's amazing.  
**[0:44:26-0:44:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:44:26):**  I mean, I wouldn't have gotten involved with the company if it didn't eat well.  I mean, it's it's and it doesn't have I mean, I've always had issues with the other plant  based meat companies and that it just didn't feel good in the gut afterward.  And I learned that a lot of that has to do with both the fact that they're using a lot  of GMO inputs, but that they're also trying to, you know, recreate, you know, meat textures  
**[0:44:48-0:44:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:44:48):**  and things like that.  You know, mycelium root, mushroom root kind of already has a meaty texture to it.  So it's it's it tastes very good.  And it's a beautiful center of the plate product.  And it's doing it's it's doing very well.  
**[0:45:03-0:45:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:45:03):**  And I'm, you know, just really excited to see that brand.  What does it use as a sort of ingredient?  Sorry, what does it use as ingredient?  What is it used to?  I don't know grow to mycelium on I don't think honest the right word like in or like how  
**[0:45:18-0:45:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:45:18):**  does like what do you need to feed it?  It's a fermentation.  It's a fermentation process and you feed sugar to it essentially.  And fermenting doesn't matter what kind of sugar it does.  And I think I think sugar sources is an issue, right, because you want to get the best source,  
**[0:45:35-0:45:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:45:35):**  most responsibly sourced.  So that's that's an issue that we you know, that we focus on as well in the supply chain  there.  Yeah, because otherwise, I mean, the sugar industry has has some issues as well, not  just because of the sugar, but also because of the growing practices there.  
**[0:45:51-0:45:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:45:51):**  For sure.  And so that's very interesting.  I mean, the fermentation part, obviously, is very interesting.  And do you see a lot of other innovations there in a sense like that used is not trying  to fake meat, but actually trying to grow a product that is a center plate, as you mentioned,  
**[0:46:06-0:46:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:46:06):**  as they see or even more like, is that has that been happening because of all the backlash  that obviously some some of the larger companies we've seen with a lot of marketing budget?  Like, do you see a lot of innovation in there?  Would you love to see more?  I think we're going to have to see more innovation on and we're seeing it already with with,  
**[0:46:28-0:46:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:46:28):**  you know, protein being added into into products, right?  Because people want to have a higher protein diet or get the amount of protein that they  that they need in a day and they don't want to do that by just eating, you know, by just  eating animal meat.  And so we're seeing that but I think that's a wide open field.  
**[0:46:47-0:46:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:46:47):**  I mean, one thing one thing I learned about the food industry, you know, starting Patagonia's  food business is that, you know, innovation should not be about, you know, adding new  flavors and that kind of thing, right?  Innovation should really be about the future of food, you know, and I think very few big  companies think that way, which is why they end up, you know, buying these innovative  
**[0:47:12-0:47:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:47:12):**  smaller companies because they just don't have that capability in house.  Like, well, it's an interesting because we've talked about the CPG side and how it can really  unlock interesting returns, but also unlock, I think a lot of farmer like potential for  farmers to to find supply or to find a ways to to sell their regeneratively grown almonds,  etc, etc.  
**[0:47:35-0:47:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:47:35):**  And yet, on the $1 billion question, you said you didn't mention, okay, well, let's invest  in a lot of the startup food companies to do it.  Is that deliberate or do you see less opportunity there?  Or maybe it's more crowded and like, because we know organic exits were good, like this  space will attract like new new bars and new food companies?  
**[0:47:58-0:48:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:47:58):**  Or is that has been something you haven't focused on too much?  No, I think I think that the change a lot of the change will happen.  I mean, I mentioned plant based because I think protein is so important and sources  of protein are so important as we look look to the future.  And like I said, this issue of using animal based proteins would kind of blow out the  
**[0:48:20-0:48:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:48:20):**  planetary boundaries to the extreme.  Really quickly.  Yeah.  Yeah.  Especially with this CAFO model.  
**[0:48:26-0:48:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:48:26):**  Right.  It's really terrible.  It's really bad for the environment.  So.  So I mentioned I mentioned plant based, but I also believe that there will be innovative  
**[0:48:34-0:48:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:48:34):**  products, right, that people will and they'll win by being the best product.  You know, the win by being the most delicious, nutritious product.  And you know, you've talked a lot, I know, about nutrient density.  And that's also an important factor for people now.  And I really I really do think that there is a huge change happening where people are  
**[0:48:56-0:48:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:48:56):**  people are unhappy with their health care.  You know, they're starting to take it into their own hands and they're starting to be  technology that's helping them to do that.  So I'm excited about that.  I think there's a whole huge opportunity there in both, you know, transforming food systems  
**[0:49:11-0:49:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:49:11):**  and health care.  And there's there's just a lot there.  Have you made investments like in that, like in the health care food space, let's say,  or are you looking at things?  I mean, obviously only if you can share.  
**[0:49:23-0:49:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:49:23):**  But have you done any any deals there?  Not not not in that particular space.  But you know, you would like to are looking at we're we're definitely, you know, talking  to companies that are they're looking at that space.  I think a lot of a lot of folks are I mean, it's going to be huge as people begin to be  
**[0:49:47-0:49:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:49:47):**  able to take more control over their metabolic health.  And then as a final question, it never is the final question.  But if you could change one thing overnight, so you don't have your $1 billion fund anymore,  I'm sorry, but you do have a magic wand and you have the unlimited power to change one  thing and one thing only.  
**[0:50:07-0:50:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:50:07):**  What what would that be?  I think it would be to abolish all forms of chemical agriculture.  Simply make it illegal or simply like what would that process?  Regulate it out of existence, you know, regulate very quickly.  How quick?  
**[0:50:25-0:50:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:50:25):**  Okay, we do it.  If I could wave a magic wand, I would do it right now.  Yeah.  I mean, it's a tough one because it's like, would you do that?  Or would you get rid of all the CAFOs in the in the world?  
**[0:50:38-0:50:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:50:38):**  All the subsidies could be Yeah.  Yeah, I know.  It's I mean, but maybe if you get rid of chemical agriculture, there won't be this immense surplus  subsidized obviously of a fee that could easily go to CAFOs and thus take also take out take  away their business model, which in a in a in a true cost accounting world obviously  
**[0:50:57-0:50:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:50:57):**  wouldn't exist.  And in an unsubsidized world, I'm betting that it wouldn't exist either.  So maybe if you take away the feed, also that model doesn't doesn't have any legs anymore.  Yeah.  So that would be the big, the big change and anything you're particularly excited, I mean,  
**[0:51:17-0:51:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:51:17):**  where it seems to be that we're going into a hot literally, but like autumn and obviously  winter like things you look forward to over the next let's say six months or so from from  the venture side from region ventures like what's what I want to keep you up at night  but what's exciting you over the over the next month?  We should definitely check into like say if we're talking a year or two years to see Okay,  
**[0:51:38-0:51:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:51:38):**  what's what's brewing there?  Well, I think what's exciting is we've we've deployed, we've deployed a portion of our  fund, but we still have a lot of capital left to deploy and there's so much exciting.  There's so much exciting stuff happening in both, you know, in food and technology and  in in soil health and in all of these different areas that I just feel like we're really positioned  
**[0:52:09-0:52:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:52:09):**  to pick those regenerative technology companies that that really have the capability to scale  and we're seeing, you know, we're seeing the beginnings of that in these early stage companies  that we're investing in and I just I just see the impact that that the fund can have  as being, you know, having great returns, but just just having really significant environmental  impact which is which is what we're we're shooting for.  
**[0:52:35-0:52:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:52:35):**  And I don't see those things as mutually exclusive, you know, and I ran a business where, you  know, we were very profitable and very successful but we also were very mindful and supportive  of planetary health and advocacy and and those are the companies that I think will win in  the next generation and those are the companies that will be on our lips.  It won't be Pepsi and Chevron and you know the companies we grew up with or I grew up  
**[0:53:08-0:53:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:53:08):**  with probably.  I think it's an interesting point.  I mean, and that's also a very fundamental piece I think of the Patagonia journey that  it never got sold or at least I think it never even got investment capital outside capital  to a certain extent and maybe it didn't need that in that timeframe like now we are living  
**[0:53:27-0:53:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:53:27):**  in different times of course, but it had this sort of long organic growth and of course  hyperscale at some point but it really only had to serve the goals it set and not necessarily  Wall Street or something because I don't know if that journey would have been the same over  40, 50 or whatever the number is years.  There will be some crisis potentially.  
**[0:53:49-0:53:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:53:49):**  So there's something to learn there potentially as well but also raise the question what happens  with the next generation?  I mean, nobody has eternal life and even neither like what will happen?  I mean, for sure plans are in place but how can it live on and have the enormous impact  it had also many decades from now?  
**[0:54:07-0:54:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:54:07):**  Yeah, well, I'm not the CEO anymore.  I can't really answer that question but I do think that the benefit corporation structure  is helpful in that secession conversation because like I said, it does enshrine the  values of the company into the company's charter and so you know what those values are and  they're very explicit.  
**[0:54:33-0:54:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:54:33):**  So, but yeah, I don't have a crystal ball of what will happen in the future there.  And do you see like, has it changed in terms of the amount of entrepreneurs you've seen  with this deep tech and deep regeneration focus over the last couple of years?  Like you say, we see sort of this growth now, I'm very excited.  We have quite a bit of dry powder left, which is great because we see deals has that shifted  
**[0:54:54-0:54:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:54:54):**  as the change since your time with with region ventures or has it been always quite a good  amount?  No, I think it's like sort of a renaissance, you know, and I think part of that is that  a lot of these founders are digitally native, right?  I mean, they grew up in a digital world and that we did not or I did not with a lot of  
**[0:55:19-0:55:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:55:19):**  information at their fingertips and a lot of technical knowledge and with idealism of  wanting to apply that to the world and they are vocal, they are active, they are, you  know, coming up with innovations.  Can some of them become like the Patagonia of our time but in the regeneration space?  Without question, I think.  
**[0:55:44-0:55:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:55:44):**  I think what we want is not just one more Patagonia like company, we want many, right?  That's what we're shooting for.  We need many of these unicorns, yeah.  Yeah, yeah.  Well, we don't need that.  
**[0:55:55-0:56:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:55:55):**  We don't want them to be unicorns, you know, we want to have a full herd of them.  Absolutely.  I want to thank you so much for your time, Rose, and for sharing, of course, for the  work you do and the fact that you didn't go and retire and but actually get your hands  dirty and do a lot of work after, I think, an immense 12 years that also took its toll  
**[0:56:19-0:56:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:56:19):**  or was definitely a roller coaster ride.  So I want to thank you for the work you do in this space and, of course, showing up here  and share about it.  Thank you, Colin.  Thank you for having me today.  
**[0:56:36-0:56:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:56:36):**  Thank you so much for listening all the way to the end.  For the show notes and links discussed, check out our website investinginregenitivagriculture.com.  Thank you so much for listening all the way to the end.  For the show notes and links we discussed in this episode, check out our website investinginregenitivagriculture.com.  If you liked this episode, why not share it with a friend or give us a rating on Apple  
**[0:57:00-0:57:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:57:00):**  Podcast.  That really helps.  Thanks again and see you next time.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  
**[0:57:23-0:57:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:57:23):**  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to put money  to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011 and recording  these podcasts since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  
**[0:57:42-0:57:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:57:42):**  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  What questions should you ask?  
**[0:57:54-0:57:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:57:54):**  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  
**[0:58:01-0:58:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:58:01):**  For whom is this course?  You, the soil builders and investors in this space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management consultants, etc.  
**[0:58:20-0:58:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:58:20):**  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  
**[0:58:36-0:58:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:58:36):**  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  
**[0:58:54-0:58:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:58:54):**  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to ride along.  
**[0:59:07-0:59:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:59:07):**  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in and what kind of co investors you could find or what kind of investors you could  find if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  
**[0:59:29-0:59:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:59:29):**  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  
**[0:59:43-0:59:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/rose-marcario#t=0:59:43):**  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  