### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2022-00-11)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  Hardly ever talked about in agriculture, let alone in regenerative agriculture circles.  The labour challenges.  
**[0:00:20-0:00:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:00:20):**  Around the world millions of people are exploited to pick our table grapes, tomatoes, lettuces,  peaches, etc.  We don't like to think about it, but unless we quote on quote fix the labour issue, we  will never have enough skilled people working on regenerative diversified farms.  We can't simply say don't worry about it, robots will take care of it.  
**[0:00:39-0:00:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:00:39):**  Because spoiler alert, they won't and especially not in specialty crops like fruit trees and  anything perennial.  Learn more about this hidden issue and more importantly the potential of a venture studio  in this space building companies, building collaborative automation agtech.  Not to replace farm workers, but to make their jobs less heavy.  
**[0:01:03-0:01:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:01:03):**  This is the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast.  Investing as if the planet mattered.  Where we talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space to learn more on  how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities and ecosystems  while making an appropriate and fair return.  
**[0:01:22-0:01:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:01:22):**  Why my focus on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land and our sea, grow our food, what we eat, wear and consume.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  
**[0:01:40-0:01:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:01:40):**  To make it easy for fans to support our work, we launched our membership community and so  many of you have joined us as a member.  Thank you.  If our work created value for you and if you have the means and only if you have the means,  consider joining us.  
**[0:01:54-0:01:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:01:54):**  Find out more on comrade.com slash investing in RegenAg.  That is comrade.com slash investing in RegenAg or find the link below.  Welcome to another episode today with the co-founder of Farmhand Ventures, a venture  studio building companies redesigning the future of work in agriculture.  Welcome Connie.  
**[0:02:17-0:02:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:02:17):**  Thank you.  Thanks for having me.  And there's a lot of back already in that little, little title or little subtitle, but  I always like to start with the question, you know, because you're a regular listener  of the show, what brought you to soil?  
**[0:02:32-0:02:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:02:32):**  And then of course, what brought you specific to the labor issue in soil and in agriculture?  But let's say what brought you to agriculture and food to begin with?  Sure.  Okay.  I'll, I'll step all the way back on this and I'm going to talk maybe less about soil than  
**[0:02:44-0:02:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:02:44):**  like most of your guests.  Cause my assumption is that almost everyone listening to this like gets it, gets that  soil really matters.  So first-  If you don't, we have like 180 plus episodes to listen to, 185 I think we're now.  
**[0:02:58-0:02:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:02:58):**  Yeah.  There are some, some, there's some great books and documentaries, but if you like, let's,  let's all agree we're in this, in this room now and we know soil matters.  It does definitely.  And yeah.  
**[0:03:08-0:03:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:03:08):**  So for me, I got into ag because I love food.  So I actually worked in restaurants.  I debated doing the kind of culinary career trajectory instead of, you know, college university.  But you know, grew up in the New York city suburbs.  My family has farm land in Iowa that we at work very much absentee landowners.  
**[0:03:32-0:03:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:03:32):**  But yeah, grew up in the burbs.  So went to college was, was good, always good at math as a kid.  So did engineer, studied engineering.  And I think that, and have also always been very motivated by conservation.  I'm a, I'm a big fan of the Bronx Zoo.  
**[0:03:50-0:03:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:03:50):**  I just like was super nerdy about all that stuff as a young person.  And so I think the intersection of those things, right?  Caring about planetary confines, caring about food both the quality of it and accessibility.  And part of the reason I also didn't go into the, just working in restaurants is as much  fun as it is and as valuable as I think it is societally.  
**[0:04:17-0:04:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:04:17):**  I didn't want to just serve rich people all day.  And so that intersect that with engineering and boom, you get ag tech actually.  So I also, basically I took a series of kind of loosely thought out things that landed  me early in the kind of ag tech venture capital movement.  So I did this entrepreneurial fellowship program after graduating college called Venture for  
**[0:04:46-0:04:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:04:46):**  America.  And that is how I ended up working, moving to St. Louis.  So moving to the Midwest of the US, which if you had told me as a kid that I would ever  live anywhere, but like the Northeast or maybe Bay area, I would have laughed at you.  And I am now a pretty big advocate for, yeah, everywhere else actually almost everywhere  
**[0:05:09-0:05:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:05:09):**  is pretty darn interesting.  And so I ended up moving to St. Louis and being one of the early employees at the Yield  Lab, which at the time was one of the first ag tech accelerators, an experiment at the  time.  And it's really grown and turned into an international family of impact venture capital funds, investing  
**[0:05:32-0:05:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:05:32):**  exclusively in agri-food technology.  So building that straight from the deep end has been super influential and shaped how  I've looked at things.  But another really key thing that, so I came into agriculture really thinking about the  sustainability side of food and the environment, specifically as it relates to environmental  
**[0:06:00-0:06:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:06:00):**  stuff.  I hadn't had at that time very much exposure to poverty, racism, all of these kind of socioeconomical,  sociopolitical issues that are really, really real and actually that are super intertwined  in our agri-food system.  And so now I've arrived, so still looking at the, okay, soil really matters scientifically.  
**[0:06:31-0:06:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:06:31):**  I'm a super science geek.  I'm the kind of person who is going to read all of the long form peer reviewed articles  and critique the methodology and those.  So that's why soil matters, right?  It does.  
**[0:06:47-0:06:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:06:47):**  But how do you actually make that fit into the reality that is political and economic?  You have to integrate people into that system.  So I have kind of shifted my mindset into thinking about, wait, why do we have an agri-food  system?  We have it to serve people.  
**[0:07:06-0:07:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:07:06):**  And why do we have one that doesn't lead to great soil health if you want to take the  geeky outcome?  Well, sure.  Let's explore that a little bit further because I came into this thinking, okay, Monsanto,  agribusiness, big corporates are the bad guys.  
**[0:07:23-0:07:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:07:23):**  But they're actually, it's much more nuanced than that.  I don't know that I believe that at all.  I can see arguments for it, but I don't know that I believe it at all.  There's really big challenges right now.  I live in St. Louis still, down the street from me, specifically across the street.  
**[0:07:43-0:07:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:07:43):**  And we have different red line neighborhoods.  The food desert issue is extremely real.  The access to fresh produce, nutrition, even to a dozen of eggs that is affordable, that  challenge is not even close to being sort of addressed.  And it's obviously tied to our agricultural systems, but less directly than you might  
**[0:08:07-0:08:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:08:07):**  think, actually.  The other side of that that I have been exposed to through working on farms, so I have done  a fair bit of woofing in France and in Oregon, but then more industrially, I've worked with  a farmland investment fund in Oregon, actually managing crews of about 100 seasonal workers  during blueberry and hemp harvest season.  
**[0:08:37-0:08:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:08:37):**  And actually working with those people alongside them and supervising them and understanding  the economic constraints that they face in their everyday life.  And also like having done the labor.  I've worked in restaurants, that's hard, right?  Working in farms, way harder, way harder.  
**[0:08:56-0:08:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:08:56):**  Physically, it's mental.  It's physically draining.  It's mentally challenging.  The unskilled work thing is total nonsense because no one moves faster than farm workers  and it's totally skill based.  
**[0:09:14-0:09:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:09:14):**  You feel like it's very hard to pick lettuce very quickly, actually, without hurting yourself  in the long run.  So all of this kind of exposure has shifted my thinking on...  So soil matters, yes.  But what matters more than soil, actually, is the people who are involved in the system  
**[0:09:34-0:09:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:09:34):**  and why does soil matter?  And to me, people are just another animal on this kind of planet Earth, right?  And so soil matters because it matters for us, actually.  It matters for us to have biodiversity for all of the good reasons associated with that.  Again, listen to a bunch of former episodes.  
**[0:09:54-0:10:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:09:54):**  But in order to address that issue, we have to look at people first and we have to look  at the people who are affected by agri-food systems, which are both the people working  in that system from farm workers to landowners and farmers and everyone in between.  And we have to look at the people who are served or not served by that system.  And so that is how I kind of arose at labor.  
**[0:10:24-0:10:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:10:24):**  So I've been trying to kind of figure out how do you address the people element of the  system in such a way that works for kind of everyone involved in this like regenerative  ag movement, so to speak.  And I think the answer is by focusing on the labor element, which I would make a strong  case for it being the single biggest bottleneck to actually changing agricultural systems  
**[0:10:51-0:10:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:10:51):**  to be more regenerative, diverse, etc.  Why is that?  Like, is that blocking?  Because we hear this constant move, okay, we do much more with less, we have better,  bigger machines, there's only 2% of the population or whatever percentage is involved directly  
**[0:11:10-0:11:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:11:10):**  in agriculture.  We know that's partly not true, because there are massive labor forces needed to pick a  lot of things.  And like you mentioned before, in brutal circumstances, very badly paid on their very, let's say high  doses of the chemicals, the sun, everything we throw at them, because we want this very,  
**[0:11:30-0:11:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:11:30):**  very cheap, very cheap, very cheap food.  So it seems like an incredible, difficult issue to unpack.  You said, let's start there.  But then why is that a limiting factor for regenerative ag or for the things we have  discussed in all the other episodes?  
**[0:11:47-0:11:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:11:47):**  Like why is labor a limiting factor to diversify or to change soil practices at the end or  to change how we manage our land?  A good question, couple of answers.  I'll start practically and then I'll go farther out into like a more radical vision.  So practically, so from like more of a sustainable ag tech, almost everyone in the agricultural  
**[0:12:08-0:12:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:12:08):**  industry, no matter where you sit on the spectrum can get on board with side.  Adoption is not happening of novel agriculture technology as quickly as it needs to be happening  if we want all the invested dollars to result in positive outcomes.  Right.  Why is that?  
**[0:12:28-0:12:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:12:28):**  I am fairly certain that a big component of that is because the technology is not being  designed for the user.  It's kind of that simple.  And also there's a lack of appreciation for various incentives, often perverse incentives  along the cut that the customer faces.  
**[0:12:50-0:12:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:12:50):**  So if you're selling to a farmer, you got to think about the landowner.  If you're and also if you're selling to a farmer, a product that makes the farm workers  job easier, you need to realize that probably that farmer, that farmer might be thinking  about retaining that farm worker.  But because of various structures that are in place.  
**[0:13:11-0:13:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:13:11):**  So I'll talk about the US specifically here.  But this is actually true in most countries.  When you look at the history of labor and agriculture starts with slavery.  So that's not good.  And that's still happening in other places in the world, by the way.  
**[0:13:32-0:13:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:13:32):**  So it's and then it evolves into sharecropping and it evolves.  Oh, so not good.  It has it's like current iteration is largely employing, but on an on a contract basis.  So without benefits, employing folks who have typically less than full citizenship rights  probably have some language barriers, probably are different ethnicities than the majority  
**[0:13:57-0:14:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:13:57):**  in that region and are therefore very easily exploited.  And so that is the group of people who gets the fresh food and the weeds and the prune  like gets all of the stuff done on farms.  And that group of people has a very limited voice in what we're actually designing to  make that farm system more efficient.  
**[0:14:25-0:14:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:14:25):**  Especially from a technology perspective, I don't think.  And anybody building, I would say almost any ag tech, maybe 99 out of 100 has ever taken  a farm worker like already you did really well if you did long interviews with farmers.  But if you or maybe your landowners, maybe to understand that kind of incentive structure  and what is needed, et cetera.  
**[0:14:47-0:14:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:14:47):**  But I've yet to hear somebody says, no, I really I went in the field.  First of all, I went to to harvest these melons.  And then we figured out this and this technology to to help or to and even what does help there  mean?  So you're saying, unless we acknowledge that there is a massive, extremely exploited, in  
**[0:15:04-0:15:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:15:04):**  most cases, extremely easily exploited labor force underpinning this ag system, we're never  going to design solutions, let alone technologies that actually serve or fix them.  Yeah, exactly.  And then if you get that, take it a step further and say, okay, in regenerative agriculture,  what do we want to see?  
**[0:15:24-0:15:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:15:24):**  We want to see fewer chemicals.  What's the alternative to herbicides, manual weeding, more labor, we want to see greater  diversity of crops.  So more rotation, less monoculture.  How do you mechanize something that's constantly changing?  
**[0:15:39-0:15:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:15:39):**  How do you fully automate that?  It's technically very difficult and expensive.  We want to see more, like all of these things that we want to see more of, and regenerative  systems require more hands on the job.  And so I think that, you know, in my utopic future, I  
**[0:16:02-0:16:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:16:02):**  Yeah, because it's a question like, how would that be done?  Is there a space, let's say, or have you seen farms at scale that sort of provide that year  on job, first of all, enough benefits, etc, that you can actually hire somebody properly,  retain somebody, train, etc.  And like, do the system provide that kind of margins or returns or whatever we want  
**[0:16:25-0:16:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:16:25):**  to call it to, to provide that and make sure somebody like this large labor force is not  moving constantly from one region to another, to pick x and then y and z and then rotates  back sort of like a big migration, but a very bad one.  Yeah, I mean, well, the other element of this, of course, is economics, right?  Like you need that.  
**[0:16:44-0:16:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:16:44):**  And I want it like, this is a very, the reason people don't pay a lot of attention to ag  labor is it's such a political hot button issue, and it gets messy, and it's human based,  so it's hard, but which is also the reason I want to try to do what I can in it.  But thinking about the farmer, right, because I have spent a lot of time trying to work  with and learn from farmers.  
**[0:17:13-0:17:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:17:13):**  And there is a very wide spectrum in terms of farmer quality.  And yeah, without getting into all sorts of like land inheritance issues there, there  are a lot of really good farmers, right?  Farms need to be sustainable businesses.  And by sustainable, I mean economically sustainable businesses.  
**[0:17:35-0:17:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:17:35):**  And the challenge is happening right now.  And like, this is why I'm doing what I'm doing right now.  The cost of labor is increasing faster than the inflation, you know, food costs is trickling  down to farmers revenue, right?  So bottom line is increasing, top line is barely increasing.  
**[0:17:59-0:18:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:17:59):**  And that creates a problem.  And so you've got situations where today, it no longer makes economic sense to harvest  certain crops.  If you look at asparagus in the UK, strawberries are getting a lot of attention right now.  But the other part of that is the waste side of things.  
**[0:18:21-0:18:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:18:21):**  So it doesn't make sense to harvest slightly lower quality crops, or, and this becomes  the challenge with having hyper concentrated single crop systems in one region, what you  end up having is a maturity and ripe, you know, everything is all the blueberries are  ripe the same couple of weeks, right?  And so that packer who all those farmers have to sell those blueberries to can drive down  
**[0:18:48-0:18:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:18:48):**  the price during those weeks when they're actually in season.  And so there's all these really complex pricing demand dynamics at play.  So it makes it really hard, actually, in my mind, to get to a lot of these idealistic,  regenerative, kind of even permaculture incorporating type agricultural systems.  I think that the only way to do that is through integrating some component of automation.  
**[0:19:16-0:19:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:19:16):**  But when I say automation, to be very clear, I don't mean a human free system.  I think over everything, but that's the solution, right?  We just unleash the drones and then we'll be fine.  Just let the robots take over.  Wally will do it.  
**[0:19:32-0:19:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:19:32):**  But no, I mean, that's not that's not going to like also like, I'm not a great engineer.  I only studied engineering academically.  I've been in finance most of the time.  But like, I know enough to be like, yeah, like if chances when when systems are completely  economically infeasible.  
**[0:19:50-0:19:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:19:50):**  Like that's cool.  That's a fun problem to solve.  That is not a good investment for anyone.  And so what I think we're starting to see actually, as people are starting to realize  that this labor crisis is, is in fact a crisis.  
**[0:20:04-0:20:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:20:04):**  And it's interesting.  It's not going away.  It's getting worse.  It's getting worse.  It's a thing.  
**[0:20:09-0:20:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:20:09):**  It's a thing.  It's not it's magically next year.  Yeah, it's only going to get worse.  When you like we can I can do a whole kind of seminar on all of the macroeconomic trends  that are changing.  
**[0:20:21-0:20:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:20:21):**  And this is going to you know, it's it ends up it is geographically specific.  Like if you look at the US context, Mexico birth rates are declining.  So immigration, immigration rates are declining that matters because the majority of agricultural  workforce in the US it seasonal workforce in the US is Mexican at this moment.  You look at like what we're trying to do in terms of workforce modernization and some  
**[0:20:45-0:20:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:20:45):**  things seem to be stuck from a legislative standpoint.  And yeah, so so there's no relief in sight from and the other really big challenge here  is this is where like often I think in these regenerative conversations, we talk about  increasing food prices, right?  If we increase food prices, the people who pick our food can't afford food.  
**[0:21:12-0:21:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:21:12):**  And they probably already can't they already can't actually a big chunk of it.  Yeah.  Yeah.  Right.  So if we talk about collaborative automation, what is that?  
**[0:21:23-0:21:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:21:23):**  What are examples that walk us through visually because of course, we're in an audio podcast  like what would what are what are things out there already that would make some people  that they think differently about attack and robotics because I know many people were cringe  listening to this and listening to like, technology is going to save us but there's a very important  role there.  
**[0:21:44-0:21:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:21:44):**  But what do you mean when you say collaborative automation?  So I actually mostly right now for the next five years or so mean the stupid kind of technology  and I'll explain what I mean by that.  So one of our studio portfolio companies is a company called Future Acres.  And what Future Acres does is it mechanizes fresh crop transport.  
**[0:22:08-0:22:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:22:08):**  So what does that really mean?  Today, if if you're harvesting table grapes, right, the workers will pick table grapes  manually clip them, put them in the wagon.  When the wagon is full, they take the wagon to the central way station, then they go back  into the row, keep picking, you waste 30 to 40% of your time walking back and forth with  
**[0:22:32-0:22:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:22:32):**  loads of grapes.  If you had a with with Future Acres product carry, the wheelbarrow says, Hey, I'm getting  kind of heavy over here, please come pick up the grapes.  And so a little wagon comes over, worker just has to load the grapes onto that wagon, wagon  goes back to central way station.  
**[0:22:52-0:22:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:22:52):**  That becomes very interesting also from a data capture future opportunities perspective.  But from a like in this moment solve a problem now perspective, you are not displacing the  people doing the hard like it is it's actually technically very difficult to pick table grapes  in particular, like that's a really complicated geometry to deal with, right?  No robotic arm will do that very soon at any kind of scale or level we can imagine.  
**[0:23:23-0:23:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:23:23):**  Yeah, well, maybe, maybe, maybe.  But the challenge really becomes vision.  And again, it becomes the diversity of fields because I so I mentioned table grapes for  that example, because Future Acres is that's their first kind of addressable market.  But what's interesting about that Future Acres model is it scales across crops, which is  
**[0:23:51-0:23:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:23:51):**  something that is really unusual in the world of agricultural automation.  And even when you look at us table grapes are interesting, they're relatively uniform  as a crop.  But I know blueberries very well, right?  So when I look, I can tell you why we had different management practices across three  
**[0:24:12-0:24:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:24:12):**  different farms, essentially, within two different counties in the same region in Oregon.  And each field was slightly different.  And those differences present a challenge and an additional cost for scaling any kind  of vision solution, right?  And so this is a problem that's important to point out in the context of agricultural  
**[0:24:38-0:24:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:24:38):**  robotics, because, and this gets into the whole kind of capital stack side of everything.  It is very expensive.  And because it's technically difficult to scale most very specific, automated solutions  across different crop types.  It's expensive even to do it across regions in different fields.  
**[0:25:03-0:25:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:25:03):**  And it just gets even worse when you try to do it across different crops.  And that's a really big problem in my mind, because I usually sit on the capital allocation  side of things in the venture capital world, right?  And you need that skill, you need that, because otherwise you're limited to a very small crop  and does a very small time of year across a long time period, actually.  
**[0:25:26-0:25:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:25:26):**  And you end up with a situation where everyone's harvesting at the same time.  So you can't, you know, effectively ship your robots to be used at different points in time  in the year.  And  How do you get over that?  
**[0:25:39-0:25:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:25:39):**  Like why, if that's such a specific issue?  This is where Farmhand Ventures is interested.  So there's two different ways to do it.  Simple solutions, stupid simple solutions.  But there's two ways to do it.  
**[0:25:49-0:25:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:25:49):**  There's either, actually, it's not either, it's both.  Stupid simple solutions, those are the things that will scale across crops, multiple types  of crops, and being pragmatic and realistic.  And so what I think we need is to invest in many solutions that are 95 to 99% technically  identical.  
**[0:26:13-0:26:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:26:13):**  But with that five, one to 5% on top, that makes it crop specific, and that one to 5%  might be pretty costly.  And so that's where it's very important to really understand the total addressable market  that that technology realistically can address.  And so at Farmhand Ventures, that's kind of what we're thinking about when we build companies.  
**[0:26:37-0:26:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:26:37):**  We are looking for opportunities that are crop specific, actually.  And we realize that in doing so, we are actually limiting our total addressable market for  some of these solutions.  And that can actually be okay.  Because then if you step back outside of robotics even, and you say, okay, again, from a venture  
**[0:26:59-0:27:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:26:59):**  capitalist standpoint, what do exits look like in ag tech right now?  They're generally, they're very few billion dollar exits, there aren't many unicorns.  They're generally acquisitions.  And in fact, they're generally under 100 million in terms of successful exits even.  You could say like the Blue River 305 million is like the top most for like ag robotics  
**[0:27:25-0:27:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:27:25):**  probably that has happened.  And like, arguably that that probably won't happen again for some time.  That was pretty high valuation for that.  And so then I sit back again as a, you know, fund manager type person who likes math, and  say, all right, well, how can I deliver effective?  
**[0:27:46-0:27:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:27:46):**  How can we as an investment community even put capital towards solutions that will have  a positive impact and make money off of them?  And we totally can.  But one thing that's really important to do in doing that is being realistic and pragmatic  about what the likely end scenario is, because then you have to reverse engineer and say,  
**[0:28:09-0:28:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:28:09):**  how can I structure an investment entity such that it, I either have a large enough ownership  percentage, or I am doing alternative mechanisms for investment, such as revenue based investment,  as opposed to pure equity based.  And like, that that is something I can talk all day about, because like, we need so much  more of that to invest in the things that actually solve the problems in agri food systems.  
**[0:28:39-0:28:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:28:39):**  And to just double click, I mean, there's a lot to unpack there on the studio model,  obviously, but to unpack, to double click on this, the stupid solution for a table grapes,  like how does that trajectory look like?  Is it going to be then other types of grapes?  Is it going to be really specific?  
**[0:28:55-0:29:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:28:55):**  Is the table grape industry big enough to support a good exit company, let's say, or  is it going to go to I just mentioned the blueberry side or the peaches side?  Like how have you planned?  Obviously, we have to look how that actually plays out.  But how have you planned that trajectory for that for that company?  
**[0:29:13-0:29:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:29:13):**  Okay, I'm going to do a weird thing and give kind of like a shout out to competitors to  that company, because like borough is arguably is the first mover in the US in this space,  they have a sort of similar platform, it's a bit different, technically.  But there I and I mentioned them, and there's a couple of newcomers, actually a bunch in  the EU right now who are very early stage that are again, addressing the crop transport  
**[0:29:43-0:29:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:29:43):**  problem.  In the field.  Right in the field.  And that's a problem across every crop.  I think that there will be multiple, there is space for multiple solutions to generate  
**[0:29:56-0:30:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:29:56):**  substantial revenue in that across multiple crops.  One question I think that all of these companies and future acres is an early stage company.  And so so I will see where we go on this.  But one question is, do you focus on verticalizing kind of within one crop and actually saying,  okay, we can do these things for table grape growers, we can we are in a very, we're very  
**[0:30:28-0:30:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:30:28):**  well positioned to capture this extra data that can then enable us to do these other  things kind of further down the supply chain of the table grape or up?  Do you focus on that?  And do you expand your revenue opportunity revenue base just within table grapes?  Or do you say, okay, actually, we can just dump a fleet of these robots with a very minor  
**[0:30:54-0:31:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:30:54):**  adjustment into stone fruit into Pinot, so the some some, some wine grapes, not most,  most are mechanically harvested already.  And and into, you know, blueberries and other soft fruits.  And that's a question and I don't really know what the answer is yet.  And we're deciding on that approach right now.  
**[0:31:21-0:31:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:31:21):**  And from a studio model, why did you choose the studio model to instead of quote unquote,  raising an ag tech focused on the labor problem funds and just do seed and proceed and go  with with that?  Is that like, what was the what's the reasoning behind that?  Apart from that, we have to see way more experimentation also on the how to deploy capital and how  
**[0:31:45-0:31:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:31:45):**  to build company sites.  I'm very happy with that.  So what's the what's the reasoning behind it from from your side from the operating  side?  A couple of things.  
**[0:31:53-0:31:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:31:53):**  So one on a value, purely values basis, right?  I want to see more diversity.  I want to see more, a better spread of wealth.  And I think one pathway to that is having greater socio economic diversity on the cap  table, on an equity owner basis, right.  
**[0:32:15-0:32:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:32:15):**  And right now, it is incredibly difficult for someone who's not rich, to afford to be  able to take the risk of starting a company or being one of the first five employees at  a fast growth company, right?  That's that's just not feasible for someone who doesn't have a cushion for the most part.  Of course, there are some exceptions.  
**[0:32:35-0:32:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:32:35):**  The studio model enables us to pay someone to work on a high risk venture, and to actually  bring them back in if and when that high risk venture fails, which is part of the reality  of startups, and to allocate them to another venture.  So it is worth trying from a values basis just on that premise to me.  Way more inclusive, way more inclusive, way more accessible.  
**[0:33:03-0:33:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:33:03):**  Exactly.  Make startups accessible is a concise way to say that.  And also, as when we look specifically at hardware in agriculture, we I mean, that's  tough.  That's not a fit for most venture capital.  
**[0:33:21-0:33:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:33:21):**  When you're saying it's a fit for some kind of deep tech models.  But when you say I'm a venture capital fund, and you have the option to invest in FinTech  software for ag versus agro robotics software for specialty crops, there's no way that as  a VC fund manager with a set number of dollars to invest, I don't know how you justify investing  in that collaborative robotics investment that's going to take longer, need more capital  
**[0:33:51-0:33:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:33:51):**  to bring to market and have a limited addressable market, relatively speaking.  And also, societally, we really, really need to invest in that stuff.  But I think that by having a very thesis specific studio, and by creating a portfolio of companies  that is actually somewhat collaborative.  So I think that most people will look at farmhand venture, most people outside of agriculture,  
**[0:34:25-0:34:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:34:25):**  will look at farmhand venture's portfolio and say, what the heck, they're invested in  a bunch of competitors.  But that's not at all because we'll have a blueberry company and a grape company and  an apple company.  And they're so different.  
**[0:34:39-0:34:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:34:39):**  And they're so vastly different.  But at the same time, the engineering is very similar.  And so we will be able to leverage substantial efficiencies there, right?  Except for that last one to 5%.  Exactly.  
**[0:34:54-0:34:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:34:54):**  And then there's the other one that's on top.  But yeah, that's very interesting.  The basis, a lot of that can be just in a venture studio, you share part of the accounting,  you share a lot of the back end stuff, you can actually share a lot of the engineering  stuff as well.  
**[0:35:06-0:35:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:35:06):**  I never thought about that.  And like, yeah, a big part of it is like, the way I look at kind of everything is like,  all right, like, this is an experiment.  We're going to try to create the next generation of ag equipment companies.  And we might sprinkle in a couple software companies in there.  
**[0:35:26-0:35:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:35:26):**  But for the most part, our focus is on accomplishing that.  And the model just follows that goal, right?  And so how many are you targeting?  How many are you planning to build?  And where are you now?  
**[0:35:41-0:35:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:35:41):**  Let's say we're at the end of the summer in the northern hemisphere in 2022, the end of  August, what is the current status?  So we're super early stage.  I'm also going to be somewhat vague here to avoid any SEC challenges.  But we are, we have basically one company that is being that is transferred into the  
**[0:36:06-0:36:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:36:06):**  portfolio.  We are building the rest of the project here and we'll have more announcements to follow  hopefully later this year, but, you know, realistically, possibly in early 2023.  And what are like exciting sectors?  Like what is like having been building one and getting close to some others?  
**[0:36:31-0:36:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:36:31):**  What are some very overlooked pieces like table grapes?  For sure, probably it's the first time we ever discussed it on this podcast.  But what are other, even say sub sectors, but other pieces you really get excited about  and almost wish there would be more if you're building a company in that space, more competitors,  like what are you excited about in that collaborative automation space?  
**[0:36:53-0:36:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:36:53):**  I think honestly, there's not very, the other, I guess this is the other reason why the studio,  I don't see that many early stage companies right now.  Externally that are super exciting.  Because everyone is chasing venture dollars, because that's what's available for the most  part.  
**[0:37:14-0:37:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:37:14):**  There are exceptions.  Like you look at like Gus spraying, I think that's a really cool company.  How are they called?  Gus Automation, I believe, like Gus Spray or Gus Automation, but basically they built  autonomous spray spraying robots for specialty crops.  
**[0:37:31-0:37:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:37:31):**  I believe they're based in California, Central Valley, California.  And I don't know them really beyond watching a lot of videos on YouTube, but they were  born out of a spraying services provider, right?  So they just solved their own problem.  And it turns out that now instead of having to have people drive tractors with sprayers  
**[0:37:51-0:37:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:37:51):**  on the back, they can watch their robot do it.  So you're saying the model of investing, the VC model is actually prohibiting to see more  innovation more in especially the specialty crops, because the addressable market, like  what we discussed before, it's easier to invest somewhere else.  Is that what you're like, it's missing innovation there because the funding isn't there.  
**[0:38:14-0:38:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:38:14):**  Yeah, the funding is kind of not there.  And I think, yeah, because when you go through like a quick exercise that says, okay, well,  how big can my addressable market be?  You actually kind of have to cut most specialty crop things.  The other really big problem- Because you're not working on soil and the  
**[0:38:33-0:38:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:38:33):**  big acreage where you can do that, where you can do that, that calculates very easily.  Look, we have so many millions of acres we can go, we're only capture 0.1%, then we are  all going to be rich.  Yes.  Although one thing that I do think is actually, and that is really relevant to the soil side  
**[0:38:48-0:38:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:38:48):**  of things that I think is under thought about, but is exciting in specialty crop world is  carbon, this is like a real wormhole, but it's carbon monitoring.  It's my belief, this is a hot take, that it's not technically and economically feasible  to measure soil organic carbon via satellite data.  I don't think that can be done.  
**[0:39:19-0:39:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:39:19):**  I think you were very clear on measuring because measuring until now, I haven't seen anything  yet.  I think that's another thing, but accuracy is the issue.  Honestly, Corn Saves America, great podcast by Ag Economic Insights, would recommend if  you want to really deep dive on the soil carbon thing as compared to ethanol markets.  
**[0:39:45-0:39:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:39:45):**  It's real nerdy.  Without getting too in the weeds there, but there's a solution to that.  I think the solution is what we should be measuring and the thing that we really care  about here is the actual atmospheric flux of carbon dioxide and methane or methane for  the Europeans out there.  
**[0:40:06-0:40:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:40:06):**  It's funny, I've started to say methane more often than methane.  I don't even know what I say.  I'm going to get emails about that as well.  You mean the flux above the fields?  Exactly.  
**[0:40:19-0:40:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:40:19):**  Because that enables you to account for, and again, measurement is better than modeling.  Modeling leads to all sorts of challenges.  I'll just keep it short there.  It really leads to a lot of challenges.  You can do this remotely, like measuring the flux of these emissions or these gases we  
**[0:40:43-0:40:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:40:43):**  would like to measure?  Yeah.  You could almost see the fields breathe basically.  That's what you would like to see.  That's right.  
**[0:40:51-0:40:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:40:51):**  It's all correlated.  You do need to understand soil organic carbon and all sorts of other nutrients in the soil  and the biology of the soil actually.  I'm thinking about this from a soil triangle pyramid standpoint.  You've got chemical and physical.  
**[0:41:06-0:41:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:41:06):**  Biological is the other part that is the future of soil testing.  That also can't be done totally remotely.  You're going to have to get dirty at some point is what I'm saying.  Can that get a lot cheaper?  Absolutely.  
**[0:41:21-0:41:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:41:21):**  That's a super interesting space.  What I'm saying is from a specialty crop and actually from a livestock standpoint, I would  really like for us to move the conversation towards atmospheric monitoring.  Ultimately, when we talk about climate change and reaching-  We care about what's up there.  
**[0:41:38-0:41:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:41:38):**  Exactly.  That's what matters.  If we can measure it, why the heck don't we?  Now we can account for above ground biomass, above ground cow burps, whatever.  The thing that we don't even know is emitting something because we're not even paying attention  
**[0:41:52-0:41:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:41:52):**  to it.  That is possible.  I work with the Yield Lab Europe as well, which is an impact venture capital fund.  They're invested in a company called Carbon Space Technology that does this.  That I think is a really interesting opportunity that isn't in...  
**[0:42:13-0:42:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:42:13):**  I think that permanent and specialty crops don't get nearly as much love because it's  a small...  It's because for good reasons, they're complicated, but they're also a more promising opportunity  and they're just better to grow from a net benefit standpoint.  Trees and perennials generally better from a carbon standpoint and fruits and vegetables  
**[0:42:37-0:42:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:42:37):**  generally better than corn.  The potential is just enormous if you look at...  I just watched a video just before we started actually on extreme pruning, obviously on  a very small scale agroforestry models, the syntropic side of things.  The possibilities there are immense.  
**[0:42:55-0:42:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:42:55):**  The labor challenges are immense as well.  There is some kind of sweet spot there to make it maybe slight...  I'm going to get emails for sure.  Slightly less complicated or complex, but still what kind of automation we can...  Collaborative automation because you're never going to automate a syntropic agroforestry  
**[0:43:12-0:43:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:43:12):**  plot, I think with 20 different types that need to be pruning.  But you also need a lot of people to have some kind of augmented help there to do it.  There's so much potential in perennials that we are not tapping into probably rightfully  so like you said, because there are a few gurus that are really good at it and then  a few other people, but if you count them, there are probably a few thousand and that's  
**[0:43:38-0:43:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:43:38):**  it.  That's never going to be enough to manage millions of actors.  Where is that technology piece and what's being designed there to make those systems  even possible at slightly larger scale than we currently do?  And I think the way that we actually get there, because yeah, all you said is true and I can  
**[0:43:55-0:43:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:43:55):**  think of a bunch of examples too of like, I'm like, oh, that's never going to work on  a spreadsheet.  But the way we can get there is by stopping...  We have to stop thinking about labor is unskilled.  There's no such thing, really, one.  
**[0:44:16-0:44:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:44:16):**  And it's insulting.  But if you flip that, you've got farming as a service and kind of crop management services  that exist today.  You've got like, there's all sorts of services like this in row cropping, like the guy who  manages my family's land does this across different farms in Iowa today.  
**[0:44:40-0:44:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:44:40):**  He's a service provider and he's really good at it.  He's a good farmer.  He knows his stuff and he treats his clients well.  Shift that then to specialty crops.  And again, right now the people who are doing the work are very undervalued.  
**[0:44:56-0:45:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:44:56):**  And if we could just shift the narrative a little bit such that we said, you know what?  These guys are experts.  We have a hazelnut orchard planting crew.  They will tell you exactly what it will cost in this region to implement a hazelnut.  Because you only plant a hazelnut orchard once, right?  
**[0:45:15-0:45:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:45:15):**  And so you're not very good at it.  You're not very efficient.  You're never going to be very good at it.  Outsource it.  It makes way more sense from a land management standpoint to do that.  
**[0:45:25-0:45:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:45:25):**  And bring in all the knowledge over decades built up in all the latest papers and paper  reviewed stuff that only the real geeks will read or the latest courses.  And yeah, you're right.  The perennial one you do once or a few times maybe and you will never reach full capacity  or full potential there because you don't do it daily.  
**[0:45:46-0:45:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:45:46):**  You don't learn daily.  You don't focus daily on these kinds of systems.  Right.  So can you get to a future state where these crews are providing services to farms?  Because this is the way that row crops work right now from an input standpoint, right?  
**[0:46:00-0:46:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:46:00):**  You've got crop consultants.  They tell you what to do.  You don't really have to overthink it.  It's you're doing what your input provider tells you to do.  And right now in row crops, what's the sales channel for most technology?  
**[0:46:14-0:46:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:46:14):**  Input providers.  In specialty crops though, you're still going direct to farmer for the most part.  Maybe input providers if you're dealing with irrigation and also some chemical stuff.  But from a labor standpoint, you're going direct to farmers and you should be going  actually to the labor provider.  
**[0:46:35-0:46:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:46:35):**  But the challenge is that that system is so broken right now.  It's really hard to get there.  But I absolutely can envision a future world where a lot of the services that like in the  US we have an extension service, right?  And so that provides some of these services.  
**[0:46:50-0:46:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:46:50):**  It's definitely variable depending on where you are and what crop we're talking about.  And it's hard to bring in new crops through this system.  But you know, it's something.  It provides a lot of value.  If you can kind of put some of that expertise into a specialized farm labor workforce and  
**[0:47:12-0:47:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:47:12):**  that farm labor workforce then becomes your sales channel and in fact your customer for  the next generation of ag equipment companies, then you can actually start to have an experimental  group within that workforce that says, hey, you want to, I don't know, do all sorts of  funky integrated multi row planting systems.  We'll try that with you.  
**[0:47:33-0:47:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:47:33):**  We'll budget it out for you.  We'll say, here's what it will cost for us to implement this system.  Do you want to do it?  And we'll be there to do it for you, which solves for the major labor risk.  It doesn't solve for all the risks to be very clear because there's also the supply chain  
**[0:47:49-0:47:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:47:49):**  market risk, like implementing new crops, even, you know, like a new crop for that region  or for that farm is super hard to do, but it's impossible to do if we don't solve for  this labor issue.  And so why now, mostly from, let's say from an engineering or technology piece, because  the labor issue, it's clear why now, it's only getting worse.  
**[0:48:12-0:48:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:48:12):**  We have to fix it preferably yesterday, which we didn't.  But why now, let's ask the investor question.  Why is this so exciting now?  Not only so relevant, but so exciting now from a building perspective and also from  an investment perspective, maybe not from the VC yet, but, or maybe that will never  
**[0:48:29-0:48:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:48:29):**  come, but from an investor and studio model, why is the time now?  Well, okay, first I'm going to say the VC opportunity is there for some companies, not  all companies.  That's how I would view it.  And again, it depends on your fund model and how you're thinking about returns.  
**[0:48:45-0:48:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:48:45):**  I think you can make it work.  The time is now from a technology standpoint, the positive side and the negative side.  So positive side, there has been so much progress in automation and robotics.  Autonomy at this point is, can be delivered functionally as a service.  It's the bare minimum.  
**[0:49:07-0:49:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:49:07):**  It's not that expensive to do anymore if you do it intelligently.  There are lots of off the shelf robots.  We're starting to see fleet robots start to be functional.  And so we're starting to see technology proof points.  And when you look at other industries, there are very expensive versions of the types of  
**[0:49:27-0:49:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:49:27):**  technologies we want to see, whether that's end effectors, whether that's vision, et cetera,  that can be basically stripped down and re-engineered for agricultural applications.  So both hardened for outdoor weather applications and made minimalist because we are not dealing  with iPhones, we're dealing with blueberries.  And then on the negative side of that, though, I think that a lot of investors and technologists  
**[0:50:03-0:50:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:50:03):**  are seeing that, are seeing that that opportunity is there to apply technology that is relatively  mature from a technology risk standpoint to agricultural applications.  However, I fear that some of those tech, most of those technologists actually have a limited  understanding of agricultural systems.  And so two things, two things that I'm currently worried about probably could generate a longer  
**[0:50:31-0:50:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:50:31):**  list here.  But one, they're going to be disappointed because they're going to invest in things  that take too long to deliver returns or never deliver returns because they're not understanding  how to sell to their market over the right timeframe.  And they don't have a realistic exit opportunity.  
**[0:50:53-0:51:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:50:53):**  And then secondly, from a more big picture standpoint, when we start to invest in fully  autonomous systems for monoculture cropping systems, it becomes even harder to diversify  those systems.  So when you look at all of the strawberry harvesters out there, many of which are super  interesting.  
**[0:51:17-0:51:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:51:17):**  It is a very real problem and it needs solving.  But they are addressing it.  So specifically in the US, you look at like Harvestcrew and you look at Tortuga and I'm  forgetting one, but I'm sorry to the one I'm forgetting.  But like those are all really technically interesting and like relatively feasible things  
**[0:51:34-0:51:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:51:34):**  to do.  But what I fear will happen from a, and also agricultural systems are going to be diverse,  we'll have monoculture and that's fine actually is my belief.  We need to have some of it, but it locks us in, right?  So if we're only designing for the really big farms that can afford to customize their  
**[0:51:58-0:52:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:51:58):**  farm setup to the very big expensive machine, then we run into this like permanent factory  farming system situation.  And again, like we can have some of that, but we shouldn't have all of that.  And so that's why now someone better also start pushing the narrative for alternatives  to the all in one does everything for your farm type machines.  
**[0:52:32-0:52:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:52:32):**  But you have to redesign your farm to fit the machine and then you'll be locked in for  that for a long time.  Yeah.  That's the narrative that is a bit problematic.  So what would you tell to the invest store side and to, of course, without giving investment  
**[0:52:46-0:52:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:52:46):**  advice, but sort of prevent them to get disappointed?  Like people are getting very excited about, of course, what technology can do.  We are amazed every day.  We're getting very excited about soil and then sort of at that intersection, what would  you tell them to be careful with, to look out for, to look into maybe to get excited,  
**[0:53:04-0:53:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:53:04):**  obviously specialty crops, but beyond that or next set, what would you give them a sort  of general advice?  Two things.  One understand total addressable market and understand that the global, someone's throwing  you a one point four trillion specialty crop market number like that's not your realistic  
**[0:53:28-0:53:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:53:28):**  addressable market.  So really understand the kind of go to market plan and what's realistic on a bottom up basis.  And then two and I maybe should have flipped the order of this because I actually think  the second part is more important.  Who's using it?  
**[0:53:42-0:53:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:53:42):**  Who is using the product?  Talk to them.  That's like that simple.  That's the main one.  It's kind of obvious, but I don't think that it's often done as part of a due diligence  
**[0:53:54-0:53:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:53:54):**  process for some reason.  Which isn't generally really weird.  Like I meet investors that invest in food that they didn't really try.  The bare minimum you could do is order it.  Let's see if it gets to your place or wherever you can buy it.  
**[0:54:09-0:54:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:54:09):**  If it's a direct to consumer and then you get, and if it's technology, you have to figure  out who ends up using it and see if they will and if they're happy or not.  If they are engaged in the collaborative process or not.  Exactly.  Well, and this becomes even more challenging, I think, in the robotics because it's increasingly  
**[0:54:32-0:54:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:54:32):**  common and this is good to talk to farmers as part of a due diligence process.  But what's important to understand is that farmers and farm managers are not necessarily  the user and they don't necessarily like the people who are their user.  So that creates a real communications challenge.  And so I think that most people will really struggle to get access to the actual user.  
**[0:55:01-0:55:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:55:01):**  So talking about that with the founders and being realistic about how are you trying to  get access to this group of people matters.  Matters absolutely.  And then to, because time is flying, but what would you do?  You're running this experiment.  
**[0:55:22-0:55:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:55:22):**  Let's say the studio becomes a success and somehow you get access to a significant amount  of resources.  I always like to use the one billion question.  What would you do with that?  But it doesn't have to be in the studio actually.  
**[0:55:36-0:55:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:55:36):**  What if you had a billion dollars to put to work in ag and food?  Let's confine it to North America.  And for now, maybe you see great opportunities in Europe.  But let's say, how would you put it to work?  What would you prioritize if you had that access for a very long time?  
**[0:55:50-0:55:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:55:50):**  It doesn't have to be a VC model.  Obviously you can also buy land to regenerate if you want to then never sell it.  And there has to be some kind of return model, but it could be a 50 year plan if you want  to.  I love this question and I don't know if I'm taking a cop out answer or not.  
**[0:56:05-0:56:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:56:05):**  But I definitely am wrong about most of my guesses.  I'm sure I will change in real time.  Hopefully that's something I try to do forever.  And there are a ton of really smart people who do not currently and thought smart isn't  even it, but thoughtful and with diverse perspectives who can effectively deploy capital but don't  
**[0:56:27-0:56:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:56:27):**  have access to it.  And so if I had a billion dollars today, I would want to spend it all ASAP so that it  can start to deliver returns.  And the most effective way to do that, I think, would be to break it down into a bunch of  different experiments run by a bunch of different people.  
**[0:56:46-0:56:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:56:46):**  And I think the mandate there would be to make things as kind of open sourced as possible  so that we can iterate upon that set of distributed experiments.  That's what I'm trying to do with Farmhand Ventures.  We will be as transparent as we can be about our model.  We'll be able to be more transparent in a little bit.  
**[0:57:08-0:57:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:57:08):**  But because I want someone to do it better than I'm doing it, actually.  And beyond collaborative automation and technology, what are other pieces of the puzzle you see  completely or almost completely neglected?  Like, where do you get excited where resources are needed but not being deployed at the moment  and where you would be if you had access to a billion dollars?  
**[0:57:34-0:57:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:57:34):**  I think one other thing that would be very interesting, I think that there's really a  gap between the real estate real asset investment managers and the tech managers.  And that needs to be bridged.  And that some ideally would also be inclusive of the existing land owners.  And I think about this a lot.  
**[0:57:56-0:58:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:57:56):**  I was just with my grandma who we passively manage our farmland and it's fascinating scenario.  But I would like for those groups to be more interrelated.  One way I could see one interesting capital structure to do that in my mind would be kind  of like a retrofit farm type fund model.  So a situation where and these exist for I wish I could remember the name of this fund,  
**[0:58:24-0:58:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:58:24):**  but there's a couple of funds like this that exist for like apartment buildings.  So where a you basically provide financing such that the landlord can increase insulation,  you know, install new windows, make the apartment more livable and increase rent slightly and  also decrease utility costs substantially.  And so that's how that fund ends up delivering a return, right?  
**[0:58:50-0:58:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:58:50):**  Usually that's debt based.  And I think a similar thing could absolutely exist for farmland.  And that could be tied again to the agriculture technology element of things and the practice  side of things.  I think that could be super duper interesting.  
**[0:59:08-0:59:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:59:08):**  And I would love to see if anyone's doing it, reach out, I want to talk to you.  And scalable because that's especially when it gets into the debt side of things, the  debt market is a number of times bigger than a lot of the other markets combined.  And there's just so much money looking for these kinds of things going into real estate,  going into renewable energy, going into other things that would love probably access to  
**[0:59:31-0:59:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:59:31):**  other real assets like land, not necessarily buying it, but improving it over time and  getting an okay return out of that is very, very interesting because you're talking about  large quantities of money and large quantities of hectares, which means a lot of impact.  And so there we need way more experimentation.  Absolutely right.  
**[0:59:50-0:59:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=0:59:50):**  But what if, can I go ahead?  Well, I guess the one other thing I would add that I'm like, when I look at Europe especially,  it's very interesting to compare, contrast, well, climate smart ag in the US versus, well,  it depends if you're in the UK or the rest of the EU, but farm to fork strategies in  the EU.  
**[1:00:14-1:00:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:00:14):**  One thing I would like to see a lot more investment in as well is really measuring emissions instead  of modeling emissions on a policy basis because one, I think that if we could get more confidence  in that number, there might be a little bit less controversy, but more importantly, actually,  if we could measure that number.  And so specifically what I mean here, you look at like the Netherlands or you look at  
**[1:00:48-1:00:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:00:48):**  Ireland in terms of like cattle culling controversies as relates to the 2030 methane reduction pledge.  Right now we're having to meet, every nation is trying to meet these goals based off of  models that are extrapolations of studies done in limited geographies with limited genetics,  with limited feed input types.  And it's really comparing apples to oranges and then extrapolating off of them.  
**[1:01:22-1:01:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:01:22):**  And while I wouldn't go, we directly need to lower emissions.  And so I don't want to go so far as to say, no, no, no, like cows aren't a problem.  But what I would like to see is a reward for the dairies that are, and the reward actually  in some cases would be not a punishment, but a reward for-  Not being closed, yeah.  
**[1:01:43-1:01:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:01:43):**  Right, not having to cull your cattle, but a reward for adopting a new manure digester  that reduces your, or a feed additive that reduces your emissions.  And right now we don't have the infrastructure in place to enable that on a legislative basis.  So I would love to see more investment on that front.  But that's a tricky one.  
**[1:02:11-1:02:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:02:11):**  It's a tricky one because I continue to see these charts of I think our world in data  and things like that showing the immense emissions from livestock.  And I think the listener of the show has always replied to that on LinkedIn, constantly taking  apart the LCA underneath there and the models underneath there, which are let's say imprecise  by best and probably flawed completely if you look at them.  
**[1:02:39-1:02:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:02:39):**  It's much more nuanced than that.  And the issue is that they're being used for all kinds of legislative stuff across the  EU and across the world, which doesn't really hold any ground.  The underlying assumptions there are very, very risky.  Doesn't mean we shouldn't address the methane problem and all that, but it's very tricky  
**[1:02:59-1:03:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:02:59):**  to do that.  And it's very tricky because you're punishing a lot of people that have made massive changes  in their practices.  And we just throw out the cow with all the issues and not really addressing the underlying  issues, which probably the issue because they're all inside and eating corn and soil all day.  
**[1:03:17-1:03:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:03:17):**  And there's an underlying issue there that is very tricky.  Doesn't mean we don't have to reduce the amount of livestock in the Netherlands, but the underlying  questions are not asked and completely being lying on those models except for measuring  actually the above fields levels that you mentioned before.  That would be super interesting because then you can see actually like, okay, what's the  
**[1:03:38-1:03:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:03:38):**  actual emission like and how does it fluctuate over a year and how does it fluctuate over  different pastures?  How does it fluctuate over X, Y, Z?  And we have no idea now.  All of this data comes from close environments, which by definition doesn't really represent  
**[1:03:53-1:03:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:03:53):**  the outside environment.  So we have sort of, maybe some of the methane gets absorbed immediately by bacteria.  Have we any clue?  No, not really because there's no data.  Right.  
**[1:04:03-1:04:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:04:03):**  Yeah.  No, and especially, and like the positive side is that for the regenerative movement,  or organic, which may be-  Go and invest in that stuff and-  You gotta prove it.  
**[1:04:13-1:04:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:04:13):**  Prove, prove that you're way like a 3X, 10X, whatever the X is better, or even 10% and  show like, look, it's not the same product.  It's not the same.  Like we're now doing with nutrient density.  Like it's not the same.  
**[1:04:27-1:04:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:04:27):**  It's not the same tomato.  It's not the same piece of beef.  It's not like you cannot call it the same because it's often charged different in terms  of certain vital nutrients that you need.  Maybe it's often charged different in sort of, in a number of emissions, but we don't  
**[1:04:39-1:04:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:04:39):**  know because we took one study somewhere and we extrapolated for basically the all of you  and then said, no, you have to reduce in this, this and this, which is risky.  But yeah, what's the business model of measurements?  Very difficult to invest in that and to get that going, but very, very needed.  So completely neglected.  
**[1:04:57-1:05:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:04:57):**  I would keep a piece of that billion to invest in those because potentially it's the highest  potential outcome or positive outcome you can get by simply showing what's currently  happening.  Right.  Cause it can drive everything else forward theoretically.  
**[1:05:13-1:05:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:05:13):**  But yeah, there's, there's a lot of political complications.  Of course, because we're on a certain track.  And so what would you change if you had one, if you had a magic wand, you know, this question  is coming and you could chase one thing in ag and food.  What would that be?  
**[1:05:30-1:05:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:05:30):**  I actually think it's that, I mean, yeah, maybe I skipped a step there, but yeah, I,  I like to measure everything.  I think that being able now, like it's unrealistic, right?  Most people don't actually want to get into the weeds of the different numbers and the  different kind of optimization models.  
**[1:05:51-1:05:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:05:51):**  But I do.  And if you could do that in an affordable way, I think it can unlock almost everything  that we've talked about and, and then some kind of, but I don't, I also think that, I  also don't know that it's feasible, right?  Like this goes all the way back to with like the Yield Lab Institute work that I've done.  
**[1:06:15-1:06:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:06:15):**  Like when I, so we at the, so the Yield Lab Institute is the nonprofit branch of the Yield  Lab family of funds.  And was initially start, I started it initially cause I wanted to try to quantify impact across  an early stage venture capital agri-food tech fund portfolio.  I don't think you can do that actually authentically.  
**[1:06:36-1:06:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:06:36):**  Like I don't think that's really possible.  The more you dig into it, the more you try to force quantification on it or the more  I dug into it and tried to do that, I realized I feel like there's going to be double and  triple accounting here and it's inauthentic.  And so it's better just to say, we'll only invest if it has a binary positive or negative  
**[1:06:58-1:07:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:06:58):**  impact, and we'll just have to leave it at that.  And that's going to have to be good enough actually for an impact venture capital fund  with some reporting and continuing to monitor that.  But yeah, so I say, I wish we could quantify everything with a caveat that I might be wrong,  that it's the best thing to do.  
**[1:07:19-1:07:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:07:19):**  But would you, would it, or is it possible on a farm level or field level?  I imagine like a few layers away.  Okay.  But to be able to start getting real data from a field, it could be an orchard, it could  be whatever table grapes could be.  
**[1:07:37-1:07:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:07:37):**  Are we getting any close to getting, I'm not even saying real time, because that would  be amazing, but like proper data with an okay sense of accuracy that we can actually compare  and start looking at, okay, this is just a better way of doing this, or it's a more positive  way because of this, this and this.  Do we get anywhere or is that sort of a pi pre?  
**[1:07:58-1:08:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:07:58):**  Do you mean from like an externality variable?  Yeah.  Even just the emission side, like you mentioned, this is possible now.  Is that how accurate do we get in a sense?  Can we compare hectares to hectares or is it more of regional?  
**[1:08:11-1:08:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:08:11):**  Today in Western Europe and most of North America and increasingly Latin America, you  can measure every roughly five weeks the flux, so the change in atmospheric carbon dioxide.  And you can do that on a field by field basis.  That can get better as more satellites get launched.  I think the other really important thing that we haven't talked about is water.  
**[1:08:37-1:08:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:08:37):**  I'd argue it might be more important than the CO2 thing actually, and then also nitrous  oxide.  And yeah, you cannot, the challenge with the water thing is evapotranspiration stuff is  only valuable to agronomics if you can get it really more than daily actually.  You can't do that right now, but I am aware of a couple of companies working on launching  
**[1:09:04-1:09:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:09:04):**  new satellites to enable that.  So I think we can get there.  But again, that runs into the problem of like, but you know what we're measuring?  We're measuring these like nerdy science concepts actually.  And again, I suspect what might matter more is the people.  
**[1:09:22-1:09:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:09:22):**  And so that's where I'm like, the science geek in me wants to do all of that.  And I wonder if that could have adverse, I'd want to think through the consequences of  that.  Although I think we ultimately are moving towards doing that regardless.  Yeah, no, it's very interesting to think about what that would lead to if we are daily able  
**[1:09:46-1:09:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:09:46):**  to measure water and emissions, et cetera.  What would that give us?  We know a lot more and now what do we do with that?  And it raises super interesting questions about data ownership, like farm data ownership,  because yeah, there's been a lot of interesting content on this.  
**[1:10:12-1:10:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:10:12):**  And I've done a lot of work on this with the Ag Launch Group.  But like, yeah, it just raises questions when you can suddenly get all the data you need  just off Google Earth.  That's part of a whole different podcast.  Until then, I would like to thank you so much for your time today to unpack some of it.  
**[1:10:39-1:10:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:10:39):**  I have a feeling we only scratched the surface, but that's probably a good thing, which means  we're going to check in again.  And I want to thank you so much for, of course, the work you do and for coming on here to  share about them.  Yeah, thank you for having me, Koen.  
**[1:10:52-1:11:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:10:52):**  It was lots of fun and happy to chat anytime.  Thank you so much for listening all the way to the end.  For the show notes and links discussed, check out our website, investinginregionaryagriculture.com  forward slash post.  Thank you so much for listening all the way to the end.  
**[1:11:13-1:11:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:11:13):**  For the show notes and links discussed, check out our website, investinginregionaryagriculture.com  forward slash post.  If you liked this episode, why not share it with a friend or give us a rating on Apple  Podcast.  That really helps.  
**[1:11:27-1:11:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:11:27):**  Thanks again and see you next time.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  
**[1:11:53-1:11:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:11:53):**  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question, how to put money  to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011 and recording  these podcasts since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework?  
**[1:12:12-1:12:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:12:12):**  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  What questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  
**[1:12:21-1:12:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:12:21):**  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  You, the soil builders and investors in the space.  
**[1:12:30-1:12:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:12:30):**  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management, consultants, etc.  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  
**[1:12:50-1:12:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:12:50):**  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  
**[1:13:04-1:13:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:13:04):**  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you.  And I'm very aware that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very  different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you, and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  
**[1:13:21-1:13:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:13:21):**  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to write along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  
**[1:13:37-1:13:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:13:37):**  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find, or what kind of investors you could  find if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  
**[1:13:58-1:14:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:13:58):**  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design, and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately, that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  
**[1:14:11-1:14:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/connie-bowen#t=1:14:11):**  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea, or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up, and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  