### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2017-18-24)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  You're going to listen to an interview with Greg Wisscher, co-founder of Farmland LP.  We're going to talk about how Farmland LP started and how their mission of showing that  
**[0:00:23-0:00:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:00:23):**  sustainable agriculture is more profitable than chemical agriculture is shaping up.  We talked about how organic milk is the gateway drug into organic products and how they are  slowly moving to a more perennial system on their land.  Enjoy!  Welcome to another episode of investing in regenerative agriculture, investing as if  
**[0:00:43-0:00:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:00:43):**  the planet mattered.  A podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why my focus on soil and regeneration?  
**[0:01:01-0:01:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:01:01):**  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small and consumers, start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  Before we get started, I've been recording these interviews next to my day job and I  
**[0:01:21-0:01:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:01:21):**  will definitely continue to do so and release about an episode a month.  But at the same time, I would love to take this further, share more interviews.  There are many more stories to share on investing in regenerative food and agriculture.  More depth, improve the quality, maybe even doing some video series.  So I started a Patreon community, which makes it easy to support creators like myself.  
**[0:01:43-0:01:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:01:43):**  If these podcasts have been of value to you and if you have the means, I invite you to  support me and make this happen.  For more information, please find the link to my Patreon account in the description below.  And now without further ado, the interview.  Enjoy.  
**[0:01:59-0:02:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:01:59):**  Welcome to investing in regenerative agriculture, investing as if the planet mattered.  I'm Koon van Sain, your host.  In the podcast of today, I'm joined by Greg Vischner, the co-founder of FarmlandOP, one  of the leading regenerative agriculture investment funds in the world.  Welcome Greg.  
**[0:02:14-0:02:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:02:14):**  Glad to be here.  Thanks for having us.  And to start with, as I usually with a personal question, from all the things in the world  you could be doing, why are you working on regenerative agriculture and specifically  on investing in that?  
**[0:02:25-0:02:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:02:25):**  Well, one is probably the most important thing that we could be doing, but why?  We agree on that of course.  How did you end up there and spend your days on that?  So this specifically started really the moment that my daughter was born.  I have a daughter, she just turned 11 actually yesterday.  
**[0:02:50-0:02:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:02:50):**  And the moment that she was born, I got very clear that my life was about helping her dreams  come true.  And in that moment, I also saw that we weren't leaving a great planet for her to have those  dreams come true.  And I also immediately got very clear that really she couldn't have her dreams come  
**[0:03:17-0:03:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:03:17):**  true unless all the kids in that generation could have their dreams come true.  And that required a really big shift from the way that we were headed to where we needed  to go.  And it really just started this inquiry for me that lasted about two years about really  what am I doing to really make a difference for the future.  
**[0:03:40-0:03:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:03:40):**  And so it really took this kind of two-year introspective process of looking at all the  things I had done, all my skills, all my abilities, and it all really came together when I went  to go visit a farm with some farms actually for a week.  We took a week-long road trip to go and look at buying some farmland with several friends  and really saw that farmland today just wasn't being managed well and that there were huge  
**[0:04:17-0:04:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:04:17):**  opportunities from a business perspective to shift it – well, from an agronomic perspective  to shift it from conventional agricultural practices to sustainable agriculture practices  and that also mirrored a business opportunity to create more value and increase the cash  flow by converting it to organic and also bringing livestock back onto farmland.  And really that combination of the benefits of biological farming methods and the business  
**[0:04:51-0:04:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:04:51):**  opportunities and then in the background the question of what can I do to really make a  difference, that was the answer.  And that really brought some key threads in my life together and that's what we've been  doing since 2009 and we're continuing to do it and we're on a nice long journey doing  that.  
**[0:05:15-0:05:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:05:15):**  And it really all started with the birth of my daughter and asking what am I doing to  make a difference.  And if we take it one step back, did you look at many other sectors in those two years before  you decided to spend a week looking at buying some farmland?  What were other, let's say, stops in that journey?  
**[0:05:32-0:05:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:05:32):**  I've always done things in my career that have made a difference.  My degree is actually in biochemistry and microbiology and I helped start a biotech  company and we developed treatment for metastatic brain cancer for that.  It's still on the market today.  And I've also managed, I grew up managing investment real estate and I spent summers  
**[0:06:00-0:06:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:06:00):**  growing up on a farm as well.  And so…  All of those came together basically.  All of those really came together.  You asked the question what else could I do, what else did I look at?  
**[0:06:14-0:06:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:06:14):**  And really in some ways looking at it from here, my life kind of started in 2009 looking  at that farmland.  It's kind of where everything was leading to.  And if you look at that day or that week that you looked at farmland probably with those  glasses for the first time, like from a business opportunity instead of spending the summer  
**[0:06:41-0:06:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:06:41):**  there instead of a playground glasses, you looked with the business opportunity glasses.  What were the steps after that that led to where FarmlandOP now is?  What were the first steps, what were some lessons to get it to a product in the market  basically?  Great.  
**[0:06:58-0:07:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:06:58):**  So I spent a number of years in private equity.  So the business side of it was always kind of crunching in the background.  And so when you're seeing how farmland is managed today…  So my co-founder was actually on that trip with me as well, Jason Bradford.  And he really has this tremendous expertise in sustainable agriculture.  
**[0:07:24-0:07:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:07:24):**  And so being really deeply exposed to the practices that were possible around sustainability  on farmland and my role was really listening to it from that business perspective, understanding  the biological science and the agriculture but not knowing it at that level but really  translating it to, hey, how do you really make this happen at a large scale?  And how do you scale up sustainable agriculture?  
**[0:07:55-0:08:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:07:55):**  How do you shift the paradigm from chemical dependent agriculture, a chemistry based approach  to agriculture to a biological approach to agriculture?  And so it was back of the envelope work looking at, you know what, if we were going to buy  this farmland and be the farmers, we would need at least $10 million worth of farmland  in order to make this basically financially viable if we were driving the tractors.  
**[0:08:26-0:08:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:08:26):**  And we would need at least $50 million worth of farmland if we were going to turn it into  some kind of fund that really other people could invest into.  And so that started to be at the scale, the beginnings of the scale of the impact that  we wanted to have.  And fundamentally, we wanted to demonstrate that sustainable agriculture is more profitable  
**[0:08:50-0:08:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:08:50):**  than chemical dependent agriculture.  And that would be our way of essentially catalyzing the shift from chemical farming to biological  farming.  So as soon as we saw that it would take at least $50 million worth of farmland in a nice  fund structure really on the drive home, I was driving, Jason was sitting in the passenger  
**[0:09:14-0:09:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:09:14):**  seat, our friends were sitting in the back.  And on that drive back from Oregon to California, we really sketched out the fund of Farmland  LP and have been working on it full time ever since.  And how close is it?  Do you still have the sketches, first of all?  
**[0:09:33-0:09:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:09:33):**  And how close is it to what it is now to those sketches?  So I do still have the notes somewhere, but a lot of it was initially was the mental picture  of it, really understanding that farmland is a long term asset.  So the first fund was actually a 30 year fund.  But the core tenants of it are basically the same as what we're doing now, buying farmland,  
**[0:10:01-0:10:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:10:01):**  converting it to organic, managing it sustainably, and demonstrating that it's more profitable.  So we've actually shown that on the farmland that we've managed over all this time, that  the organic farmland generates 72% more revenue per acre than the conventional farmland.  So we're really demonstrating these numbers, which is really quite nice.  Yeah, which is absolutely essential for the industry.  
**[0:10:28-0:10:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:10:28):**  I mean, the regenerative agriculture industry, sustainable agriculture industry.  Can you walk us through an example of, could be hypothetical one or a real one where you  bought land and what is really the difference on and also in the ground, but on the ground  of managing?  How is it so different?  
**[0:10:46-0:10:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:10:46):**  You mentioned bringing livestock back.  What is the shift you make in terms of managing this land different and for the non farmers  in the audience?  What should we picture when we think about that?  Great question.  
**[0:11:00-0:11:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:11:00):**  So the first thing is to have a clearer understanding about what conventional commodity agriculture  looks like.  So the US has $2.6 trillion worth of farmland and that's the same economic value as all  of the office buildings in the US or all of the apartment buildings in the US.  And 40% of farmland is leased.  
**[0:11:26-0:11:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:11:26):**  So it is commercial real estate like those other two sectors.  And farmland, leased farmland is really just farmed on a year by year basis.  Neither the landlords nor the farmers have real incentive to really invest in the land.  And combined with government policies, you end up with 53% of US farmland growing two  commodity crops, corn and soy.  
**[0:11:59-0:12:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:11:59):**  It's not because those are the best crops to grow on the land.  It's really an artifact of the ownership structure and the incentives and the regulatory structure.  And so what that though does create is a lot of opportunities to switch from that commodity  agriculture system to something better.  And so that's really what we focus on.  
**[0:12:24-0:12:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:12:24):**  And so here's an example of some opportunities.  So we bought a large property 50 miles east of where I am now, 4200 acres.  It's about 3.1 miles by 3.1 miles in size.  And it was growing, one of the main crops that was growing there was commodity corn,  not for human consumption.  
**[0:12:46-0:12:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:12:46):**  It was actually, well...  As it usually isn't for human consumption.  Yeah, exactly.  What is it about 80% or something in the US?  I don't have the latest numbers, but...  
**[0:12:58-0:13:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:12:58):**  Humans eat less than 1% of the corn grown in the United States.  As fresh corn.  And then there's about 2 or 3% that's used in tortillas and tamales and things like that.  But 12% of US corn is turned into high fructose corn syrup.  Even better.  
**[0:13:17-0:13:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:13:17):**  40% is turned into ethanol, 40% is fed to livestock.  And this corn was frequently sold to be turned into high fructose corn syrup.  Just to paint this picture, this is beautiful farmland, very high quality farmland, 50 miles  away from San Francisco, which is the largest market for locally grown organic food, in  my knowledge, in the world.  
**[0:13:42-0:13:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:13:42):**  In the world, probably.  So very underutilized from a business standpoint, from a revenue per acre standpoint.  But it was just very operationally efficient for the farmers and didn't require a lot of  investment.  So what we did is we bought this land and we said, okay, what's the best way to maximize  
**[0:14:04-0:14:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:14:04):**  biological productivity and economic value from this farmland?  And that looks very different.  So rather than just growing commodity corn year after year after year on this land, we  switched that over, planted some of the ground in pasture and again high quality corn land.  Instead of the corn, some of the corn was sold to dairies or feedlots.  
**[0:14:27-0:14:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:14:27):**  Instead of growing corn, harvesting it, selling it to a feedlot, we planted pasture and brought  in sheep and cattle tenants on that land.  Very regenerative and restorative to the land and generates great economics as well.  Instead of driving the corn to the cow, you...  And it produces the same amount of meat per acre if we're growing pasture or if they produce  
**[0:14:53-0:14:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:14:53):**  corn and sell it to feedlots.  And a lot less costs, I can imagine, from an economic perspective.  There's a lot less costs.  There's a lot less chemical inputs.  There are some higher labor costs.  
**[0:15:07-0:15:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:15:07):**  But still, it ends up being better for...  And the premium you can get for true, what is it, pasture-based meat, of course, in San  Francisco is a very different level compared to the feedlot animals.  Exactly.  Grass-fed, grass-finished animals do receive a price premium.  
**[0:15:30-0:15:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:15:30):**  And there is exactly strong market demand for them as well.  So we plant some of the land in pasture.  Usually it's in pasture for three to seven years.  Really maximizes that soil fertility.  We get it certified organic.  
**[0:15:48-0:15:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:15:48):**  And then rotate in to organic vegetables.  And then rotate into grains and then back into the pasture phase.  And the vegetables, for example, instead of being corn that's turned into high fructose  corn syrup, it can be sweet corn, for example, that is directly consumed at farmers markets  or at large retailers like Costco or Whole Foods.  
**[0:16:16-0:16:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:16:16):**  And much better economics.  So at least four to six times more revenue per acre growing sweet corn than commodity  corn.  So we do vegetables for two to three years, then rotate into grains.  Again, organic grains.  
**[0:16:34-0:16:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:16:34):**  They use up some of that excess nitrogen that's in the soil.  And the grains also, they're very fine, strong roots, also really break up that soil again.  And then it can rotate back into pasture and begin its seven to ten-year rotation cycle  again.  And again, we've demonstrated that the land that's organic is generating 72% more revenue  
**[0:17:01-0:17:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:17:01):**  per acre than if it stayed in that commodity system.  And that revenue, where does that come from?  Is it the tenants selling it?  Is it Farmland LP having a brand or a stand at a farmers market or at Whole Foods?  How does that work?  
**[0:17:18-0:17:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:17:18):**  Great.  So the revenue that I'm talking about is the revenue that Farmland LP sees.  And so that's generally in the form of rent, either fixed rent or revenue share.  And the farmers are the ones that are generally selling that.  I might have a relationship with a contract with Costco or a processor.  
**[0:17:42-0:17:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:17:42):**  And they're also, the only reason we're getting more revenue is that they're getting much  more revenue and more profits as well.  And is it difficult to find farmers, tenants that are, let's say, that look this holistically  or that look that they're used to work with multiple crops, multiple rotations, et cetera.  Is that one of your challenges or is it relatively easy in the US?  
**[0:18:08-0:18:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:18:08):**  I know here in Europe, it's difficult to find people that are able to do multiple crops  and livestock and do that in a way that makes economic sense.  Yeah.  So I have to split up your question into two parts.  One is, are there farmers around who grow organically and sustainably?  
**[0:18:26-0:18:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:18:26):**  And the answer to that is yes.  We're generally buying farmland in areas that already have strong demand for locally grown  organic food.  And so you have farmers who are already producing this way and already have markets.  And their biggest constraint is that they don't have enough organic land in order to  
**[0:18:45-0:18:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:18:45):**  produce the food to serve their markets.  So we provide that land.  We help take the land through the organic conversion process, get it certified organic  and then provide it to them.  Now, the second part of your question is farmers growing a multitude of crops.  
**[0:19:03-0:19:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:19:03):**  It is very hard for farmers to produce sheep, cattle, corn, tomatoes, squash, wheat, buckwheat,  other kinds of grains.  It goes against all our lessons in economic classes about specialization.  Exactly.  It is tremendously challenging.  
**[0:19:26-0:19:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:19:26):**  And the power of specialization is really amazing and a feature of our economic system.  It also drives the 53% of US farmland to grow to commodity crops, which is bad, unequivocally  for a number of reasons.  But if we look at the benefits of specialization and we apply it to sustainable agriculture,  then you say, you know what?  
**[0:19:54-0:20:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:19:54):**  You do want the person who grows the best tomatoes possible to have as much land as  they need in order to serve their markets, the market for beautiful organic tomatoes.  But you just can't grow tomatoes on the same ground year after year after year.  That tomato farmer needs to rotate around.  And so we provide the land management and the land ownership to make sure that they  
**[0:20:20-0:20:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:20:20):**  have one, enough land so that they can grow to the right size to meet their markets.  Two, making sure that they always have fresh land that is – that they're growing tomatoes  in the right part of that sustainable rotation.  And so that in a lot of ways is the beauty and magic of the farmland LP model that we  did, which was to harness both organic and sustainable agriculture and specialization,  
**[0:20:54-0:20:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:20:54):**  helping those farmers really grow to the scale that they need in order to serve their customers.  And I can see the elegance and the beauty of the model and the system.  I can also imagine it raises some questions for the tenants and the farmers, especially  as they are building up the soil, but don't have a long-term connection to that specific  piece of land they need to be comfortable with.  
**[0:21:20-0:21:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:21:20):**  And I don't know how you organize that, but comfortable that you find them another piece  where they can move the year after with their tomatoes, because otherwise, of course, they  have customers and no tomatoes.  So how do you make sure that that relationship with your farmers is not tied specifically  to one spot of land, but basically to you as Farmland LP?  
**[0:21:39-0:21:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:21:39):**  How do you organize that?  Sure.  Well, they can see all the land that we own, and we're long-term landowners.  So they can also see that – and they can sign long-term relationships with us to get  access to hundreds of acres of land, and that the specific acres may rotate over time, but  
**[0:22:01-0:22:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:22:01):**  it's really, like I mentioned, this 4,200-acre single piece of property.  You're not growing 4,200 acres of tomatoes each year.  You're growing several hundreds of acres of tomatoes.  And so instead of – when you drive onto the farm, instead of going left, you might  go right.  
**[0:22:24-0:22:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:22:24):**  And these farmers are very used to rotating like that.  And I can give them 10-year access or more to that farmland.  But most importantly for them, I can say, you know what?  You're always – you're going to get farmland that's always one or two years out from  having been pasture for three to seven years.  
**[0:22:42-0:22:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:22:42):**  So they're always – they know that they're actually always going to be getting essentially  virgin soil that has high soil fertility and very low pest pressure.  So they're actually going to have much reduced operating costs and greater yields than if  they were trying to farm on the same ground year after year.  And they wouldn't have to worry about planting broccoli, corn and wheat on three-quarters  
**[0:23:10-0:23:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:23:10):**  of their ground so that you get a quarter of the ground growing tomatoes.  They could just focus all of their efforts growing great tomatoes and serving their customers.  So there really are a lot of benefits in there.  And really the farmers get it very quickly.  And they're very excited about it.  
**[0:23:29-0:23:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:23:29):**  And they really like working with us.  No, I can definitely imagine.  And speaking of soil fertility, what's the difference with the biology background as  well?  So you see maybe from the land you started working eight years ago and now or this big  
**[0:23:46-0:23:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:23:46):**  piece of land you mentioned, what from a non-expert or non-farmer perspective, how would you describe  the difference of managing some of these pieces of land for eight seasons so differently?  Great.  So the first piece of property that we bought up in Oregon was 154 acres.  And we put it pretty much in pasture right away.  
**[0:24:13-0:24:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:24:13):**  And the first piece of land that we rotated out of pasture and put it into squash, we  had a farmer who was an expert at growing.  He had grown some organic squash, but it was mostly conventional squash.  And so he did both.  He farmed organic squash that was turned into baby food.  
**[0:24:36-0:24:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:24:36):**  And in farming this ground, he said that it had been in pasture for I think four years  at the time.  He said that this was his least weedy field ever that he had seen conventional or organic.  So the pasture phase had really broken down the weeds.  We had wonderful clear fields.  
**[0:24:58-0:25:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:24:58):**  We had great productivity on that land.  And he could really see a dramatic difference in soil quality versus ground that had been  managed conventionally up until that point.  And that continued.  And then you can see actually as you farm it with annual crops how that ground changes.  
**[0:25:18-0:25:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:25:18):**  So over several years, weed pressure can increase a little bit.  Your soil fertility can go down a little bit.  And at that point, there's a certain point that you say, OK, now we're going to rotate  it into grains and then put it back into pasture.  And so that's the ongoing year-by-year management that we do and the flexibility that we have  
**[0:25:39-0:25:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:25:39):**  in these rotations.  But it's a very wonderful process.  And you always put in a lot and take a little out and then put it back into the pasture  or perennial phase again to regenerate it.  So we're always making it better on this kind of nice, slow, undulating upward cycle.  
**[0:26:02-0:26:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:26:02):**  It's fun.  And I can imagine you measure that as well.  We do.  Biodiversity, that's how you come up with the planning and the flexibility.  We do.  
**[0:26:10-0:26:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:26:10):**  We measure a number of things.  There is one of my favorite quotes, which is that not everything that matters can be  measured and not everything you measure matters.  And so there are some things that are harder to manage that I wish we could on a very quantitative  basis.  
**[0:26:31-0:26:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:26:31):**  But there are key indicators.  And one of the things also is getting scientists to agree on what some of the benefits are.  And I'll give you a very specific example.  We were actually – we applied for and got a grant from the USDA for $250,000 to translate  our agricultural practices into – have two scientific groups identify the physical benefits  
**[0:27:02-0:27:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:27:02):**  that we're creating through improved soil quality, improved water, improved air, et  cetera, and biodiversity, and also translate those into economic benefits.  And this is going to be released either later this year or early next year.  That's not easy, probably.  It's not easy.  
**[0:27:21-0:27:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:27:21):**  But we're very grateful to have the $250,000 grant from the USDA.  And it's a good process.  One of the things that is a personal frustration of mine is that when you look at carbon sequestration,  so we're sequestering a lot of carbon in the ground.  And agricultural practices have an opportunity to sequester very meaningful amounts of atmospheric  
**[0:27:45-0:27:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:27:45):**  carbon.  So between 10 and 24 percent of the annual output could be sequestered in agricultural  soils.  It's the reason why I'm interested in regenerative agriculture, apart from the great food, obviously.  That too.  
**[0:27:59-0:28:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:27:59):**  That's a lot of reasons.  All the science on carbon sequestration is basically based on the carbon that's stored  in the top six to eight inches of topsoil.  Now if you look at our pasture phase, you dig down and roots are going down six to eight  feet, not six to eight inches.  
**[0:28:19-0:28:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:28:19):**  And the roots are basically pumping carbon into the soil, into that deep soil.  But there is not sufficient data to be able to quantify the amount of carbon that's going  in below those top six to eight inches.  And so what ends up on our reports is we get zero credit for carbon going below basically  eight inches.  
**[0:28:48-0:28:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:28:48):**  And this is one of the big quandaries for me is because I dig a hole and I see that  carbon is being pumped into the ground below that, and it seems wrong to apply zero credit  to that carbon.  But that's where the science basically needs to catch up to that.  And I really just think in general we're underreporting the amount of carbon that gets sequestered  
**[0:29:16-0:29:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:29:16):**  in some of these good agricultural practices.  And it's okay and it's very important to have scientific incentives.  I'm a huge fan of that.  But this is an example where uncertainty can get in the way of really communicating the  full potential of sustainable agriculture, really the full benefits of sustainable agriculture.  
**[0:29:38-0:29:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:29:38):**  It's like a positive externality that's not being brought into the operation.  Exactly.  Just like the dead zones aren't being incorporated as a negative externality in the corn thing.  They would be bankrupt if they would.  Exactly.  
**[0:29:52-0:29:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:29:52):**  And yet my pasture has to compete economically with the price of commodity corn being sold  to feedlots.  So not only do I have to beat that on a pure economic playing field, but I also am not  getting the crop subsidies and crop insurance that they're getting.  It's very difficult to insure livestock, but they can insure corn.  
**[0:30:16-0:30:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:30:16):**  Can't insure the pasture with livestock on it, but they get corn insurance.  And yet that has negative externalities.  We have positive externalities and we just don't get any credit for that.  So it's okay.  I think it's something that will play out over time.  
**[0:30:33-0:30:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:30:33):**  You get paid for it in terms of resilience.  But anyway, it's an example of how sustainable agriculture, even with one hand tied behind  its back, is still superior.  Or two.  Yeah, I can see that.  
**[0:30:47-0:30:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:30:47):**  And in terms of, you mentioned the rotation and what's the long term vision for that land?  You mentioned some perennials.  Is there, will that rotation keep rotating or are you introducing some perennial systems  plans that at some point the landscape will change or will it just be, or just between  brackets, will it be this seven to eight year rotation you will do for eternity?  
**[0:31:14-0:31:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:31:14):**  That's really a great question.  So we really look at the land and what its highest and best uses, what its ideal uses  in the realm of sustainable agriculture.  So we're not looking at Walmarts, we're not planting Walmarts.  Also real estate.  
**[0:31:34-0:31:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:31:34):**  Yes.  But so we actually, for example, on some of our land just completed a permanent crop suitability  study where we looked at all the main success factors for permanent crops and identified  actually about half of the acreage that could be converted to permanent crops.  And it's a mix of trees and vines and organic blueberries, for example.  
**[0:32:01-0:32:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:32:01):**  And so we're, you know, we do think that this mix of open ground and the perennial crops  really have some wonderful synergies, both agronomically and ecologically as well as  economically.  And so that's one of the things that's happening now to enhance the ecology and it will also  deliver very positive benefits for the investors as well.  
**[0:32:33-0:32:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:32:33):**  Oh, very interesting.  And for farmland LP itself, if we look back maybe a year ago and what has changed in terms  of your work in terms of farmland LP, what have been the major shifts you've been busy  with and happy to share?  That's a great question.  
**[0:32:53-0:33:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:32:53):**  So we now manage just around 13,000 acres worth of farmland.  And we're at a scale now where we're able to hire and bring in really extraordinary  people.  And so over the past more than a year, but it's kind of born fruit over the past year,  is really be able to build up a really extraordinary farm management team.  
**[0:33:23-0:33:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:33:23):**  And that's been a fun process.  It's been a hard work process.  But that's really paying off and it's been the biggest change over the past year.  And what does the farm management team do within farmland LP?  So they do everything from managing the planning out the rotations of the land, every single  
**[0:33:48-0:33:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:33:48):**  field.  We look at a 10-year management plan on that land and look back as far as we can.  So it could be four to nine years or more.  And so it's that strategic planning around the crop rotations.  It's getting that land certified organic.  
**[0:34:08-0:34:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:34:08):**  And we also, particularly in Oregon, we do some direct farming as well in addition to  the tenant partner farmers that we work with.  And we also do some livestock management as well.  So not livestock ownership, but just the management of the livestock on the ground.  So what we do is more complex than just a corn corn soy rotation.  
**[0:34:40-0:34:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:34:40):**  And so it's much more fun.  It's much more fun.  It is more complex.  And so having the people in place and the systems in place to really manage that on  a go forward basis, we're at a good scale.  
**[0:34:54-0:35:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:34:54):**  So if we would look back a year from now, what would you be most happy with that have  happened in, let's say, the next few months, but also in the, let's say, if we look at  August next year?  That's great.  So continued systems development and growth on the farm management side.  
**[0:35:15-0:35:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:35:15):**  The things that are kind of exciting right now are integrating more technology into what  we're doing.  So I have a technology background as well.  And so integrating aerial imaging, multi-spectral aerial imaging.  You're close to Silicon Valley.  
**[0:35:36-0:35:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:35:36):**  Exactly.  And so integrating our GIS system with the regular crop imaging, determined biological  productivity and feeding that back to the farm managers so that it's not just reliant  on scouting and we can really kind of see problems as they're happening and give feedback,  whether it's a tenant farmer or farm team, whether it's on growing crops or pest issues,  
**[0:36:06-0:36:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:36:06):**  nutrient issues or irrigation as well.  There's some exciting things that are basically coming into place now and over the next 12  months that are exciting.  Very, very interesting.  It will change significantly from it because you're managing such large plots.  
**[0:36:24-0:36:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:36:24):**  Scouting is always an issue because you can never see everything.  And from there, at least in theory, it's a lot easier.  In theory, it's easier.  And sometimes weed pressure builds up.  In an organic system, weeds are an important issue.  
**[0:36:43-0:36:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:36:43):**  And if you have green or brown at the wrong times, you most likely have a weed issue that  you can send people out to look at and deal with and catch early.  And so if a field has been plowed but there's a lot of green there that you haven't planted  yet, you've got a weed issue.  And you probably want to deal with that before you plant your next crop.  
**[0:37:09-0:37:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:37:09):**  If you have a pasture field but you have large dead spots in there, you probably have a weed  problem in that pasture.  And the weeds probably have gone to seed and died off very quickly.  And so you're not going to get a lot of livestock forage off of that land.  And maybe it's time to rotate that field out into annual crops or replant a pasture.  
**[0:37:34-0:37:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:37:34):**  So we can, with the use of technology, help identify those issues, help quantify them,  and really discuss them at a management level, discuss issues at a management level that  otherwise might have been caught just at the pasture management level.  So it really gives an opportunity to quickly and efficiently manage issues that can end  up impacting the economics at the end of the year or impact the land rotations.  
**[0:38:06-0:38:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:38:06):**  So it really actually brings that technology rather than remove us from the land actually  can bring us much closer to it.  And for farmland LP at the place where you are now after eight years, what's the biggest  bottleneck for growth?  What's the biggest bottleneck for farmland LP at the moment?  
**[0:38:28-0:38:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:38:28):**  We have a great team.  We're at a very good scale from a management standpoint, from a management team standpoint,  and we have the capability to manage more acres and we have properties that we want  to acquire.  So at this particular phase, we're raising additional capital to buy more land that really  
**[0:38:48-0:38:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:38:48):**  is contiguous with our existing properties.  And so that just from a scale perspective, that's where we are right now.  And in terms for the sector, I mean, you're very active in the sector, you've been in  that for a while and probably one of the key players in the regenerative agriculture sector.  What do you see as the main barriers to scale up the regenerative agriculture sector and  
**[0:39:13-0:39:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:39:13):**  really get it to a much higher level?  I really think that when we started this, I was concerned about competition and about  a lot of competitors coming into the space.  And now I'm concerned about competition, meaning there's not enough of it.  There's not enough people really taking on sustainable agriculture.  
**[0:39:38-0:39:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:39:38):**  And it's because it takes several years to really, it takes several years to get the  land certified organic and then takes time to get to show those economic benefits.  So hopefully what we're doing by showing that it does work, that we do have increased returns  from organic and sustainable agriculture, that this will expand and we'll continue to  hit additional milestones and we'll continue to publicize those as much as we can.  
**[0:40:08-0:40:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:40:08):**  And so I really think that the big catalytic shift comes from the average everyday farmer  understanding and being very clear that sustainable agriculture is more profitable than chemical  dependent agriculture.  You have the customer demand out there which is phenomenal and continues to grow like a  freight train.  
**[0:40:34-0:40:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:40:34):**  You have strong demand from the buyers, the packaged food companies, the retailers, etcetera.  And you have farmers that will grow those crops whether it's organic or conventional  but it takes that land, it takes someone managing that land and being willing to take the three  years to convert it to organic in order to have that farmland be organic to serve those  organic markets.  
**[0:41:07-0:41:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:41:07):**  And we're trying to help investors in general whether who invest with us or externally understand  the benefits of that and understand that it does work and it is worth that journey.  It's a worthy journey.  And what do you say to people who are saying that organic is starting to lose a bit of  its content, that maybe the bar is a bit too low, that many people are organic according  
**[0:41:39-0:41:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:41:39):**  to certification but if you look at if they're building soil or not, if they're looking at  it with a more holistic view, they maybe aren't.  How do you look at that debate?  I look at it as when people start to ask questions about what they're buying in the supermarket,  what food they're putting in their kid's mouth or their own.  
**[0:42:05-0:42:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:42:05):**  Once they start asking questions, they are on the good journey.  They never stop.  You can't go back.  They never stop.  And we call milk the gateway drug for organics because the organic mom when she moves from  
**[0:42:26-0:42:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:42:26):**  breastfeeding the child to giving them a bottle, organic milk is generally the first organic  product that new organic consumers buy to feed their little baby.  So they're asking the question, what do I want to put in my baby and what went into  that food?  Well, then they buy organic baby food.  
**[0:42:46-0:42:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:42:46):**  Then the whole household shifts.  It happens and it's natural and it's beautiful and you keep asking questions, what's in my  food?  And I think it's great.  The organic standards are not the Holy grail.  
**[0:42:59-0:43:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:42:59):**  There are some issues in it and there's a whole spectrum of sustainable agriculture  practices that are really amazing, really extraordinary and affect everyone in their  daily lives beyond just what they put in their mouths.  And once you start asking these questions, you really just don't stop.  You're awake at that point and it's just part of a really wonderful journey.  
**[0:43:25-0:43:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:43:25):**  And if you, I mean, you mentioned already, you're, you're sometimes also working with  or advising investors that haven't invested in your fund or showing that it's possible.  Let's pretend there, there's a whole arena of smart impact investors listening to this  podcast which might be there actually, but what would you advise them where to start?  They are ready to invest.  
**[0:43:48-0:43:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:43:48):**  They put their capital, maybe their full portfolio to work in regenerative agriculture and sustainable  agriculture, but they don't know where to start.  What would be your first step as an advice?  I really want them first to know themselves and to know what they're investing in and  what they're looking for.  
**[0:44:08-0:44:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:44:08):**  So you know, the first question I ask themselves is what's their timeframe for investing?  And these are, there's often a confusion between the charitable impact that they want  to have and the investment needs that they have.  And so, and they may think that their impact first, but they really need their capital  back and they really want a return on their investment because they have very specific  
**[0:44:35-0:44:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:44:35):**  goals, whether it's for their lifetimes or their kids.  And so to know those investment parameters first and then look at, okay, what kind of  impact do I want to have?  That's great.  And once they're clear on that, then they can look at, okay, great, what can go in the  
**[0:44:54-0:44:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:44:54):**  public markets and what should go in the private markets?  And in the private market, what we've done is set up something that's much more heavily  weighted to land and commercial real estate, so long term investments that have appreciation  and cash flow, but it's very long term and it's not liquid.  Some people may want more operating risk and invest directly in farms.  
**[0:45:22-0:45:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:45:22):**  And that's great.  Capital is definitely needed there, but they need to understand the risk cycles there.  They're greater than investing on just the farmland side, but there are also great opportunities  there.  So for investors, number one, to know themselves and then to be able to see how any of these  
**[0:45:41-0:45:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:45:41):**  investments in sustainable agriculture really fit for them so that they can make them powerfully  allocate the right amount of their portfolio to it and really know that they are actually  making a difference in a way that really works for them and really works for the world as  well.  Thank you so much for that.  
**[0:46:03-0:46:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:46:03):**  And with that, I would like to finish this interview.  Thank you so much for your time.  I'd definitely be checking in a year from now and to see how the drones or the aerial  photography is working and of course how everything else is going with Farmland LP.  Thank you so much, Greg.  
**[0:46:19-0:46:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:46:19):**  Wonderful speaking with you, Koen.  You just listened to an interview with Greg Wisher, co-founder of Farmland LP, and we  talked about how they're making sustainable farmland more profitable than conventional  chemical farmland.  Thank you for making the time to listen to this podcast and making it all the way till  
**[0:46:36-0:46:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:46:36):**  the end.  I hope you enjoyed it as much as I did.  If you found the investing in regenerative agriculture and food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  
**[0:46:49-0:46:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:46:49):**  It's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast, and it only takes a few seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  join my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or in the description  
**[0:47:12-0:47:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:47:12):**  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  
**[0:47:38-0:47:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:47:38):**  Why are we doing this course?  After a hundred interviews and more than a hundred hours of audio asking the question  how to put money to work in regenerating soils and I've been following the space since 2011  and recording these podcasts since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  
**[0:47:56-0:47:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:47:56):**  How have we built our decision making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees and what questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  
**[0:48:07-0:48:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:48:07):**  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  You the soil builders and investors in this space, the soil builders, people working in  
**[0:48:19-0:48:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:48:19):**  this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers, vehicle builders, crowd investing,  platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food companies, permaculture, key line  designers, holistic management consultants, et cetera, et cetera.  People that are building soil at scale and the investors who are putting their own money  to work through their family office or as private individuals or people who are putting  
**[0:48:40-0:48:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:48:40):**  other people's money to work through foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies,  et cetera.  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  
**[0:48:51-0:48:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:48:51):**  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you.  And I'm very aware that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very  different means.  So I'm inviting you if this course is creating value to you.  And if you have the means to consider paying what you think it's worth, thank you.  
**[0:49:09-0:49:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:49:09):**  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides.  So you don't have to ride along.  We're going to look into why investing regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  
**[0:49:29-0:49:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:49:29):**  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design, and a lot more.  
**[0:49:49-0:49:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:49:49):**  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately, that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  
**[0:50:00-0:50:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/09/27/craig-wichner/#t=0:50:00):**  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking, click on  the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  