### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2022-00-25)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investing in regenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  Regenerative aquaculture, how do we farm the oceans regeneratively?  We all heard of the massive issues of fishing and especially the industrial scale extractive  
**[0:00:23-0:00:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:00:23):**  way we are basically emptying the oceans.  So the solution is very simple, simply farm the fish, also known as aquaculture.  But also there are enormous challenges with unsustainable feed, concentrated pollution  and commodified markets, just to name a few.  It very much sounds like the rest of the agriculture and food industry.  
**[0:00:42-0:00:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:00:42):**  So what can be done?  Join us today in a deep dive, pun intended, into the world of regenerative aquaculture.  Try my focus on soil and regeneration because so many of the pressing issues we face today  have their roots in how we treat our land and our sea, grow our food, what we eat, wear  and consume.  
**[0:01:22-0:01:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:01:22):**  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  To make it easy for fans to support our work, we launched our membership community and so  many of you have joined us as a member.  Thank you.  
**[0:01:37-0:01:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:01:37):**  If our work created value for you and if you have the means and only if you have the means,  consider joining us.  Find out more on comrade.com slash investing in Regen Egg.  That is comrade.com slash investing in Regen Egg or find the link below.  Welcome to another episode today, a very special one where we go deep into the blue side of  
**[0:02:03-0:02:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:02:03):**  the planet.  Today, we're welcome.  I'm welcoming James to the show, the founder of Sea Topia, a pioneering regenerative aquaculture  business for the direct to consumer markets.  Welcome James.  
**[0:02:13-0:02:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:02:13):**  Thank you so much.  It's such a pleasure to be here and be part of this conversation.  And to start with the question I always start with a very subtle but still fundamental difference.  So not why soil, but why the oceans?  Why farming in the oceans?  
**[0:02:28-0:02:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:02:28):**  How do you end up there?  As many people in the farming industry can say, I grew up on a farm, then I went away  and I came back, etc.  But the chances you grew up on an ocean farm are very small.  So I'm going to guess here that wasn't the reason you ended up here.  
**[0:02:42-0:02:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:02:42):**  Like, how did you ended up caring so much about the oceans and working in with them  so much?  That's funny that you position the question that way, because while I didn't grow up on  an ocean farm, I did grow up practically in the ocean.  And I guess that has shaped a lot of my direction in life.  
**[0:03:04-0:03:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:03:04):**  My father was a lifeguard, so I grew up just at the beach every single day.  My mother worked at SeaWorld at the time.  So I was fascinated by the aquariums and I really wanted to be involved in oceanography,  marine biology, and particularly the big mammals.  Cetaceans were so interesting to me.  
**[0:03:27-0:03:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:03:27):**  So I started volunteering at an aquarium as an adolescent where they had, this was a really  unique aquarium, on a estuary on a wetland that used to have a healthy population of  steelhead.  And so in this aquarium, they had a demonstration rehabilitation project where they're actually  breeding steelhead and showing how the steelhead would go from freshwater to saltwater and  
**[0:03:56-0:03:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:03:56):**  back and forth.  The principles of breeding fish for rehabilitation first introduced me to the principles of aquaculture.  And I guess fast forward many years later, I was able to get more directly involved with  aquaculture.  So yeah, I got involved with it, I guess, because of a bit of nurture and my fortunate  
**[0:04:26-0:04:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:04:26):**  being born in a family that was connected to the ocean.  But I think we're all born kind of in that space, even if we're, as long as we're on  the blue planet, we should be thinking about how can we efficiently work with the blue  planet because whether it's farming the ocean or in freshwater, there's a lot more water  on this planet than there is land.  
**[0:04:56-0:04:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:04:56):**  So how do we work with that efficiently?  So you basically were born in the ocean, but then still the step from going there, I mean,  there were many different routes you could take, you could become a professional server  or an activist really caring about the oceans, you could really focus on plant based fish  food, you could focus fish food, not meal, you could focus on many things on the pollution  
**[0:05:22-0:05:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:05:22):**  side of things, but you decided to focus on the food side and take quite a, I would really  say neglected route.  Like how do we get regenerative aquaculture, those two words together, we don't hear very  often for sure I'm getting emails now, but we don't hear it very often, well, we should.  Like what was that trigger to regenerative aquaculture?  
**[0:05:41-0:05:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:05:41):**  What triggered you into the food side of things and starting to answer or at least ask many,  many very complicated questions in the aquaculture sector?  There's, I'm in a contrarian space I would say, because most people believe hook, line  and sinker, this romanticized story of commercial fishing, of going to the ocean and being able  to extract seafood and wild caught seafood is this beautiful thing and there is, if done  
**[0:06:15-0:06:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:06:15):**  sustainably is the most romantic and beautiful way to do it.  But when I was studying ecology and marine biology, textbooks are talking early about  the potential of aquaculture done right to create healthy seafood in a controlled environment  where you control the feed and you control the exposure to toxins.  You can in the same way that we can raise tomatoes or chicken or cattle done right,  
**[0:06:56-0:07:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:06:56):**  you can produce an absolutely beautiful product that's clean, that's nutrient dense, that's  free of exposure to toxins.  And the principles of aquaculture have been there from the beginning, but I guess I'm  just kind of an optimist and reading about the principles of aquaculture very early on  didn't end up aligning with the reality.  
**[0:07:27-0:07:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:07:27):**  So if you as a consumer are looking for sustainable farm raised seafood, it's kind of a murky  confusion place.  So I remember at one point feeling that I didn't want to go to a sushi bar because I  didn't want to condone industrial scale commercial fishing, knowing the challenges that are being  placed on our oceans from industrial scale extraction of wild caught fisheries.  
**[0:08:02-0:08:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:08:02):**  I didn't want to condone that.  So what was the alternative having a foundation on the principles of ecology and aquaculture  being a methodology for raising fish?  Where were those good fish farms?  And there just wasn't enough information about that.  
**[0:08:25-0:08:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:08:25):**  There wasn't enough detailed certification processes, transparency.  And so I actually went and started visiting farms and wanted to find out which farms were  actually producing high quality seafood and doing it in a manner that was in line with  my values.  And so I actually went to Mexico.  
**[0:08:54-0:08:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:08:54):**  So I grew up mostly in Southern California, lived in Hawaii for a while.  And funny enough, you mentioned the professional surfing and actually thought surfing was the  most important thing in the world for a number of years.  I lived on the North Shore of Oahu and pursued that for a bit.  That's part of the reason that I learned as much as I did about commercial fishing from  
**[0:09:17-0:09:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:09:17):**  a number of relationships that I built out there.  And wanting to do something that was directly related to the oceans after having sold another  consumer product good business that I had at an energy bar company that was a quinoa  based energy bar that we were sourcing from these fair trade farms in Peru and Bolivia.  And we had all of the certifications for USD Organic and we were selling it in Whole Foods  
**[0:09:56-0:09:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:09:56):**  nationwide.  That was interesting.  And it was on some levels, it was of value to me.  But I really wanted to be involved with the oceans.  And I wanted to be involved in food systems because food has always been really important  
**[0:10:14-0:10:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:10:14):**  to me and my wife, it's been very important to her.  It's been just one of these things that I've cared a lot about, I guess, probably stemming  from health.  And I think the fish part is fascinating, especially the farming part, because that  contrarian piece you mentioned at the beginning, I think many people sort of easily click into  
**[0:10:41-0:10:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:10:41):**  that thought of fish farming is bad, like you said.  And if we just all buy sustainably fished wild card, we will be fine.  And that's probably a bit of a naive or very naive view.  So the question is, and at the same time, it's not naive, I think, to think at all that  most of or a big chunk of the fish farming space is definitely not run with regenerative  
**[0:11:05-0:11:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:11:05):**  principles.  Let's say like that, like there's a lot of non transparency and a lot of chemicals and  a lot of input and a lot of just like farming is many cases not done regeneratively.  But you're saying, I found I went out to look for and where did you start?  Like I went out to look for the regenerative fish farms, where are the ones that are taking  
**[0:11:26-0:11:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:11:26):**  input seriously, taking feed seriously, taking high quality sushi grades, work seriously?  Where do you even start when you get when you said I went to Mexico, but where do you  even I mean, it's not that you Google this stuff, like how do you find the first one,  maybe the first one leads to others, but that first one, do you remember how you found it  and how it was going there?  
**[0:11:47-0:11:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:11:47):**  Yeah.  Southern California is a is a nice place for being involved in the food scene.  There's a farm to table movement of restaurants that has is really connected to farms.  And on most menus, you know, at farm table restaurants, they'll reference where their  tomatoes and their chickens come from.  
**[0:12:16-0:12:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:12:16):**  But seafood is kind of a missing piece.  They'll kind of reference, sometimes they'll reference that it's wild caught, or sometimes  they'll reference the name of the fishermen, but they're not going into more detail on  that.  So I went to Mexico to visit some farms that were raising fish because there are no fish  
**[0:12:41-0:12:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:12:41):**  farms in the ocean in California.  It's not currently legal.  There's no legal fish farming in in the oceans in this region.  You can do it on land.  But just south of the border, there's a tuna ranch that I had become familiar with because  
**[0:13:01-0:13:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:13:01):**  it's next to a a renowned surf spot, a spot called Salsepue, this and they have these  huge open ocean floating PVC circular pens that that hold these giant nets and they put  tuna in there.  That is not actually a sustainable model.  They're essentially ranching a wild species and then feeding it wild caught sardines.  
**[0:13:28-0:13:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:13:28):**  But I kept going further because I was familiar with that.  People mentioning tuna farming as sort of trying to farm a tiger.  And that's probably not like, first of all, it's not easy.  And second, the feed in, the feed to food ratio is feed conversion ratio or FCR is very,  very, very high.  
**[0:13:48-0:13:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:13:48):**  But we want to eat tuna.  So that's what the market creates.  But that was your first exposure.  And you're like, OK, let's go further south and and see if there are other models.  Yeah, I was I was aware of that, but I wanted to see it and just to be among to be in that  
**[0:14:03-0:14:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:14:03):**  place to swim in pens like that and to have.  How is that?  Like what's this to just to to to give people I mean, we're on Audi, obviously, but a visual  clue or a journey like you go into a pen like that.  First of all, how big are the pens and then how how many fishes more or less?  
**[0:14:22-0:14:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:14:22):**  I don't think there are exact numbers, but how many are there in it?  Like what is the size we need to to to keep having our mind as we're listening to this?  40 meters across would be could be the and similar depth.  So I mean, one of the most beautiful things about farming the ocean is the potential for  three dimensional space.  
**[0:14:45-0:14:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:14:45):**  You know, in terrestrial farming, you're farming on land and you have limited resources.  But when you're farming the ocean, you have depth, right?  So the the volume inside of that pen is actually quite significant.  You can have a lot of creatures in there.  The biomass is massive.  
**[0:15:08-0:15:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:15:08):**  And the the experience of swimming in that I mean, is is literally like swimming in the  most incredible aquarium that you've ever that you've ever seen.  I mean, you could literally be swimming in a circle of 150 to 200 pound torpedoes.  You know, nature has evolved these tuna that are warm blooded creatures that that have  the ability to swim, you know, 30, 40 miles per hour.  
**[0:15:39-0:15:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:15:39):**  And you're and they, you know, if they wanted to, they could they could easily kill you.  They could drive them, you know, full speed right into you.  But they just stay right at the perimeter of the of of, you know, where they feel safe.  And they just kind of circling around.  They look at you and they're intelligent creatures.  
**[0:15:57-0:15:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:15:57):**  They're looking at you.  They're thinking about you.  I had a lot of mixed emotions being there.  It was a very sad and awesome place to be to see that in a ranch and to see how it's  working.  
**[0:16:12-0:16:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:16:12):**  And it's not to say that there is no buddy farming tuna.  There are people that are farming tuna from eggs.  This is a tuna ranch.  But still, the problem, as you mentioned, is the FCR, the feed conversion ratio of these  high energy, warm blooded creatures.  
**[0:16:27-0:16:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:16:27):**  They spend so much energy that to feed them.  It's just it's not an efficient conversion ratio of energy inputs.  It's something like 20 to 120 pounds of feed in to grow one pound of biomass.  And they're very finicky about what they eat.  Because most tuna farms or ranches in the world are still feeding them whole sardines  
**[0:16:53-0:16:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:16:53):**  from the ocean.  There are some people that have developed a pelletized feed, but it's very difficult  to get them to eat it.  In some cases, they're actually painting what looks like an eyeball on these little sausages  in order to get them to eat it.  
**[0:17:08-0:17:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:17:08):**  So it's not ideal.  If you're looking for a model of what's an efficient fish to raise, it's not tuna.  But there are other creatures.  If you look at, for example, the feed conversion ratio portion of it, what inputs are the lowest  are going to be things like filter feeders or plants that don't require any inputs from  
**[0:17:42-0:17:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:17:42):**  humans.  We don't have to go out there and feed them.  They're just filtering from the ocean or converting.  Plus they don't move so much.  So they don't burn so much energy.  
**[0:17:52-0:17:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:17:52):**  You don't have to keep them in nets.  Filter feeders are the bivalves, the muscles, etc.  The oysters as well.  And they clean.  Yeah.  
**[0:18:03-0:18:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:18:03):**  So from an energy perspective, that's like it doesn't get better than that.  And kelp obviously on the plant side.  The whole plant family in the ocean is fascinating, not only because of speed, but also because  of health and because it looks spectacular.  And then there's some unappreciated ones like sea cucumbers that are going to be on the  
**[0:18:22-0:18:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:18:22):**  bottom that are going to be cleaning the sand.  So you have an integrated multi-trophic aquaculture system or INTA, which is essentially a permaculture  model in the ocean.  You have a symbiotic relationship between your filter feeders, your crustaceans, your  kelps, your sea vegetables and your fish.  
**[0:18:47-0:18:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:18:47):**  So what are the members of that ecosystem that you want to cohabitat your concession  or your farm?  So as I kept going further south, I was able to find a handful of other farms in Mexico.  There's actually quite a bit of aquaculture.  Mexico's in some ways, I would say more advanced in aquaculture than the United States, primarily  
**[0:19:10-0:19:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:19:10):**  because Mexico already sold a lot of its fishing rights to the Chinese and kind of is on the  pendulum swing of trying to figure out how to create a sustainable financial model for  fisheries in Mexico because they went from having beautiful, healthy fishing culture  and economies to selling off a lot of their resources, having it being overfished and  then having local communities now dependent on subsidies.  
**[0:19:42-0:19:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:19:42):**  So they're now investing quite a bit in aquaculture.  Some good, some not so good, but they're definitely evolving, I would say more rapidly even than  parts of the United States.  And did you find one of those, it sounds perfect on paper, obviously you have the 3D space,  you have the plants, you have the bivalves, the crustaceans that clean, you have the sea  
**[0:20:02-0:20:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:20:02):**  cucumber and you have the fish.  But is that being done, I wouldn't say at scale, but is it being done in practice at  a certain commercial scale yet, because I think for many people, even this word of the multi-species  and the integration of multi-species is new.  Like is that, did you find things there that were like, wow, okay, I didn't know this existed  
**[0:20:24-0:20:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:20:24):**  as sort of the complete opposite to the wrenching wild tigers in the tuna farm.  So at commercial scale, there's not anyone doing it with an integrated multicultural,  polytrophic site in Mexico, but there's a lot, all the components are there.  So there's people doing kelp, there's algaes, there's mussels, there's scallops, there's  oysters, there's striped bass, there's kompachi.  
**[0:21:00-0:21:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:21:00):**  So different species of finfish are going to have a very different feed conversion ratio.  So for example, kompachi or Cereolo rebeliana, which is a type of yellowtail has a feed conversion  ratio closer to one to one or even lower depending on the feed components.  So I ended up spending a number of years working with this kompachi farm in the Sea of Cortez,  which is the Southern tip of the Baja Peninsula on the Eastern side there, where they're raising  
**[0:21:33-0:21:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:21:33):**  this kompachi, which is essentially an almakojack or Cereolo rebeliana that grows at a very  efficient rate and can be adapted to eating a feed that is a much more sustainable.  So an algae-based feed that can be grown regeneratively can be a high feed component for the omega  threes, the oils and the proteins that it needs, combining that with either land-based  proteins, it could be a variety of different sources, it really has the ability to create  
**[0:22:16-0:22:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:22:16):**  a sustainable feed for a fish that grows very efficiently.  And then as long as that, even if it isn't monoculture in this case, done at low density  in a well-sited location, I think is a very important part of creating a healthy food  system.  So this farm, for example, does low density farming, is sited in an area that is far from  
**[0:22:46-0:22:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:22:46):**  industrial pollutants, deep water, tons of current, in fact, twice a day of the amount  of tide that flushes through this.  You have sometimes two to three knots of current flowing through this.  Which is important to keep things flowing, like the manure basically of the fish to keep  it flowing out, making sure disease and pathogens don't get a chance.  
**[0:23:12-0:23:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:23:12):**  It's better to be diluting it with a lot of sea water twice a day than being in a closed  environment unless you need to start farming.  But then do you get to that health piece you mentioned?  Because that's what everybody says, yeah, of course you can feed it with a lot of different  things.  
**[0:23:31-0:23:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:23:31):**  You can feed it with plants.  There are fish that eat everything.  But then it doesn't get to that healthy omega-6, omega-3 ratio fish that we're looking for,  because we're looking for omega-3s.  And then everybody says, yeah, but then it's better to go to wild.  
**[0:23:44-0:23:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:23:44):**  What do you say to people?  You get this question for sure all the time.  How do you answer the health question of farmed very, very well versus wild that we have no  clue where it comes from?  It just depends on the feed, right?  
**[0:23:58-0:24:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:23:58):**  So the evolution of feed in aquaculture kind of followed the trajectory of first, let's  feed them exactly what they eat in the wild, which is sardines, anchovies, anchovetas,  mackerel.  But there's a finite resource in the ocean.  The underlying issue is there's a finite resource and the gross production of wild-caught seafood  
**[0:24:23-0:24:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:24:23):**  has plateaued.  We're not going to find a new well of fish in the ocean.  We've plateaued already, so we can't keep extracting.  And it probably is going down, because in many places it's collapsing.  We can't wait for the moment we cannot keep throwing sardines into a tuna pan.  
**[0:24:45-0:24:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:24:45):**  No, no.  And we should probably eat the sardines directly if we end up doing that anyway.  There's that really weird eat lower on the food chain thing.  So that's the first phase.  And then the second phase is, okay, we replace it with something else.  
**[0:24:57-0:25:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:24:57):**  Let's replace it with soy, et cetera, to fatten the fish.  Exactly.  So it evolved from, okay, let's mitigate the pressure on the bait fish and give them land-based  proteins like the soys and the corns.  And then that had a direct effect on the omega-3, omega-6 levels, because again, fish don't  
**[0:25:22-0:25:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:25:22):**  produce omega-3s, with the rare exception.  There is only a handful of fish in the entire world that produce their omega-3s.  It comes from the feed.  So if you're feeding them whole fish, they're getting their omega-3s.  In fact, in the early days of farming, there was a lot of studies done that quantified  
**[0:25:42-0:25:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:25:42):**  even higher levels of omega-3s in farmed fish than you saw in wild caught fish, because  they were just getting such a healthy diet.  But you were extracting a lot of these resources in order to feed them.  Not that wild fish don't also eat the same amount, if not more, because they're expending  more energy.  
**[0:26:02-0:26:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:26:02):**  But regardless, if you're going to scale aquaculture to feed the world, how do we do it efficiently?  So transitioning from anchovetas or bait fish to land-based resources, like soy and corn,  but then how do you evolve the omega-3, omega-6 and protein resources?  The original source of omega-3s comes from algae.  So an algae-based feed is going to provide the actual omega-3 content that the fish needs.  
**[0:26:38-0:26:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:26:38):**  So growing different types of microalgae to be used in feed is something that is currently  evolving.  There's a lot of investment actually happening in the commercial and industrial scale production  of different types of microalgae for aquaculture and other industries, because you can now,  feeding a compote, for example, an algae-based diet, get even more omega-3s than a wild caught  
**[0:27:08-0:27:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:27:08):**  fish.  So it really just depends on the actual components that are going to feed.  The challenge is the cost, because still, there's a lot of subsidies in wild caught  fisheries.  For anyone who doesn't know, there are massive studies.  
**[0:27:24-0:27:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:27:24):**  I think Planet Tracker has a great one.  I will link it below.  The amount of money we throw at, we burn in industrial scale extractive fishing is just  mind boggling.  It would never be able to pay for itself if we all, I mean, collective society, including  
**[0:27:41-0:27:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:27:41):**  the Chinese government and others, wouldn't be heavily subsidizing their fuel, their boats  and everything else.  It's really, really crazy.  It's a completely bankrupt industry, unless it would be subsidized by all of us.  European Union, US, the whole thing has been.  
**[0:27:56-0:27:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:27:56):**  And it's, yeah, not many people know that.  That's been subsidized.  And of course, you're competing because you have to grow the feed as well.  But the wild one just goes out and get the mackerel that has been eating other fishes  that have been eating algae.  
**[0:28:08-0:28:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:28:08):**  So that's a challenge.  Yeah, yeah, it's a challenge.  As long as there's still oil in the ground, people are going to mine it.  And that's still kind of a challenge with wild caught fisheries.  But the price is coming down.  
**[0:28:23-0:28:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:28:23):**  One of the interesting things that happened over the last, let's say, six months with  the price of petroleum skyrocketing is the affordability and uptake of algae based feeds  became a lot more affordable and has increased.  There's been more use of it by more farms.  And that's really helping scale.  
**[0:28:47-0:28:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:28:47):**  So the economies of scale are shifting.  And that's something that we're really trying to promote is alternative feeds that are based  on things like algae, microalgae.  But there's also single cell fermentation of various other organisms, bacteria and yeast.  There's insects.  
**[0:29:11-0:29:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:29:11):**  So there's a whole evolution in the feed.  And to just say that farmed fish are not as healthy as wild caught fish is one of those  generalizations that you just can't make.  It's like saying that farmed tomatoes are not as healthy as wild caught tomatoes.  Well, it really depends on where that wild caught tomato was planted and what it was  
**[0:29:33-0:29:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:29:33):**  exposed to.  And the same thing with the farm.  How was it farmed?  And then the question of health.  Yeah, the nuance is, but the nuance in farming is not there either.  
**[0:29:45-0:29:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:29:45):**  You continue to see these diagrams of the impact of water consumption of a kilo of beef.  And it's like, yeah, it sort of depends if that cow was outside in Ireland where it rains,  like how do you calculate the water?  But just to leave that for another discussion.  But then the natural question becomes, okay, if the fish gets their healthy omega-3 from  
**[0:30:06-0:30:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:30:06):**  the algae, why don't just eat the algae directly?  Or is there a transformation happening in the fish that makes it more accessible, more  absorbable, more tasty for sure?  But what's the reason to have to sort of introduce that extra step?  It could be a cultural thing.  
**[0:30:24-0:30:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:30:24):**  Could be we just don't need algae or it will take a while and we are eating fish.  So let's use it as almost a vehicle.  But what's your answer?  I'm asking the very obvious questions.  And later we're getting to the investment side of things.  
**[0:30:38-0:30:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:30:38):**  But what's the reason to use the fish as a vehicle for the omega-3?  I think it's mostly just culture.  I personally put a little bit of spirulina in my water and I take a couple of chlorella  tablets, but it's not that delicious.  It's going to take quite a lot of work to make that more attractive for consumers to  
**[0:31:01-0:31:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:31:01):**  eat.  The conversion of that into fish creates ancillary benefits as well.  So I think that if we're in this space of trying to create healthy food systems where  we're raising commercially producing algaes to feed fish and shrimp and mussels and the  whole myriad of other species that can work together and create healthy ecosystems, it  
**[0:31:35-0:31:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:31:35):**  also has the ancillary benefit to the environment.  So the environmental services provided by a well-sited, integrated, multi-trophic aquaculture  or permaculture in the ocean benefits not just the end consumer that's eating it, it  also benefits the environment because it's cleaning the environment.  It's creating a habitat for other wild and natural species and it's creating jobs and  
**[0:32:03-0:32:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:32:03):**  economies.  So I think that there's that multiplier effect when you create healthy food systems.  Because that's, I think, the big piece here, to regenerate.  I think we easily forget how, just as we forget on land, honestly, how degraded the land is  and how degraded the oceans are, how abundant they used to be.  
**[0:32:23-0:32:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:32:23):**  If you hear, not even so long ago, I think 100 plus years, how many fish there were in  the Mediterranean or how many fish there were, like the kelp forest in California.  The stories are there, maybe they're a bit exaggerated, but even if they're half or 20%  of what they wrote, it must have been an extraordinary abundance of life.  So there's a very strong argument that you just made, like how to restore that while  
**[0:32:47-0:32:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:32:47):**  producing an economic outcome or while producing food that is being sold and bought and etc.  And so that piece of regeneration, I think, is often forgotten in, okay, well, let's just  get some algae pills, because that's just not going to regenerate anything except for  maybe part of your body.  So after working a couple of years with that fish farm, that word is doing, was doing the  
**[0:33:14-0:33:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:33:14):**  right things and pushing on that, like what made you set up SeaTopia?  Why was that a natural next step?  It was a vision for the scalability of the distribution and transparent communication.  So initially I was bringing these fish to farm to table restaurants throughout Southern  California.  
**[0:33:41-0:33:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:33:41):**  How difficult was it to sell it?  It was very easy.  Because why?  The quality of the fish was so much better than the current system.  So the seafood supply chain is really built on the concept of moving a highly perishable  
**[0:34:00-0:34:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:34:00):**  commodity as quickly as possible.  And that's generally done through multiple layers of resellers, master importers and  distributors and smaller distributors and just moving these commodities through these  buckets.  And it's quite difficult with highly perishable items, especially when you're talking about  
**[0:34:24-0:34:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:34:24):**  wild caught seafood that sometimes is caught in unpredictable quantities.  So for example, if a purse sanian boat comes across a breeding aggregation or spawning  event and catches a massive breeding aggregation, it could be multiple schools coming together.  And it catches an enormous quantity of pollock or cod or whatever, brings it to market, it  kind of floods the market with all this product.  
**[0:34:59-0:35:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:34:59):**  This fresh perishable product needs to move efficiently throughout the market.  So what tends to happen is product doesn't have traceability because it's moving through  so many hands and being put into these generalized buckets where there's not a market for this  product.  They sometimes are just going to rename it something else and just move it.  
**[0:35:18-0:35:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:35:18):**  There's a lot of studies that have quantified that the fish you get on your plate is not  the fish that's on the menu.  It's a very high number.  I think it's in the high 40s or even more.  It's quite like one in two or probably more of the fish you order is actually not the  
**[0:35:37-0:35:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:35:37):**  fish you order.  Which is understandable in a commodity focused market that's just focused on shipping it  as fast as possible to plates because you lose the quality.  It was easy to sell because you could very predictably get it to them obviously because  it's not that far.  
**[0:35:59-0:36:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:35:59):**  You know the slaughter schedule, let's say, because the harvest schedule because you know  when the fish are ready.  I'm imagining the taste and quality was just very stable and off the chart.  The quality was just much better than anything that was available anywhere else, especially  on a consistent basis.  
**[0:36:18-0:36:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:36:18):**  Then to Debut, we were bringing chefs to the farm.  Bringing a chef to a farm where maybe they've visited a cattle farm or a pig farm and had  the experience of following the journey to their plate on those proteins.  But to do it with fish was something that was out of sight out of mind for so many people.  We created this authentic connection to where their seafood was coming from and gave them  
**[0:36:53-0:36:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:36:53):**  the chance to swim in this aquarium.  Swim with a school of 5,000 beautiful fish in crystal clear turquoise water.  The experience was spectacular.  It definitely worked.  We were able to develop probably one of the most trusted specialty seafood distribution  
**[0:37:13-0:37:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:37:13):**  businesses in Southern California because of this direct relationship with high quality  farms.  Over the years, we started working with multiple farms in Mexico, Peru, and Chile.  One at a time, bringing in these different relationships, trying to identify what are  the best farms in the world and bringing them to the best chefs.  
**[0:37:33-0:37:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:37:33):**  A lot of the Michelin star chefs and being based in Los Angeles, a lot of these celebrity  TV chefs were really stoked to work with the product that allowed their farm to table menu  to authentically also tell a story on their seafood.  But the scalability of that model was actually quite limited because while there are a lot  of farm to table restaurants, there's very few national distribution channels for farm  
**[0:38:01-0:38:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:38:01):**  to table products that can really move the needle.  So as an example, one of the largest farm to table restaurant groups that we had brought  to the farm was a group called Tender Greens, which really cared about where their products  were coming from.  But as Tender Greens grew, their business model changed.  
**[0:38:22-0:38:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:38:22):**  Instead of allowing each chef to make the decisions on their buying, it switched to  a national buyer.  And then the national buyer was more conscientious of the volume discounts that were going to  be applied by choosing slightly different proteins.  And then eventually it changed to being somebody that was probably more of like a controller  
**[0:38:42-0:38:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:38:42):**  or CFO and had less connection to the consumer's demands or concerns or different incentives  and motives.  And that is one of the best examples of a farm to table restaurant group that we were  able to bring to the farm.  The more middle of the road for restaurant groups, the disconnection happened really  
**[0:39:05-0:39:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:39:05):**  soon and there just wasn't the same motive to get the most sustainable product as opposed  to save a million dollars a year by saving 25 cents per unit.  So that challenge of who actually is the decision maker and who really cares always came back  to the consumer seems to care more.  So I knew that a direct consumer model was going to get the product to the people who  
**[0:39:32-0:39:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:39:32):**  care and create that feedback loop.  So Cetopia was this idea that, well, maybe one day consumers will care enough about seafood  to be able to pay what it actually costs and get it to them delivered at home in an authentic  way that isn't just wrapping it in styrofoam and calling it sustainable seafood.  So Cetopia was this idea that kind of was on the back burner and kind of like a business  
**[0:39:54-0:40:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:39:54):**  plan that sat in a circle of friends for a number of years until COVID actually created  the impetus and the space to justify it.  So as restaurants closed during COVID, you have these farms around the world that have  been investing in best in class feed and handling and low density farming.  It's an expensive way to do it.  
**[0:40:18-0:40:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:40:18):**  And you have these living creatures in the water that require to be fed and they no longer  had a sales channel because the farm table, the restaurants were not buying and these  fish needed to eat.  So what's the future?  The crystal ball didn't really have a vision for when those restaurants were going to come  
**[0:40:42-0:40:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:40:42):**  back.  So I really pushed the Cetopia model forward in order to continue to create a supply chain  that would continue to support and reward the farms that were really innovating.  And the cool thing about it is that we've actually opened up a much better sales channel  that creates that feedback loop and is much more scalable.  
**[0:41:06-0:41:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:41:06):**  So the vision for Cetopia now is not just to support those handful of farms and continue  to keep that going, but is to be a marketplace for farms around the world and eventually  be able to create the feedback loop for consumer demand and fostering regenerative aquaculture  on a global scale.  So that's really where Cetopia has evolved to is creating this platform through this  
**[0:41:36-0:41:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:41:36):**  subscription model that gives a long-term investment and commitment to the farms that  we're going to keep buying these products and allow them to know for sure that there's  a buyer who cares and get that feedback.  If a farm makes a change in their feed, how does that affect the taste?  If it doesn't really affect the taste, but it is better for the planet, do the end consumers  
**[0:42:05-0:42:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:42:05):**  care enough to pay for that?  Well, if you're selling in a commodity sales channel where that nuance might not be told,  no, the answer is no.  But if you can speak to your end consumers and we can put it in the newsletter and you  can host an event once a year where your consumers actually get to come to the farm and have  
**[0:42:27-0:42:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:42:27):**  a dinner there and tell that story and be in the newsletter and have that information,  yes.  That's where the direct-to-consumer model allows a healthy relationship between aquaculture  and our relationship to seafood and end consumers.  We've been able to do it actually in a quite authentic way where we deliver carbon neutral.  
**[0:42:55-0:43:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:42:55):**  We're actually partnered with an organization that's doing creating carbon credits through  open ocean kelp reforestation projects.  We are investing a percentage of all of our profits back into ocean conservation through  the support of marine protected areas.  We're shipping in totally eco-friendly packaging, no styrofoam.  
**[0:43:21-0:43:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:43:21):**  When we first started, we were doing completely no plastic, but we haven't yet been able to  come back to that because the compostable vacuum seal bags that we're using just aren't  quite up to quality yet.  We're continuing to try to in.  You're dealing with food.  
**[0:43:40-0:43:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:43:40):**  Yeah.  It is a food grade product that we were sourcing from a really cool company that was producing  it from Kosovo.  But the challenge of keeping that plastic in close proximity to dry ice just didn't  preserve the product as well as we needed.  
**[0:44:02-0:44:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:44:02):**  We were losing the seal on the freezer-safe vacuum seal bags at too high a percentage.  So we're continuing to invest in R&D on that side.  There are some advancements on kelp-based plastics.  Which would be ideal.  From the story perspective and also from the circle perspective.  
**[0:44:24-0:44:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:44:24):**  But to get to that, you went from restaurant to direct-to-consumer forcefully.  How ready was the consumer?  You say we open a much bigger market, potentially, obviously.  How has that been?  Has the consumer responded strong enough to keep the fish swimming and also to keep these  
**[0:44:44-0:44:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:44:44):**  farms going?  Or did you have to scale down a lot?  How has the response been?  Now we're talking the end of the summer 2022.  How have those two years been basically in terms of consumer demand or consumer response?  
**[0:45:01-0:45:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:45:01):**  It's been really great.  It's been overwhelmingly good.  We haven't done any advertising and it just continued to grow.  Mostly word of mouth.  The biggest challenges are the logistics of the product.  
**[0:45:17-0:45:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:45:17):**  So we all know those challenges.  But the model of working, scaling a CSA is really what we're doing.  So who are the farms that have good relationships with processors or are in close proximity  to international supply chains?  We can put it onto a container and ship it and getting into a port that's not backlogged.  
**[0:45:42-0:45:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:45:42):**  Those are the biggest challenges for us.  And as long as we're really methodical about which farms that we're supporting and can  predictably bring into our warehouse, it seems to be working pretty smoothly.  We've had hiccups on the packaging and the vacuum seal bags and things like that.  But the farms are really on board.  
**[0:46:09-0:46:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:46:09):**  There's not another market out there that is providing the feedback loops.  We have the Whole Foods of the worlds.  And I would say that they're pushing the envelope, but we're trying to be the forefront.  We're trying to really be the thought leaders and create the most demand.  So for example, we take a sample from every lot that we receive and send it to a laboratory  
**[0:46:37-0:46:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:46:37):**  that quantifies the parts per billion, the presence of heavy metals.  And we publish transparently the certificate of analysis and the mercury levels on our  fish.  And we're doing that because A, it gives us information about whether there was a change  in the feed.  
**[0:46:59-0:47:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:46:59):**  It quantifies the health levels and it holds the farms accountable and gives the assurance  to the customers that this is absolutely a cleaner product than what you're going to  find anywhere else.  And it is what they say it is.  Not only does it come from a farm that has been quantified or certified by a third party  
**[0:47:27-0:47:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:47:27):**  audit for sustainability, but it's also been certified clean per the certificate of analysis.  So what we're trying to do is really push a model that drives aquaculture as quickly  as we can towards those values that we believe.  When I first heard about aquaculture, it was this potential solution to feed the world  a clean, healthy, sustainable food system.  
**[0:47:57-0:48:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:47:57):**  Well, what were the challenges that prevented that?  And a lot of that surprisingly was not challenges with the ocean as much as it was challenges  with the supply chain, the ecosystem, the economies and the incentives that were built  around it.  And so we're trying to address those core issues in order to tell farms that there is  
**[0:48:24-0:48:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:48:24):**  a safe and healthy way that you can invest in best practices for advancing the innovations  on regenerative aquaculture practices.  And do you see like these multi-species systems, the ideal permaculture one you mentioned,  is that on the horizon?  Is it still very far away?  
**[0:48:45-0:48:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:48:45):**  Is that maybe like that complexifying, which we talk often about on farms, is that something  happening or starting to happen, or is it okay, we really have to fix feed because that's  the biggest, by far the biggest lever for change, and then we look at other things?  There are small scale farms doing it.  There's a number of universities doing it.  
**[0:49:11-0:49:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:49:11):**  There are individual components being done.  So for example, there's kelp farms being sited next to salmon farms because, so what you  talked about earlier, the manure or the effluent from a salmon farm is in high concentrations,  a toxic nutrient that can create an unhealthy environment.  But in nature, there's actually no such thing as waste, right?  
**[0:49:42-0:49:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:49:42):**  So in nature, there's a symbiotic balance between that nitrogen and something else.  And what is that in the case of siding kelp next to it?  The kelp is absorbing a lot of those nutrients.  A shellfish farm, a sea cucumber farm, the scallops, all of these organisms have an ability  to work with the finfish, but it's a matter of one, changing the model and creating the  
**[0:50:19-0:50:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:50:19):**  incentives for those farms.  So if you're a salmon farmer and you want to sell your products without fear that there's  a limit on the buyers, you're going to sell to the big commodity distributors.  And they care about different things than...  Yeah, and consumers do.  
**[0:50:43-0:50:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:50:43):**  Yeah, exactly.  So what we're trying to do is say to that big farm, you have this other concession,  you have this site where you could grow a brand that is synonymous with not only a healthy,  delicious salmon, but your brand could be synonymous also with your scallops and your  seaweed products and your mussels and your sea cucumber.  
**[0:51:13-0:51:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:51:13):**  And by having all those products under your brand, we will buy everything that you produce.  And so that's kind of the sea topia model.  So there are a number of farms that are experimenting with this and are taking that risk, but a  lot of it comes down to just the risk factors for them, the business model and the incentives.  And so what would you tell investors that are listening?  
**[0:51:45-0:51:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:51:45):**  I mean, it's difficult to say what's the most neglected piece of the Regiment of Aquaculture's  place because it seems to be all relatively neglected.  But where would you point them, obviously without giving investment advice, but what  would you be...  Let's say we're doing this on stage at a big ocean conference, where would you tell them  
**[0:52:01-0:52:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:52:01):**  to go and dive or go and dig deeper to understand more?  Is it the algae space?  Is that these multi-species together?  Is it the CPG brands?  Or is it creating these distribution channels that reward these things?  
**[0:52:15-0:52:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:52:15):**  What is your feeling most neglected in this space?  I think you have to ask the consumer what they want and give that to them.  So what does the consumer want?  The consumer wants to eat something that's delicious and healthy and sustainable.  And right now what they're looking for is salmon.  
**[0:52:43-0:52:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:52:43):**  And where do they go?  They go to Alaskan salmon because they've been told that wild caught Alaskan salmon  is the healthiest.  But in reality, if you're going to put that product under the microscope and look at the  mercury levels or the PCBs or the sustainability or the omega-3 levels, can you produce a better  
**[0:53:08-0:53:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:53:08):**  product?  I think you absolutely can.  And there are farms doing it.  So I would say that the best place for an investor to be looking is what are the products  that are meeting the consumer's need or getting closer to it?  
**[0:53:29-0:53:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:53:29):**  And how do we produce more of that?  And I think that those products are the finfish.  So what's limiting finfish is feed components.  And not that it's not being done, but the unit economics aren't quite there yet.  So how do we bring more scale to that?  
**[0:53:56-0:54:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:53:56):**  And education and transparency is one of those things, getting more awareness to the benefits  of aquaculture and the benefits of a regenerative aquaculture farm.  So there's a lot of money, unfortunately, spreading misinformation about farms.  And in some cases, it's well-served because there are a lot of commodity farms out there  that suck.  
**[0:54:29-0:54:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:54:29):**  And they're competing with artisan fisheries of people who have the best intentions to  be good stewards of their local waters.  But it's doing a disservice to the advancement of aquaculture.  So I guess I don't know if I answered your question because I don't have a clear answer  other than what we've been doing with Cetopia is really just focused on building a market  
**[0:54:57-0:55:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:54:57):**  that's going to create those incentives for the farms and components that are supporting  those farms.  I believe that that's where I've put my energy because I felt like the biggest problem was  the delivery, the transparency, the feedback loops.  And so to flip the question, because actually you get you give a very clear answer, but  
**[0:55:21-0:55:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:55:21):**  it is different if you're on that other side.  So let's say you are managing a billion dollars and you had to put it to work.  I'm assuming it's going to be in regenerative aquaculture.  I'm asking this question not because I want to know a dollar amount, but I want to know  what would you prioritize?  
**[0:55:36-0:55:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:55:36):**  Where would you spend most of your energy, in this case, quite significant resources?  If I were in charge of a billion dollar fund with a traditional, let's say, 10 year investment  structure, I would look at innovations around aquaculture technologies, monitoring, testing,  cleaning.  Also look at supply chain logistics, like transportation, traceability, enabling software,  
**[0:55:59-0:56:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:55:59):**  hardware, packaging that extends shelf life, reduces environmental footprint, and direct  consumer supply chains like Cetopia that connect farms directly to consumers and create this  direct feedback loop.  I'd also look at some mid to late stage investment opportunities with established farms or feed  manufacturers.  
**[0:56:17-0:56:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:56:17):**  But realistically, I'd prefer to manage maybe more like an evergreen fund with a structure  that can focus on the long term capital appreciation without time barriers, one that meshes well  with entrepreneurs looking to grow their businesses sustainably and truly foster regenerative  aquaculture.  In that case, I would look at investments across the supply chain to drive real change  
**[0:56:39-0:56:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:56:39):**  in the dynamic of our relationship with the oceans with an investment thesis for creating  a true Cetopia on the blue planet.  As such, I would be incentivized to invest in innovative feeds, in innovative aquaculture  farms, advancing IMTA and RAS aquaponics and urban farming into retail brands, into processing  facilities, into packaging that extends the shelf life, reduces waste, and creates a circular  
**[0:57:08-0:57:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:57:08):**  economics, into the distribution, a global network of distribution hubs, education, there's  a ton of investment that needs to be done in education and testing and traceability.  We need more testing, not only in aquaculture, but in wild caught products to create those  right incentives.  And in general management of our resources.  
**[0:57:30-0:57:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:57:30):**  So how would that allocation look at probably putting a lot into those innovative feeds  to help bring economies of scale to sustainable feeds produced from microalgae and bacteria,  insects, yeast, and even invasive species, maybe let's say 15% allocation just in feed.  Farms are really important though, we need to be developing more innovative farms and  really helping bring IMTA, RAS, aquaponics and urban farming closer to the distribution  
**[0:58:02-0:58:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:58:02):**  centers.  So probably upwards of 40% of that would go towards shrimp farms and salmon farms.  Sablefish would probably be a little bit lower, Cetiola, Riviana, Quinteana, Llandi, all of  the jacks, the yellowtails.  Sea breams, the snapper, the kimidai, the sea bass, scallops are really important, we  
**[0:58:25-0:58:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:58:25):**  need more scallop farms, lantern baskets, scallop farms, oyster farms, kelp farms, seaweed  farms, sea cucumbers, as we've mentioned, urchins, lobster, crab, lumpfish, bear mundi  and other underappreciated herbivores, and even maybe something like sardines.  There's a lot of innovation that needs to happen on the farm.  So that would probably be a big portion of that investment.  
**[0:58:49-0:58:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:58:49):**  But retail brands is also super important.  Probably let's say 15% would be invested into retail brands to bring these products center  to the plate to reduce waste.  And part of that would also, we would need advancements on processing.  I would like to see, I would probably be investing in processing facilities that can make more  
**[0:59:11-0:59:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:59:11):**  innovative products from the offal, from the livers, from the hearts.  Making bone broths, seafood bone broths, I think would be a really amazing product line,  more smoked products, more jerkies, more pet foods, just to reduce waste and to increase  profit margins across the supply chain.  But then if we were looking at packaging, that would be probably a minority investment in  
**[0:59:34-0:59:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:59:34):**  innovations on compostable bags and compostable insulations.  There's some very innovative projects coming up with algae and mushroom and fish scales  to produce these sort of products, these insulations, these packaging.  But distribution is really important.  The cold chain distribution logistics, having a chain of distribution centers across the  
**[0:59:58-1:00:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=0:59:58):**  United States and across the world.  Innovation on AI assistant distribution, the last mile cold chain distribution is super  important.  It hasn't yet been defined who's going to be the Amazon of cold chain distribution.  A lot of these, let's say, archaic cold chain warehouses haven't yet embraced innovations.  
**[1:00:18-1:00:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=1:00:18):**  Definitely not to assist the last mile on the direct consumer side.  I'd love to see a lot more investment there.  I would probably put a pretty significant investment there.  It's 10% of our allocation.  But education is going to drive a lot of this.  
**[1:00:31-1:00:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=1:00:31):**  Not as expensive, but it is exceptionally valuable.  I think investments in documentary films, like The Biggest Little Farm was such a powerful  farm for education around permaculture and regenerative farming on land.  We need the biggest little farm story for aquaculture.  General media and education is going to be really important too in schools at the farm  
**[1:00:53-1:00:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=1:00:53):**  level and also policy, environmental lobby.  We really need to see changes.  The National Oceanic and Atmosphere Organization, NOAA, has really been trying to push aquaculture  but has continued to affront this pushback from environmental groups.  We need to have more education and lobby to help bring properly sighted, properly managed  
**[1:01:15-1:01:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=1:01:15):**  aquaculture closer to the markets.  The US is still importing way more seafood than it should.  Traceability and testing, I think that's going to help drive change across industry with  heavy metal testing, toxicity testing, nutritional testing, the validation of those omega-3 levels  versus omega-6 levels on labeling on every single seafood product.  
**[1:01:40-1:01:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=1:01:40):**  Traceability across the cold chain and fair trade certifications and certified sustainable  certifications.  We need a lot more of that.  And I'm not just talking about within aquaculture.  I'd like to see these sort of testings and certifications across wild caught seafood.  
**[1:01:54-1:01:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=1:01:54):**  I think that'll really help drive change.  So yeah, hopefully that outlines a bit of my vision for how I'd invest a billion dollars  because there is an enormous market in seafood and change needs to happen.  But we need a sort of long-term vision on how to align our relationship to really create  that sea topia.  
**[1:02:17-1:02:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=1:02:17):**  I think it's a perfect way to end this conversation.  I want to thank you so much James for your time and for sharing.  And I hope it's not the last time, first of all, we talk, but also where we look into  regenerative aquaculture, regenerative ocean farming, because it's a very neglected, at  least on our podcast for sure, space.  
**[1:02:40-1:02:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=1:02:40):**  And it's such an important one, such a potential one, not only because the potential in terms  of changes in practices, but the potential in terms of space.  Obviously there's a lot of water, but also the potential simply in terms of biology,  simply in terms of feed to food ratios, in terms of the quantity of biomass you can grow  in 3D.  
**[1:03:02-1:03:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=1:03:02):**  I mean, the opportunities are truly magnificent.  So I want to thank you for putting a spotlight on that today and for all the work you do.  My pleasure.  Thank you so much.  I hope that I was able to articulate something of value to your audience.  
**[1:03:19-1:03:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=1:03:19):**  I feel like we kind of wandered all over, but at the end of the day, there's just so  much nuance and so much story to be told.  I appreciate you creating a forum for people to be asking these questions and learn a bit  more and I hope that we can continue this conversation.  Thank you.  
**[1:03:42-1:03:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=1:03:42):**  Thank you so much for listening all the way to the end.  For the show notes and links discussed, check out our website, investinginregenerativeagriculture.com  forward slash posts.  Thank you so much for listening all the way to the end.  For the show notes and links we discussed in this episode, check out our website, investinginregenerativeagriculture.com  
**[1:04:01-1:04:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=1:04:01):**  forward slash posts.  If you liked this episode, why not share it with a friend or give us a rating on Apple  Podcast.  That really helps.  Thanks again and see you next time.  
**[1:04:20-1:04:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=1:04:20):**  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to put money  
**[1:04:39-1:04:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=1:04:39):**  to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011 and recording  these podcasts since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  
**[1:04:55-1:04:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=1:04:55):**  How have we picked interviewees?  What questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  
**[1:05:03-1:05:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=1:05:03):**  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  You, the soil builders and investors in this space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  
**[1:05:16-1:05:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=1:05:16):**  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management consultants, etc.  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  
**[1:05:36-1:05:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=1:05:36):**  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  
**[1:05:50-1:05:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=1:05:50):**  that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  
**[1:06:05-1:06:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=1:06:05):**  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to ride along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in and what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could  
**[1:06:28-1:06:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=1:06:28):**  find if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  
**[1:06:45-1:06:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=1:06:45):**  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment please find professional investment advice.  
**[1:07:00-1:07:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/james-arthur-smith#t=1:07:00):**  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  