### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2017-17-03)
**[0:00:00-0:00:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com slash course or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  Welcome to another episode of investing in regenerative agriculture investing as if the  planet mattered.  
**[0:00:21-0:00:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:00:21):**  A podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  
**[0:00:42-0:00:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:00:42):**  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small and consumers, start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  Before we get started, I've been recording these interviews next to my day job and I  will definitely continue to do so and release about an episode a month.  
**[0:01:02-0:01:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:01:02):**  But at the same time, I would love to take this further, share more interviews.  There are many more stories to share on investing in regenerative food and agriculture, more  depth, improve the quality, maybe even doing some video series.  So I started a Patreon community, which makes it easy to support creators like myself.  If these podcasts have been of value to you and if you have the means, I invite you to  
**[0:01:24-0:01:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:01:24):**  support me and make this happen.  For more information, please find the link to my Patreon account in the description below.  And now without further ado, the interview.  Enjoy.  Welcome to investing in regenerative agriculture, investing as if the planet mattered.  
**[0:01:40-0:01:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:01:40):**  I'm Kuma Sayan, your host.  In these interviews, I'm talking to people who are scaling up the regenerative agriculture  sector, either by increasing the inflow of investment capital or by scaling up the enterprises  on and in the ground.  And by doing so, exploring what it means to be an impact investor in regenerative agriculture.  
**[0:01:59-0:02:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:01:59):**  Why my focus on regenerative agriculture?  Because the roots of so many of the issues we're facing in the world today can be found  in agriculture.  From droughts, migrant flows, obesity, social issues, water wars, climate change, hunger,  they all have a connection to how we treat the land, grow food and what we eat.  
**[0:02:16-0:02:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:02:16):**  I hope you will enjoy this interview as much as I did making it.  If you have any comments, please share them on Soundcloud or Twitter.  And if you think this content is relevant or interesting for someone else, please feel  free to share the interview.  You're going to listen to an interview with Geert van der Weer, co-founder of Heerenbuhlen,  
**[0:02:32-0:02:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:02:32):**  a movement in the Netherlands where they bought a farm with 200 families and hired a farmer  to farm for them in the most sustainable regenerative way possible.  We're going to talk about how he started, why he started this movement, and more importantly,  what he's trying to do to scale it and to get to 100 farms in the Netherlands and to  a few thousand in Europe.  
**[0:02:52-0:02:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:02:52):**  Enjoy.  Welcome to investing in regenerative agriculture, investing as if the planet mattered.  I'm Koen van Sijn, your host, and in the podcast of today, I'm joined by Geert van der Weer,  co-founder of Heerenbuhlen.  Welcome Geert.  
**[0:03:03-0:03:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:03:03):**  Thank you.  Hi Koen.  So to start with a personal question, and of course we would love to know more about  Heerenbuhlen and the movement.  But what made you start Heerenbuhlen and why regenerative agriculture in the Netherlands  
**[0:03:16-0:03:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:03:16):**  for you?  Yeah, it has to do with my experience during my, since I was working with the Farmers Association  here in the Netherlands.  I've been working there between 1998 and 2003, and I discovered a lot about the way we are  producing our food here in the Netherlands, of course, in Europe and in the world.  
**[0:03:45-0:03:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:03:45):**  And I saw that things should be different done than it's been doing today.  So that's why I was trying to do it from, I was trying to change from within the organization.  And that took me so much effort that I thought that I want to do it differently.  So I started, I left the association, started to work on projects on short chain relationships  between consumers and farmers.  
**[0:04:18-0:04:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:04:18):**  And I did that for a couple of years.  And also I there discovered that starting with the producer is not always the same as  starting to work with an entrepreneur.  And so I discovered that it's difficult for farmers to change their business model, to  change their way of thinking.  
**[0:04:42-0:04:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:04:42):**  It's also a cultural thing within the agricultural sector that I thought, okay, I've seen a lot  and I've done a lot.  And right now I have to do one thing.  I have to develop my own farm concept that shows the world, shows the Netherlands that  it's possible to do it differently.  
**[0:05:02-0:05:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:05:02):**  And the best way of having some impact is to do it.  So then we started the Heere Burren movement as we speak of it right now.  And well, we opened the first farm in 2015 in Vauxhall.  And right now we are having about 20 farms as in families who want their own farm here  in the Netherlands.  
**[0:05:32-0:05:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:05:32):**  We are helping to build that farm.  So it's more than just one spot at the moment.  Yeah, you definitely from the beginning, and I remember the conversations we had a number  of years ago, that there are many examples where people get together and maybe start  farming or buy something, et cetera.  
**[0:05:49-0:05:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:05:49):**  But what really for me set you apart is that from the beginning you said this needs to  scale.  We need to get to 100, we need to get 200, we need to go to 2000 farms that are operating  in this way.  So from the beginning you really designed it with scale in place.  
**[0:06:04-0:06:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:06:04):**  And at the moment there's one really operative and there are about 20 that are in different  phases of getting there.  But can you explain, let's take the one that is already operational.  What is it?  What's the scale?  
**[0:06:18-0:06:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:06:18):**  What is so different from the neighbors that are still farming traditionally?  And how does it work?  Okay, the basic principles are quite simple.  There are 200 households representing 500 people.  These households, they became a member of our cooperative and they did an investment,  
**[0:06:41-0:06:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:06:41):**  an investment of 2000 euros per household and they brought also together, so 400,000  euros.  And that amount of money we spent on, we invested in the first costs we had to make to start  the farm.  And the farm is a farm which produces a lot of different products.  
**[0:07:07-0:07:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:07:07):**  So we have fruits, vegetables, we have meat as in chicken, pork, beef.  We have eggs and we try to, within these different product groups, we try to have as much as  possible variety.  So we have 12 different apples, eight different pears, et cetera, et cetera.  And what the members do, they bring on an annual base all the costs together by the  
**[0:07:47-0:07:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:07:47):**  contribution they pay to the cooperative.  So each mouth in a household, in a family, each mouth pays about 10 euros each week and  gets in return for that, he gets the products from our farm.  And compared to the supermarket, that's a lot cheaper.  So you get more products by paying the company.  
**[0:08:09-0:08:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:08:09):**  And a lot nicer and healthier products, I imagine.  Exactly.  A lot more sustainable from a mixed farm that doesn't hardly exist anywhere else.  Exactly, exactly.  And so to summarize, all the members of the cooperative pay at the beginning a fixed fee  
**[0:08:24-0:08:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:08:24):**  of 2000 and then after that they also guarantee for a number of years their take off, their  off take.  So they pay a contribution of 10 euros a week per person.  And for that they get, if I remember correctly, about 60% of their daily needs when the farm  is fully operational and fully producing these 12 types of apples, et cetera, et cetera.  
**[0:08:46-0:08:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:08:46):**  Yeah, exactly.  And to be more concrete, they are committed for three years in the beginning.  And of course they can stay a member as long as they want.  But in the beginning they are committed for three years and that makes it possible to  start this farm because in the beginning it's not up and running completely.  
**[0:09:08-0:09:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:09:08):**  So that commitment we needed.  But it seems to be not even a problem to find people who are this committed to the concept.  So it has to do with two things.  It has to do with the community feeling, being together, starting together, something that  makes the world a little bit better in your own benefit in this concrete.  
**[0:09:38-0:09:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:09:38):**  And the other thing is that we are trying to improve our techniques in the way we produce  the food.  So it has to do with the way we keep our livestock.  It has to do with the way we are producing vegetables, et cetera.  A lot of permaculture influence on our farm.  
**[0:10:01-0:10:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:10:01):**  Agroecology is the main principle we work with.  And so on, you can say that it's not only nice and fun to be a member of the cooperative,  but you can also have a lot of influence on the way we are producing.  So actually the entrepreneurship of this farm is not on the level of the farmer, but it's  on the level of the cooperative and every member is the entrepreneur of our farm.  
**[0:10:28-0:10:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:10:28):**  And in terms of you mentioned him or her now very briefly, who is the farmer?  Who's doing the farming?  Are those the people in the cooperative or is it somebody else doing the day to day work  professional?  The essential part of the concept is that we wanted to be independent of voluntary activities.  
**[0:10:54-0:11:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:10:54):**  So there is a farmer who is getting his money from the cooperative.  A fixed salary, which is nice for, I mean, it's very different for many farmers.  Yeah.  He's not having the risks or the benefits of the farm.  That's what the cooperative members together have.  
**[0:11:13-0:11:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:11:13):**  So he gets a salary to be concrete.  So that's one farmer.  And he has on a yearly basis, there is an amount of money he can spend on hiring more  people to work on the farm if necessary, because there are a lot of members who want to work  on the farm.  
**[0:11:36-0:11:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:11:36):**  There is no necessary element that they have to come to work on the farm.  But if they do, of course it saves costs, which benefits the cooperative.  Exactly.  So basically the daily work has been, it's the farmer who is doing the daily work.  And he's the manager of the farm and he can hire more people or he gets his people from  
**[0:12:03-0:12:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:12:03):**  the community working on the farm.  And to describe, to dive a moment into the farm itself, can you describe the size?  Did you buy the land first of all?  Did you rent it?  Or at least what can we see on that farm that's so different from the neighbors?  
**[0:12:18-0:12:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:12:18):**  Okay.  We have a farm of 20 hectares and we didn't buy it because that has to do with the philosophy  of our movement regarding to ownership of land.  We did not want to have someone or an organization to have an exit.  So for the benefit of the person or the organization, I will sell my land.  
**[0:12:48-0:12:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:12:48):**  No, that's not possible.  Altogether at this moment we rent the land from a foundation.  That's a long-term rent I can hear.  Exactly.  So that's the way we are gaining our land.  
**[0:13:03-0:13:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:13:03):**  And like I said, it's 20 hectares.  And well, you can see, you can see 3,000 trees in the orchard.  You can see 30 pigs and about 25 cows for our meat.  And we have 1,000 chickens.  We have four and a half hectares with vegetables, etc., etc.  
**[0:13:28-0:13:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:13:28):**  So that's…  And you're rotating them in a system, right, in a process to make sure the different parts  of the farm benefit from each other and not in silos.  Yeah, not just rotating them.  We're also mixing them.  
**[0:13:42-0:13:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:13:42):**  So our chickens are working for us in our orchard and our pigs are doing some work on  the field.  For example, after we have harvested our potatoes.  So there are always more…  We do not need to invest in machinery or something.  
**[0:14:03-0:14:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:14:03):**  Our animals can do a lot of work.  Symbiotic relationships, yeah.  Exactly, exactly.  And animals, I mean, like Joe Salatin says, they don't break down.  They don't need fossil fuel, but at the end of the day you can still sell them.  
**[0:14:16-0:14:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:14:16):**  Exactly.  And even stronger, it's also something Joe Salatin said.  They grow on it.  So you also are saving some costs on the other hand on the feed you need for the animals.  So there is just a win-win.  
**[0:14:35-0:14:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:14:35):**  And in terms of this specific farm in Bockstau, where are you at?  You started in 2015.  What would you say…  What point have you reached now and what are the next steps?  Okay, right now what you see is that the main principle of the concept are really…  
**[0:14:53-0:14:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:14:53):**  are really working right now.  So we have our members.  We're seeking 200 households.  At the moment we have 144 households committed to our concept and we're still growing.  So that's going very well.  
**[0:15:10-0:15:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:15:10):**  And in this second full season we are producing right now, we start learning a lot and gaining  a lot of insights for the next season.  We have a lot of luck this year with the climate, with the weather.  Everything is growing really beautiful.  So we are being complimented for the quality we are delivering at the moment.  
**[0:15:33-0:15:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:15:33):**  Because last year was horrible.  I remember a drought and water and everything went against you basically.  So some people said last year, they said when you're surviving this year, you can beat  every other year that's coming.  And this year we are very lucky, really.  
**[0:15:53-0:15:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:15:53):**  So we are very lucky this year.  And so that makes the people happy, literally.  They have invested in the concept because they believe that.  They had a hard year last year and right now it's a beautiful year and they have beautiful  products.  
**[0:16:07-0:16:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:16:07):**  So that gives us the space in time and thinking of how to improve our techniques, how to…  Me myself, I'm studying on nature.  What can nature bring for us?  Insights or techniques we can scale, we can transform into a technique of producing.  And can these techniques be scaled to a level of a complete farm?  
**[0:16:40-0:16:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:16:40):**  So the time I have right now I spend watching YouTube videos, reading books, following courses  myself to improve all the knowledge we need to restore the ecosystem of our farm.  And the vision we are developing in the last couple of months is more and more that we  have the responsibility for the complete ecosystem and yes, this ecosystem is also producing  our food.  
**[0:17:15-0:17:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:17:15):**  And that gives us a lot of thinking of how we can improve biodiversity, what can we do  more for our soil as we are doing already.  What can we plant in terms of wood, like trees on the farm, more as we have already.  And that makes us… well because the production is going so well we can think about these  themes and that gives a lot of hope for next year.  
**[0:17:44-0:17:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:17:44):**  Yeah, no, I can imagine.  And let's talk a bit about scalability and replicating this model.  How did you start with that?  I mean it's one thing to start in one place but it's another thing, a whole completely  different thing to from the beginning actually have scalability in mind.  
**[0:18:04-0:18:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:18:04):**  Can you explain a bit what's your vision there and what's happening actually now  on the ground with all these other cities and villages that are somewhere in the process  of setting up their own Heerenboren?  Yeah, exactly.  Well, what's happening here in the Netherlands and I think I see that all over Europe and  
**[0:18:20-0:18:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:18:20):**  other places in the world as well, there are a lot of entrepreneurs working on their own  concept and how big they are as an entrepreneur.  The problem here at least in my surroundings is that there are always forces, forces you  need as in politicians or government or etc.  They are telling you constantly, okay, what you're doing is nice but it's not the  
**[0:18:47-0:18:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:18:47):**  solution for all the crisis we are dealing with within the sector at the moment.  So it's a kind of the point of, okay, nice try but you're not a serious, I can't  take you seriously.  So when we started thinking of this foreign concept, we had one of the principles we based  the concept on was it should be scalable.  
**[0:19:11-0:19:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:19:11):**  The moment that we would start to scale the model is at the moment that came a lot quicker  as we thought.  But from beginning on, we were telling all the people this is not just one farm.  We are going to work on at least 100 farms in the Netherlands and therefore when we started  putting that out, there were a lot of organizations and foundations, government but also our universities  
**[0:19:46-0:19:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:19:46):**  who said, okay, this is probably the first concept in the Netherlands that is trying  not to stick to a farm for own benefit.  This is a movement and with this movement, we can maybe, we can make a change and I hope  we are an example for a lot of that we can have that function to be an example for a  lot of other people who say that they want to scale their movement themselves because  
**[0:20:15-0:20:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:20:15):**  it's not our movement that can make the change.  We should go work together with a lot of other people who have the energy and the time to  build their own movement but I think we are having the benefits of being one of the first,  if not the first movement in the Netherlands that is working on scale from the beginning  and that brought a lot of attention from the beginning on even when there was not even  
**[0:20:44-0:20:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:20:44):**  a farm in Baxl.  So just putting out the wish to grow was enough to get all the attention and then when you  get the attention, there is a kind of snowball effect we engaged and that made the whole  thing move.  As in, we started in Baxl with also little things as a website and Facebook and Twitter  
**[0:21:11-0:21:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:21:11):**  and well you are sending out a message but the other hand is that you will be found and  we were found by a lot of people also in the cities and other places in the Netherlands  and they started asking us please give us a farm nearby as well and that was in the  face that we didn't even have one farm up and running.  And what was your response to that when somebody asked I am living in Amsterdam or I am living  
**[0:21:39-0:21:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:21:39):**  in Utrecht which is not just for the people listening, not super close to Baxl and I would  say I want something like this near my place.  What was your answer?  What is your answer when somebody asks that?  First of all the answer is follow us.  
**[0:21:54-0:21:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:21:54):**  Join the movement and if you want to have your own farm nearby you have to work yourself  because we are not like a traditional McDonald's franchisee, copy paste.  Exactly.  So it's not our goal to create 100 farms.  We are preparing our organisation to service people who want to have their own farm.  
**[0:22:20-0:22:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:22:20):**  So there is always energy needed from local people and if there is no energy locally we  are not going to introduce ourselves over there.  So the main thing we respond to people is okay you want to have a farm start up your  community.  Start to find soul mates who also want their farm in our concept and when you have at least  
**[0:22:45-0:22:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:22:45):**  actually we are already starting to work together from a group of six households locally who  said we are really going to pull on this project, we are going to find these people, our soul  mates who also want to have their own farm.  And when we have found these four of the six families we are starting to make a little  contract and from that contract on they have the responsibility to find at least 150 households,  
**[0:23:21-0:23:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:23:21):**  members, families and on a parallel we are trying to find the ground, the soil, the land.  That's what we are trying to find at that moment in a parallel from seeking on the families  and we are also trying to find the farmer because we have one challenge here and that  is that our farmers are always specialized in producing one product and on a farm they  have to do about everything that exists in that way.  
**[0:23:55-0:24:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:23:55):**  So that are two parallel things we are starting up and every time they reach a new milestone  like the first milestone is at 100 families we can also take another step and that step  involves investment from our side in money and energy and time so every time they reach  a milestone we can have another step towards making the farm concrete.  And as a customer or as a part of a cooperative does the food get to my place?  
**[0:24:35-0:24:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:24:35):**  I know I don't have to work on the farm if I don't want to, there is no obligation if  I want to of course I can do my gym and work out and help the farmer.  If I don't the food will survive.  Can I choose my products?  What if I don't like something?  
**[0:24:49-0:24:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:24:49):**  How does that concretely work?  Okay what they do, what we do is once or twice a year we are sending out this form to our  members on which they can apply what they want that the farm should produce the next  season.  So we are really getting back so about 80% of the forms we get in return and we are analyzing  
**[0:25:18-0:25:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:25:18):**  these forms on the products for the next season.  The main reason we do that is for the vegetables.  So that's the way people get influence on what the farm produces and we are also organizing  little events for people to test the taste of our food.  So that has more to do with the meat production.  
**[0:25:42-0:25:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:25:42):**  Is this the kind of meat I want to eat?  Is this the right species of pigs or chicken we want to have here on the farm?  And in that way we are gathering the information out of the community depending on what we  are producing and how we are producing it and that gives us an average production.  So we are not producing on a personal level your wishes but we have an average production  
**[0:26:08-0:26:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:26:08):**  all over these community members and when the products are ready it's up to the community  what they want.  Do you want to come to the farm and pick up your food or do you want us to arrange pickup  points or do you want us to arrange the delivery at home?  At this moment 95% of our members they want to come on a weekly base to their own farm.  
**[0:26:33-0:26:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:26:33):**  They say you are not going to keep me away from my farm.  We want to come over here and we want to get our products and what we do concrete is that  people at a Saturday or a Wednesday afternoon they come on the farm and they really pick  the vegetables from the field while they are still growing.  So we are cutting them off in front of our members.  
**[0:26:59-0:27:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:26:59):**  We are harvesting our products in front of them.  So they really choose what they want to eat.  But just to be clear if they don't want that in the budget in the plan it can still arrive  at home.  There is for the percentage of people that don't want to go every Saturday to their farm  
**[0:27:15-0:27:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:27:15):**  the food is delivered at a pickup point or how does that work if I am a more lazy farmer?  At the moment the cooperative decided that while 95% of the people wanted to get to the  farm every week and pick it up so in Boxhall we did not do any preparations for other delivery  services.  So right now at the moment you can feel the conversation is restarted.  
**[0:27:46-0:27:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:27:46):**  With new people joining there might be less involved so there will be a solution decided  by the cooperative to make sure the food gets to the right places.  And the people who are already members for a longer period I experience that it is quite  nice for a couple of first times to get to a new place and a new concept and what we  see right now is that convenience is also something we have to deal with.  
**[0:28:17-0:28:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:28:17):**  Yeah sure I can imagine.  And I want to be very conscious of your time.  I want to end with a question which I might open a can of worms but what is the role or  could be the role if there is of impact investing of investment money into a system like this?  It seems to be very focused on local energy, local resources because people actually put  
**[0:28:40-0:28:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:28:40):**  the money upfront to rent the land and to prepare the land for their farm.  Is there a role you see in the scalability in the businesses on top of maybe a hundred  farms what do you see as if there is a group of smart impact investors hopefully listen  to this podcast and they say I want to do something in this.  Not just being a customer of course you should start your own farm locally close to your  
**[0:29:02-0:29:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:29:02):**  city but what can be their role with their investment amount.  I see two main different goals.  First of all there is a goal we have to buy the land sometimes.  We are not buying the land locally with the cooperative but on the central organization  here in Nederland we are on the market to buy land so we can hire it to the cooperative  
**[0:29:33-0:29:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:29:33):**  and sometimes when there is no foundation we can hire the land from locally we are on  the market so we are looking for people to help with that.  So that's the first thing really buy land with us.  That's the first thing and more basic and more necessary on the short term is that this  movement is growing so fast that we feel our organization is having problems to keep up  
**[0:30:06-0:30:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:30:06):**  with the growth coming from the outside.  Keeping up with the demand yeah that's a good problem to have.  Yeah exactly it's luxury but you can see that our break even from the national staff organization  is about is between the 2025 farms.  Because the break even in this case means because yes the farms are cooperative.  
**[0:30:28-0:30:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:30:28):**  Heerenbuden itself is a company and every farm pays a certain amount every year for  all the assistance for the setting up etc to Heerenbuden so you can make yourself sustainable  with you mentioned 25 farms right?  Exactly and up till that moment we need funding to get our organization up and running.  So that's also part we are very curious to find some investors to join us not just for  
**[0:30:56-0:31:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:30:56):**  making a lot of profit because that's not the goal of our organization.  Our profits are more than just financially we are actually producing happy people and  a lot of biodiversity and nice food and yes we also have a financial chapter and I'd like  to invite people to come and watch in that chapter what we can do together.  Well a lot of money is needed to get this as big as I think it can be but from 2025  
**[0:31:28-0:31:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:31:28):**  farms there is a point that it will be self-sustaining.  Sustaining and propelling yeah it will start growing.  I think also because you have a lot of interest from abroad I can imagine I mean a lot of  similar situations are happening in the UK in France the agriculture is under the traditional  chemical agriculture is under pressure.  
**[0:31:48-0:31:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:31:48):**  We have a lot of journalists and other interested people from a lot of countries in Europe at  the moment and therefore I think but yeah it is our concept so I hope I may say that  I think this deserves embraced and put a little bit further as it is right now and we cannot  do that alone we need a lot of other people other than I think not only just in the Netherlands.  I want to thank you so much Geert for your time and sharing your lessons learned in setting  
**[0:32:17-0:32:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:32:17):**  up this new concept this different concept in terms of agriculture consumers and prosumers  everything in between and I will definitely be checking in to see how the others are setting  up and to check in on projects abroad etc to follow here in Britain as far and as long  as possible.  Yeah you are really welcome to do that thank you for that.  
**[0:32:40-0:32:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:32:40):**  Thank you so much.  Okay thank you.  You just listened to an interview with Geert van de Veer we talked about how to scale a  movement a movement built on active consumers how to get it to all of the Netherlands and  how to get it to Europe as well because without scalability we're going to be just doing small  
**[0:32:56-0:33:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:32:56):**  scale farms and that isn't enough to really get the change we need.  Thank you for making the time to listen to this podcast and making it all the way till  the end.  I hope you enjoyed it as much as I did.  If you have any comments or ideas for future guests please share them on SoundCloud or  
**[0:33:12-0:33:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:33:12):**  Twitter and if you think this content is relevant or interesting for someone else please feel  free to share the interview and I hope to see you again here soon for more of these  type of interviews.  If you found the investing in regenerative agriculture and food podcast valuable there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  
**[0:33:28-0:33:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:33:28):**  Number one rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  It's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few seconds.  Number two share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means please join  my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  
**[0:33:50-0:33:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:33:50):**  You can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or in the description  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food.  
**[0:34:32-0:34:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:34:32):**  How to put money to work in regenerating soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while  doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After a hundred interviews and more than a hundred hours of audio asking the question  how to put money to work in regenerating soils and I've been following the space since 2011  
**[0:34:48-0:34:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:34:48):**  and recording this podcast since 2016 we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision-making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  
**[0:35:03-0:35:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:35:03):**  What questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  
**[0:35:10-0:35:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:35:10):**  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  You the soil builders and investors in this space.  The soil builders people working in this space entrepreneurial farmers fund managers vehicle  builders crowd investing platform builders egg tech companies farm to gut food companies  
**[0:35:26-0:35:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:35:26):**  permaculture key line designers holistic management consultants etc etc people that are building  soil at scale and the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family  office or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work  through foundations institutional capital banks insurance companies etc.  Is this course free?  
**[0:35:47-0:35:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:35:47):**  No this is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  that among the listeners of this podcast we have people with very different means.  So I'm inviting you if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  
**[0:36:08-0:36:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:36:08):**  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to ride along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  
**[0:36:23-0:36:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:36:23):**  is so risky how to invest what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build what to  invest in what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports what  kind of interviews what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  
**[0:36:44-0:36:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:36:44):**  We're going to look at nutrient density landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  
**[0:36:58-0:37:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/20/geert-van-der-veer/#t=0:36:58):**  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment please find professional investment advice.  So get ready get a cup of coffee a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking click on the  link below sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  