### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2017-36-22)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  You are going to listen to an interview with Rene Chang and we are going to talk about  the challenges and opportunities on how to get institutional investors on board with  
**[0:00:21-0:00:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:00:21):**  regenerative agriculture.  And also what is the role of high net worth individuals, foundations and family offices  in this revolution.  Enjoy!  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture.  
**[0:00:35-0:00:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:00:35):**  Investing as if the planet mattered.  Podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  
**[0:00:53-0:00:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:00:53):**  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much  more attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  Before we get started, I have been recording these interviews next to my day job and I  
**[0:01:13-0:01:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:01:13):**  will definitely continue to do so and release about an episode a month.  But at the same time I would love to take this further.  Share more interviews, there are many more stories to share on investing in regenerative  food and agriculture.  More depth, improve the quality, maybe even doing some video series.  
**[0:01:29-0:01:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:01:29):**  So I started a Patreon community which makes it easy to support creators like myself.  If these podcasts have been of value to you and if you have the means, I invite you to  support me and make this happen.  For more information please find the link to my Patreon account in the description below.  And now without further ado, the interview.  
**[0:01:50-0:01:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:01:50):**  Enjoy!  Welcome to Investing in Regenerative Agriculture, investing as if the planet mattered.  I'm Koen Van Zeyen, your host, and in the podcast of today I'm joined by Renée Chang,  founder of Pontera Partners, a natural capital investment specialist.  She works with investors to identify and invest in sustainable, profit generating, environmental  
**[0:02:09-0:02:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:02:09):**  and real asset strategies.  To do the investment research, strategy analysis, but also the deal negotiations.  We're gonna have a lot to talk about I think.  Welcome Renée!  Thank you Koen!  
**[0:02:19-0:02:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:02:19):**  So to start with, as I like to do, a personal question.  How did you end up in regenerative agriculture and the investment side of things?  Kind of in a roundabout way but also in a very very fortunate way.  So my background is in private equity.  I've been doing that in both San Francisco and London for quite a few years.  
**[0:02:38-0:02:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:02:38):**  But then deep inside my heart, my passion has always been conservation, environmental  conservation.  So about 2010 I basically decided that I will leave private equity, leave London and try  to move to South America to start doing some environmental volunteering work.  That was my goal.  
**[0:02:58-0:03:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:02:58):**  But when I moved down to Buenos Aires in Argentina, I ended up being introduced to a sustainable  agriculture company that has a very long term vision of what environmental sustainability  should look like.  They care a ton about conservation and wildlife and biodiversity and they happened to need  help looking at new investment opportunities.  
**[0:03:21-0:03:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:03:21):**  So they basically asked me to help them and they became my first client.  I helped them analyze and evaluate investment opportunities that they wanted to look at.  So in a way it has worked out really well because it allows me to combine my skill set  in private equity investing with my passion for the environment.  And through this first client I started to learn more and more about agriculture and  
**[0:03:47-0:03:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:03:47):**  then soon after that I learned about regenerative agriculture.  And so it kind of all kind of snowballs from there.  Wow that's a great coincidence that you met them there.  And how did the transition from, not even a transition but going from I'm focused on  conservation to looking at agriculture, was it a gradual place or did it happen, was there  
**[0:04:10-0:04:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:04:10):**  a specific moment where you saw how important agriculture could be for conservation?  Yeah, well when I was in finance, when I was in private equity, I was a generalist.  I was looking at all sectors, in many ways not conservation focused.  But for sure not.  But during that time I started looking at red carbon credits, reduction emissions for  
**[0:04:37-0:04:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:04:37):**  deforestation, degradation.  And I started looking at that and thinking that well potentially maybe that's something  that I can shift my career towards, to look at forestry carbon.  But then the Copenhagen conference in 2009, it didn't really turn out well.  The US didn't agree to that.  
**[0:04:56-0:05:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:04:56):**  And so I realized okay maybe there's actually not a very sure future for forestry carbon  at least at that time.  And then it was also by coincidence that I met the sustainable agriculture company.  So I basically just shifted my focus towards agriculture.  And that's when I realized actually the whole world needs to eat food regardless.  
**[0:05:14-0:05:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:05:14):**  There's a lot to do.  There are a lot of issues, environmental issues surrounding modern agriculture.  So I thought maybe this is what I should actually focus more of my time on.  And the next few clients after that, they all became agriculture related opportunities.  And so I just kind of gained my knowledge and gained my knowledge and gained my interest  
**[0:05:34-0:05:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:05:34):**  that way.  And so now even though Bonterra Partners looks at different types of natural capital investments,  I would say agriculture is pretty much the most important bit of what I do in addition  to say fisheries and forestry, etc.  And if you look at agriculture and what you've seen in the past years in terms of regenerative  
**[0:05:54-0:06:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:05:54):**  agriculture, what has been the most inspirational example you have seen both maybe from an investor  point of view or from the agriculture company point of view?  What was the one that really, really stood out?  I think I have seen the evolution and pickup of holistic management grazing of how just  even I would say six, seven years ago, very, very few have heard of it or those have heard  
**[0:06:23-0:06:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:06:23):**  of it, they don't believe in it.  Yeah, it's very hard to believe it seems for livestock farmers that there is another way  possible.  Exactly.  And now in 2000, you know, starting 2000, I would say maybe 15 and after you start hearing  
**[0:06:37-0:06:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:06:37):**  big NGOs talking about, yes, we can actually work with ranchers, we don't need to get rid  of all the cattle and sheep, you know, we actually want to support them and work with  them to figure out how to graze them in a sustainable regenerative way by using intensive  rotational grazing, or holistic plant grazing, whatever you want to call it.  So I think I have definitely seen the big change in that, which is very encouraging  
**[0:06:57-0:07:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:06:57):**  to me.  And then I think another thing that American farmers are looking more and more at is now  they're considering, okay, cover crops, that's actually quite important.  So I see that they are embracing that more and more and also no till slowly.  I think no till is still generally like a pretty new concept in the US.  
**[0:07:20-0:07:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:07:20):**  But the truth is in Brazil and Argentina, for example, they've been doing it for a  long, long time.  So it's, so it's good for me to see that American farmers are kind of shifting towards that  way as well.  And from an investor perspective, what are the big changes you've seen there?  
**[0:07:37-0:07:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:07:37):**  From the investor side, especially from say, high net worth individuals, family offices,  you know, the more progressive type of investors.  What I've seen is, say, from five or six years ago, they would, very few of them would have  even considered investing in sustainable agriculture.  Now by now, I feel like they, they have heard of regenerative agriculture, they have now  
**[0:08:03-0:08:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:08:03):**  heard of holistic management, they have now heard of, say, other things such as key line  farming, and incorporating multiple crops together on the same farm, mixed cropping  and all that.  They are definitely warming up to the idea.  And now, some of them are saying, actually, we want to start investing in the sector because  
**[0:08:23-0:08:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:08:23):**  we understand how important it is.  So I think that's good.  But that's actually at the, at the more progressive type, that only applies to the more progressive,  smaller investors, I would say.  So that would be institutional investors, you know, the large pension funds, university  
**[0:08:39-0:08:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:08:39):**  endowments, etc.  They are still moving very slowly.  I don't think many of them are really looking at sustainable agriculture, let alone regenerative  agriculture investments at this point.  And for, let's unpack both of them, actually.  
**[0:08:55-0:09:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:08:55):**  For these institutions, what are the biggest barriers for them to get into this space?  For the large institutional investors, you mean?  Yeah, for the large ones.  Yeah.  Yeah.  
**[0:09:07-0:09:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:09:07):**  The way they work is, you know, you try to pitch an idea to somebody on the investment  team, but who makes the ultimate say is, of course, the investment committee.  And in other cases, it could be the ultimate, the shareholders of the organization.  And so for these people to convince the investment committees and the shareholders to invest  in something, it needs to be something that's quite straightforward and simple and can be  
**[0:09:30-0:09:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:09:30):**  easily explained.  A bit boring, basically.  It has to be boring.  It has to be boring or else the investment committee will not understand what it is.  Hence, you know, with a lot of the large agricultural opportunities such as monoculture, GMO, corn  
**[0:09:46-0:09:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:09:46):**  soil rotation, or just investing in cattle that's being fed in a feedlot, all of those,  they're actually quite easy to understand for the investment committee.  So it's much easier for those investments to be approved than for you to try to present  a regenerative agriculture opportunity to them and hoping that they will invest in it  because regenerative agriculture and mother nature by itself is more complex.  
**[0:10:13-0:10:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:10:13):**  Regenerative agriculture investments or just practicing or implementing regenerative agriculture  operations, in general, they require a lot more thinking.  They require more planning.  And sometimes, depending on what it is, it could require a bit more labor.  So all in all, you kind of add all these things up.  
**[0:10:30-0:10:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:10:30):**  It just becomes something that's not as easy to understand.  And it will be much harder, I would think, at this point for someone from a pension fund  to explain to the investment committee members why they should invest in a, say, mixed cropping,  farming business where you combine different permanent crops with some maybe annual grasses,  annual crops, and how that's all going to mix together with, say, different livestock.  
**[0:10:55-0:11:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:10:55):**  So I think to them, it's just not simple enough, which is unfortunate because from my point  of view, regenerative agriculture, the beauty of that is it actually mimics nature, which,  like I said previously, is not that straightforward.  It's a bit more complex and it requires more adaptation and thinking and planning.  And the role of these institutions, especially pension funds and insurance companies, could  
**[0:11:18-0:11:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:11:18):**  be transformational in the sector because not only because of the amount of capital  they hold, but also because of the supposedly long-term view they should have because they're  going to be there for a while.  But yeah, the systems and the processes internally have to probably catch up with what's happening  in the impact space in general, but especially in agriculture.  
**[0:11:44-0:11:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:11:44):**  And I think at the end of the day, for them, the ultimate goal and their primary fiduciary  duty to their shareholders is actually financial return.  And so I think the...  It would be nice to have a living planet.  Right, exactly.  
**[0:12:01-0:12:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:12:01):**  I absolutely agree.  The shareholders should think about, do I want there to be a planet for my grandchildren  to live in?  But maybe they don't think that far yet.  So yeah, so basically I think for regenerative agriculture investments, they basically see  
**[0:12:17-0:12:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:12:17):**  that as something that's very new.  It hasn't been fully proven.  And yet the financial return may just be similar to what they see from a conventional agriculture  investment.  So I think from their standpoint, they're like, the risk reward profile is not quite  
**[0:12:35-0:12:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:12:35):**  there yet.  It's easier to go for the ones you've already done and done before.  Or ones you have already seen, even though some of them may have failed in the past.  But at least they understand the risk.  Okay, if I plant GMO corn and soy, then my biggest risk would be say input cost and the  
**[0:12:53-0:12:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:12:53):**  climate.  But then they don't question, will there be skills?  Will I have an issue hiring somebody to run a tractor down that farm?  Those are not issues that they need to worry about.  But for regenerative agriculture, I think the skills and the experience in the sector  
**[0:13:12-0:13:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:13:12):**  overall, that's just slowly building up.  So I think that's another challenge for regenerative agriculture investment currently is, it's  hard for you to find, it's not that easy to find skilled operators out there who have  done it for many years and who can run the farm in a regenerative way for you.  They are around, but there are just not many.  
**[0:13:34-0:13:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:13:34):**  Yeah, I think it's actually one of the main challenges we have.  We don't have too many people that can really work the land well in a regenerative way at  scale considering all the economic costs and everything involved.  It's a very, very small group and they have many options to choose from.  So it's not that easy to get them to the one you want them to go to.  
**[0:14:00-0:14:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:14:00):**  Exactly.  I mean, a lot of them, they actually have their own farms and they're making quite a  good profit.  So it's not their intention to go and raise a fund and work with investors.  They're happy on their own farm.  
**[0:14:14-0:14:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:14:14):**  Yeah, why would they?  To go through all that trouble if their farm is doing well and their lifestyle, of course,  they work incredibly hard.  They can do what they love the most, which is working on the land.  Exactly.  
**[0:14:27-0:14:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:14:27):**  As opposed to having to pitch to investors who then ask you, what is this about?  What is the difference between a steer and a heifer and a cow?  Things like that.  So, yeah.  Yeah, we can't blame them actually to not do that.  
**[0:14:42-0:14:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:14:42):**  But we do need them to do it.  And then do you see, because I saw some announcements and read some reports on some larger funds  being announced, and especially one you have been interacting with and also worked on a  report with them, which is the Land Neutral Degradation Fund, and I'm probably mixing  up the name now.  
**[0:15:03-0:15:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:15:03):**  Can you explain a bit what they are about?  Because they are just launched, I think, two or three weeks ago, but they've been in the  making for a while.  Is this something that these institutional investors could grab and could get behind?  Yeah.  
**[0:15:18-0:15:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:15:18):**  So the Land Degradation Neutrality Fund, the LDN fund, is, I would say, as a partnership  between Mirova, which is an impact investment firm that's based in Paris, together with  the UNCCD, which is the United Nations Convention to Combat De-certification.  So the idea of the LDN fund is an impact investment fund that is going to use a blended finance  structure that will bring in both public and private money to invest in projects around  
**[0:15:53-0:15:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:15:53):**  the world that will restore or regenerate degraded land.  And so a lot of the projects that they're considering, for example, would be in the  agriculture and forestry space, not just in developing countries, but also in developed  countries.  And the idea for them is to, for example, first bring in the public financing, whether  
**[0:16:16-0:16:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:16:16):**  it's from a DFI or government, the public financing will take the most risky tranche  of the structure.  And then hopefully then with that, they can bring in some private impact investment money  to take the less risky bit of the capital and use that to provide financing for projects  around the world that shows the potential to restore degraded land.  
**[0:16:41-0:16:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:16:41):**  Which is a huge step for the sector.  I think there hasn't been any blended capital or layered capital funds of this size, at  least that I have seen that are so focused on soil land degradation and agriculture.  Yeah, exactly.  And basically with the UN, one of their sustainable development goals is to restore, is to keep  
**[0:17:07-0:17:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:17:07):**  land at a neutral state, so restore degraded land.  And they realise that relying on just public funding and philanthropy, that's not going  to be sufficient.  And so that's why they believe that they should try to come up with a blended finance vehicle  that will try to, that can try to bring in private capital without letting the private  
**[0:17:30-0:17:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:17:30):**  investors take on all the risks so that their DFI is willing to come in and take the more  risky tranche, like I said, and use that to start to build up a vehicle.  And this is, the LDN Fund's ambition is not for this to be the only fund.  They hope that this will just be fund one and then there will be other funds in the  future.  
**[0:17:49-0:17:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:17:49):**  Because like you said, the amount of capital that's required to restore the amount of degraded  land around the world and provide people with, sustain the livelihoods and provide food for  people, a lot of capital needs to go into that space.  Many times this fund.  Yes.  
**[0:18:05-0:18:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:18:05):**  And is this, these type of structures from your experience with institutional investors  that maybe are looking at this space and are thinking and knowing that they have to become  active and they want to become active, but of course they have, like we discussed, the  structures and the processes inside to make it difficult.  Are these type of structures, maybe not specifically this fund, and of course it's difficult to  
**[0:18:27-0:18:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:18:27):**  look into the heads of pension fund investors, but are these type of structures, the structures  and the language that they speak more easily?  So maybe this could mean more of the institutional money becomes available.  I think the institutional money could be interested later on, say by say a fund three or fund  four, after they have seen how the first one or two funds have performed.  
**[0:18:51-0:18:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:18:51):**  Because I think as I mentioned earlier, for most of these pension funds, the financial  return is still of primary concern to them.  So I think if it's just a fund one or two, they may say, well, we don't quite know the  track record of this yet.  We don't even know if this concept of putting money through a blended structure into LDN  
**[0:19:11-0:19:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:19:11):**  type of projects is going to work.  So let's wait and see.  And also the LDN fund, for example, and usually a lot of these blended finance structures  usually are not aiming to deliver very high market rate return to investors.  So unless I would say, unless an institutional investor actually has impact in mind or actually  
**[0:19:34-0:19:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:19:34):**  has an impact investment program in mind where they are willing or they are ready to accept  slightly lower market rate returns because they want to support certain causes, I still  think maybe this type of funds or vehicles probably won't be the type of investments  that some of these large institutional investors will invest in until later on, or unless someone  can come up with a fund structure that actually will allow these investors to receive a stellar  
**[0:20:06-0:20:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:20:06):**  market rate return, then they'll be like, oh, it's no brainer.  I can get my high return and at the same time be supporting impact.  Which is of course the holy grail.  But for you, the first, let's say the first few funds or these structures will be mainly  invested probably by the progressive high net worth individuals, the larger family offices  
**[0:20:25-0:20:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:20:25):**  that are maybe already comfortable with at least understanding the return of agriculture.  If you look at this group and you've worked with them, what are for them the main challenges  if you are a high net worth individual and wanting to get into this space and wanting  to put your money to work?  What would be the main challenges for them?  
**[0:20:49-0:20:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:20:49):**  Yeah.  Well, I think in addition to high net worths and family offices, I think foundations, for  example, could be another possibility.  So thinking of those three groups, the challenge I find often working with different family  offices, high net worth individuals, foundations, et cetera, is they're sometimes almost too  
**[0:21:10-0:21:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:21:10):**  specific in terms of the type of causes they want to support.  The example I like to give, for example, would be, no, not only do I want to support forestry,  I want to support local redwood trees in my state.  That becomes very specific.  An example could be fisheries.  
**[0:21:30-0:21:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:21:30):**  Not only do I want to support fisheries, I want to support salmon and trout only because  I'm just not as interested in other species.  So I think with some of the investors, even though they're progressive, but if they have  very specific causes they want to support, which is not a bad thing, then I think a fund  such as the Eldian Fund that is going to invest worldwide because they do want to be diversified,  
**[0:21:56-0:22:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:21:56):**  they want to go into different sectors, different countries, then I think some of these investors  may say, well, sorry, it sounds great, but it's not going to be my cup of tea.  So I think that's one.  The other thing would be a similar, a very common due diligence question that all investors  would ask, which would be, can the Eldian Fund team, do they have the capability to  
**[0:22:19-0:22:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:22:19):**  execute?  Given that this is a first fund, they're trying to invest worldwide in all sorts of sectors,  do they have the knowledge and expertise to find the good deals, to negotiate good deals?  How are they going to evaluate and monitor the impact?  All of those questions.  
**[0:22:38-0:22:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:22:38):**  But that's pretty typical, whether you're investing in impact or not.  You're basically asking about the management team's capability.  And when you work with these, let's say family offices, high net worth individuals and foundations,  as you've been doing for many years, what were some case studies of successful ones  and maybe if we can also non-successful ones of deals you looked at, some farms you looked  
**[0:23:06-0:23:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:23:06):**  at, really things that stood out and that showed maybe the progress as well that we  hopefully have made as a regenerative agriculture sector and where we stand now?  Yeah, looking at actually, I did some work for actually an impact investment fund.  So not a foundation or a high net worth, but then this impact investment fund that they  have been very good at going out there to find good deals to invest in that are, they  
**[0:23:38-0:23:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:23:38):**  invest in companies in Latin America and basically they go for triple bottom line impact and  they have just been very good and disciplined in terms of doing that.  And so for me, being able to see that they were able to raise, to have not just a fund  one but also a fund two and now currently raising fund three, to me that's very encouraging.  And you look at some of the portfolio companies, what they have done, they are exactly the  
**[0:24:08-0:24:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:24:08):**  type of regenerative agriculture type of opportunities that we're talking about and where they're  working with small holder farmers and they are creating social impact and they're delivering  healthy food for consumers, et cetera.  And so for me that's success, but that actually requires my client, that impact investment  fund to have a local team based in Latin America and being out there constantly networking  
**[0:24:37-0:24:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:24:37):**  and sourcing deals and monitoring the investments.  So that's one that I can think of that has gone very well.  Can you name the fund?  Yeah, I like them a lot so I can actually name them.  It's Eco Enterprises Fund.  
**[0:24:51-0:24:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:24:51):**  I figured.  Yeah.  Yeah.  So that's one example.  And then I've done some work looking at Chile, for example, and you have interviewed Paul  
**[0:25:03-0:25:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:25:03):**  McMahon at SLM and so together we looked at what can we do again in South America that  will allow us to restore degraded land and at the same time do something that's profitable  and scalable.  And so we were able to find an operator to help us lead that effort in Chile, which is  great because like I mentioned earlier, it's really hard to find good operators.  
**[0:25:26-0:25:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:25:26):**  And now currently SLM is fundraising for that.  So I'm definitely hoping that fundraising will go well and that we can start doing something  in Chile.  Basically, there will be buying land in Chile and Patagonia and using holistic management  grazing to produce, to do sheep production, producing both sustainable wool and sustainable  
**[0:25:48-0:25:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:25:48):**  lamb and lamb meat.  So there is that.  And then I can think of one case where I wouldn't call it a failure because my client did not  make the investment in the end, but basically through the due diligence process, we've realized  that even though this investment could be something very good for the environment, the  
**[0:26:08-0:26:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:26:08):**  financial return just wouldn't meet that criteria, wouldn't meet the target that my client had.  And in this case, it's actually looking at reforestation of native hardwood species in  Latin America.  So it would basically require buying land and planting high value native hardwood species,  such as say mahogany or Spanish coca-cola wood.  
**[0:26:33-0:26:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:26:33):**  It's great for the environment and for my client, who I cannot name in this case, unfortunately,  but they have a very, very long-term view.  So they're in actually in a way in no real hurry for any exit.  But basically after we did due diligence by going into different countries to talk to  people who have been doing it for a while, we've realized that it's very good for the  
**[0:26:55-0:26:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:26:55):**  environment.  It's great for biodiversity.  However, the financial return is really not guaranteed because growing a mahogany tree  really takes 40, 50 years.  And it's really hard to know whether it's actually going to grow well and have that  
**[0:27:10-0:27:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:27:10):**  type of production and yield that you're expecting.  And so I think even for my client in this case, who is definitely a patient, very patient  investor, waiting 45 years, 40, 50 years and not knowing what the result would be, it just  doesn't make sense from a financial perspective.  So in the end, we decided to not go ahead with this project.  
**[0:27:31-0:27:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:27:31):**  So I think it's one of those where it is great.  It can have great environmental and even social impact by creating jobs.  But unfortunately, financially, I just don't think it's prudent to do so.  Yeah, no, of course.  And in terms of, let's say for the next year or so, what do you see or what do you hope  
**[0:27:49-0:27:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:27:49):**  for?  What do you see happening in this space?  If we would talk in September 2018, what do you think we will be discussing in terms of  regenerative agriculture and impact investing?  Good question.  
**[0:28:04-0:28:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:28:04):**  I think on one hand, regenerative agriculture, like I mentioned earlier, has gotten bigger  in the last five years and more people know about it, which is great.  But overall, it's not your typical high tech deal where things move so quickly.  So I think my view is probably in a year's time, if you and I were to sit down and have  a chat again, we'll still be wondering how to bring in more capital into the regenerative  
**[0:28:33-0:28:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:28:33):**  agriculture investment space.  I actually don't think too much is going to change between now and the next 12 months.  I would be glad to be proven wrong.  I'll be very happy if that's actually not the case.  But looking at how some of the regenerative agriculture investments out there have been  
**[0:28:50-0:28:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:28:50):**  trying to fundraise and that they have been finding it challenging, I actually don't see  why things would be too different 12 months from now unless something happens to the economy  or unless all of a sudden people realise that really the way that they have been doing modern  day agriculture, saying the corn belt with your typical corn, soy, all of that all of  a sudden has just gone down the drain in terms of financial terms.  
**[0:29:17-0:29:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:29:17):**  I think that's when it will cause people to rethink, okay, now I really need to do something  differently.  That just did not work.  So what should I consider?  How about if I think about doing things in a more regenerative way so that I can minimise  
**[0:29:28-0:29:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:29:28):**  my costs and hopefully increase my profit?  I think something will have to happen on the financial side, on the profit bottom line  that will cause people to rethink.  And I think with regards to impact investors, I think what I would like to see slowly, maybe  not within the next 12 months, but at least over the next few years is for impact investors  
**[0:29:53-0:29:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:29:53):**  to figure out what do they really want.  I think if you ask impact investors, a lot of them will tell you they want both the financial  return and the impact.  But if you really question further and ask deeper, what they really want is actually  the financial return and that hopefully the impact will be there.  
**[0:30:15-0:30:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:30:15):**  But I would just say and encourage them to just choose one.  If you really want to go with a financial return, that is fine.  But if you really care about the impact, I think there are so many opportunities for  you out there to back some of these emerging fund managers or emerging companies, social  environmental enterprises out there that is actually really trying to do something great,  
**[0:30:39-0:30:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:30:39):**  trying to do something that's regenerative.  Give them a chance.  Your financial return may not be great or you may have to wait for a long time.  They may be able to create huge positive impact on society.  So fund those people and there are plenty of those out there that require funding.  
**[0:30:57-0:31:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:30:57):**  Yeah, and I can see that also as field building and of course with part of your portfolio,  but be courageous there and maybe back once in a while something a bit less with a smaller  track record or which could create a huge positive impact and might create, if everything  goes well, of course also a financial return.  Would that be your main advice?  
**[0:31:26-0:31:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:31:26):**  Because of course everybody that's listening to this podcast is already fully on board  on regenerative agriculture and probably hopefully has sold all exposure to the Corn Belt and  to GMO, soy and corn, etc.  What would be your advice to the impact investors that are ready to get into this space?  They have maybe part of their portfolio available for this, maybe the full one.  
**[0:31:53-0:31:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:31:53):**  How do you get exposure across the value chain basically to regenerative agriculture?  Where should I start looking?  I think it depends on the amount of capital that one has available.  If one is more interested in making several small investments, then I think potentially  there are some opportunities in the AgTech, agriculture technology space, that could be  
**[0:32:21-0:32:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:32:21):**  interesting.  Some of them are actually very focused on trying to help farmers with practicing regenerative  agriculture or a better way to understand the soil, etc.  So there are companies like that.  So I think that's one way to invest.  
**[0:32:36-0:32:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:32:36):**  If you're a family office with a sizable amount of capital that's readily available to invest,  consider some of the real asset opportunities, backing, either doing it yourself or going  through an investment fund that's trying to buy farmland and implement regenerative agriculture  strategies.  Back those people.  
**[0:32:58-0:33:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:32:58):**  There are some of them out there doing something that's very interesting, I think.  So that will be one way to deploy the capital because obviously farmland is expensive and  it's hard for us to convince the institutional investors, like we said at this time, to put  money into those opportunities.  So if you are a high net worth individual or a family office that's progressive, that's  
**[0:33:23-0:33:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:33:23):**  definitely the one space that I would look at.  Great.  Thank you so much.  I want to thank you for your time and we'll definitely be checking in, let's say in a  year from now and see if you were wrong or right.  
**[0:33:36-0:33:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:33:36):**  Yeah, I hope I will be wrong actually.  So yeah, definitely we'll be happy to check in.  Thank you, Kun.  Thank you so much.  You just listened to an interview with Rene Chung, founder of Bonterra Partners.  
**[0:33:46-0:33:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:33:46):**  We talked about the challenges of how to get more investment capital into the regenerative  agriculture space.  Thank you for making the time to listen to this podcast and making it all the way till  the end.  I hope you enjoyed it as much as I did.  
**[0:33:59-0:34:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:33:59):**  If you found the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few  seconds.  
**[0:34:13-0:34:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:34:13):**  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  join my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or in the description  below.  
**[0:34:33-0:34:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:34:33):**  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food.  How to put money to work in regenerating soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while  doing it.  
**[0:34:58-0:35:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:34:58):**  Why are we doing this course?  After a hundred interviews and more than a hundred hours of audio asking the question  how to put money to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011  and recording this podcast since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  
**[0:35:16-0:35:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:35:16):**  How have we built our decision making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  What questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  
**[0:35:26-0:35:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:35:26):**  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  
**[0:35:34-0:35:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:35:34):**  You, the soil builders and investors in the space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management, consultants, etc.  People that are building soil at scale.  
**[0:35:54-0:35:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:35:54):**  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  No.  
**[0:36:08-0:36:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:36:08):**  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  that among the listeners of this podcast we have people with very different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  
**[0:36:28-0:36:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:36:28):**  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to ride along.  We're gonna look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  
**[0:36:44-0:36:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:36:44):**  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  
**[0:37:04-0:37:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:37:04):**  We're gonna look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  
**[0:37:18-0:37:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/10/28/renee-cheung/#t=0:37:18):**  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  