### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2017-53-01)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  They are going to listen to a conversation with Oswaldo de Falco, co-founder of Biofarm.  Conversation about prices and margins for organic farmers and how they want to take  
**[0:00:22-0:00:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:00:22):**  care of the land, but with the current value chain and the prices it's simply not possible  and they cannot leave their land in a healthier state to their children.  Oswaldo is on a mission to change that and he explains how.  Enjoy!  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture.  
**[0:00:40-0:00:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:00:40):**  Investing as if the planet mattered.  Podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why my focus on soil and regeneration?  
**[0:00:59-0:01:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:00:59):**  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  Before we get started, I've been recording these interviews next to my day job and I  
**[0:01:19-0:01:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:01:19):**  will definitely continue to do so and release about an episode a month.  But at the same time I would love to take this further.  There are more interviews, there are many more stories to share on investing in regenerative  food and agriculture.  More depth, improve the quality, maybe even doing some video series.  
**[0:01:35-0:01:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:01:35):**  So I started a Patreon community which makes it easy to support creators like myself.  If these podcasts have been of value to you and if you have the means, I invite you to  support me and make this happen.  For more information please find the link to my Patreon account in the description below.  And now, without further ado, the interview.  
**[0:01:55-0:01:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:01:55):**  Enjoy!  So welcome to investing in regenerative agriculture, investing as if the planet mattered.  I'm Koen van Zeyen, your host, and in the podcast of the day I'm joined by Oswaldo  De Falco, co-founder of Be Your Farm, a platform connecting you with organic fruit growers  all over Italy.  
**[0:02:10-0:02:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:02:10):**  You can adopt a tree, a fruit tree, and receive the fruit at home and make sure the farmers  receive a fair price.  Welcome Oswaldo!  Welcome Koen, thank you.  So to start with a personal question.  
**[0:02:21-0:02:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:02:21):**  How does somebody who comes from Calabria but then starts working in Milan, starts a  platform to sell organic fruit directly to consumers?  Well, my story starts three years ago when I quit my job as a financial consultant in  Milan and I decided to go back to my hometown in Calabria in the south of Italy in order  to support and help my father.  
**[0:02:49-0:02:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:02:49):**  He's a small organic farmer and basically when I arrived there I discovered how hard  it is for a local farmer to be competitive in a huge market such as the market of fruit  is today.  So I was thinking how is possible to help my father, so basically a local farmer, to  stay alive, to not lose money and not risk to lose the crops.  
**[0:03:27-0:03:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:03:27):**  Because you know in Italy for example there is a study that shows how the 5% of small  local farmers every year leave the crops because they are not economically sustainable.  So my aim was to do something in order to improve the income of my local farmer.  But to the other side I lived for 10 years in different cities so I saw what people like.  People today, the smart consumers today, they want to enjoy the real flavor of the fruit,  
**[0:04:16-0:04:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:04:16):**  they want to know where the food comes from, they want to be sure about the fruit, safe  and they want to also be sustainable when they buy fruit.  So I was thinking how to match the need of local farmers, small local farmers to be sustainable,  to be profitable with no skills and no possibility to reach far away markets.  And the other side I was thinking how to help people to receive, to enjoy real fresh organic  
**[0:04:54-0:04:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:04:54):**  fruit in a sustainable way, being sure about the region and the quality of it.  So I thought that the best way for everyone should be for the consumers, I mean to grow  their own fruit.  But of course it's not always possible because you know people who live in the city they  have no space or no time or no possibility to grow their fruit.  
**[0:05:22-0:05:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:05:22):**  So I said okay we have the technology, we have the skills to share what's happening  in our lives.  So why we don't connect local farmers with consumers, with clients in order to create  a trust and a relationship between the local farmers that have a need and the smart consumer  that have another needs complementary to the farmer needs.  
**[0:05:55-0:06:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:05:55):**  So basically I thought that with an emotional task, an emotional activity like the adoption,  we can do it.  So basically we created like the farmer spin-off to start a platform where people can adopt  organic trees from local farmers and they can follow and monitoring the cultivation,  the growing of their crops, of their trees, how thanks to the farmers that share like  
**[0:06:38-0:06:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:06:38):**  a social what's happening in the crops.  So basically from a side there is a farmer that share the farming activity and the growing  process with the simple app.  The other side when you client adopt a tree you can follow your farmer and the farming  process so you see how your oranges come from, how your oranges grow and then you are able  
**[0:07:10-0:07:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:07:10):**  to receive wherever you are in a few hours, in 24 hours a real fresh fruit with an extraordinary  taste and you are sure what this fruit come from and you know the hands of the farmer  that let you enjoy this fruit.  In the same time you are also supporting a local farmer so it's something like a win-win  relationship that we created and in the same way I helped my father to improve the income  
**[0:07:46-0:07:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:07:46):**  and I helped the clients, the first users to be satisfied about the quality and the  origin about the fruit they received.  I think it's an extremely, you are touching on an extremely important point in regenerative  agriculture, agriculture in general, it's paying the farmer and paying the farmer for  all his or her work on maintaining and taking care of the land and in this case trees.  
**[0:08:18-0:08:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:08:18):**  Can you talk a bit more about just the, because your father is an organic orange farmer but  still he couldn't really survive while he was selling to the major distribution channels  etc.  Can you explain a bit more for the listeners that don't know how that works when you are  growing oranges all year, you are selling them somewhere in the winter, how much do  
**[0:08:42-0:08:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:08:42):**  you get more or less, when do you get that or how little do you get obviously?  Yeah basically I can speak about citrus fruit but now I saw by adding other farmers on our  platform that is the same issues for all local farmers.  So basically the local farmer, the small farmer one works entirely here to grow in an organic  way, oranges for example with a lot of risks, I mean weather risk or natural risks that  
**[0:09:20-0:09:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:09:20):**  can destroy, totally destroy your production and your work for a year.  So basically as a farmer my father cultivate and let oranges grows and in the hand in the  winter he used to sell the oranges for an amount that is 20, 25 cents per kilo, it's  the same oranges or clementines.  And the paradox is that in Milan where I was working I was seeing the same fruits sold  
**[0:10:03-0:10:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:10:03):**  for 3 euros and 50 per kilo.  So just to be clear going from 20, 25 cents to 3 euro 50 in what is it 6, 7, no maybe  a thousand kilometers.  Exactly but the problem is not just thousand kilometers, the problem is that the fruit  before to arrive to the supermarket or the grocery basically it's spend something like  
**[0:10:35-0:10:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:10:35):**  more than 100 hours of journey.  So if on Monday your farmer pick the fruit, on Friday the fruit arrive to the supermarket  but it's not enough because the supermarket can stock your fruit for up to 12 months.  Okay it's depend of the fruit for example the apple can be stocked for one year, oranges  for two months, it's depend.  
**[0:11:04-0:11:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:11:04):**  But for sure it's not fresh.  Exactly and you are paying like 15 times more for a fruit that is 10 times less fresh.  So it's a paradox.  Why if you have the technology to reach your farmer and let him send you the fruit and  you in the same time you support him, you save money and you improve the chain.  
**[0:11:26-0:11:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:11:26):**  And so what was the response when you built the first version of the platform which for  sure looked a lot different than the one now but what was the, do you still remember your  first customers and what was their response when the box of fruit arrived, when the box  of oranges arrived at their home or their office?  Okay so basically the first users, how I like to speak about them, I mean I like to call  
**[0:11:57-0:12:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:11:57):**  my clients, our clients, users and not clients.  By the way the first users we had they were the parents of my friends.  So in the beginning it was yes happy but I already knew that they were happy because  I know my fruit and I knew them.  So basically the first real feedbacks from the real customers, strangers, came after  
**[0:12:37-0:12:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:12:37):**  the first months with the word of mouth basically because we didn't invest nothing.  And it was extraordinary because it was really cool to see how people that I didn't know  paid like six months before receiving the fruit just because they liked the idea and  how they were engaged with the farmer, they shared on Facebook the new updates from the  crops and they wrote an email to the farmer that say hey how are you thanks to invent  
**[0:13:26-0:13:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:13:26):**  this new model and the most cool thing was when they received the fruit because they  start to share with us on social media this huge, because the first packs were huge, the  huge pack of box of fruit, fresh fruit and it was really satisfying to see that the day  before I was in the crop to pick the fruit and the day after a lot of people in Milan,  in Rome, all around the county were in the beginning they were just a few hundreds but  
**[0:14:16-0:14:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:14:16):**  it was really beautiful for me, it was really good for me to see how they were happy and  how they were happy that they were sure to give the fresh fruit to the child, I mean  they start to share pictures of the sons, daughters with the fruit and they were sure  because they knew that the oranges, the clementines, the lemons were without pesticides, without  nothing and they were so sure because they knew the farmer, the local farmer, they received  
**[0:14:54-0:15:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:14:54):**  the fruit from the tree so it was amazing and it's still amazing to see how now more  than 1000 users share pictures, share trees, share the happiness they have with beer farm  so for me it's really, really, how to say, I feel proud of myself not because I start  a new business model, not for money because we are not profitable yet but I'm proud of  me because with one idea I let farmers and users be happy together so it's amazing.  
**[0:15:51-0:15:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:15:51):**  And what was the response of the farmer, your father, to these people in far away places  like Milan being so happy with his fruit?  Well, in the beginning my father, to be honest, he didn't understand what I was doing but  after he saw that the money started to come he asked me what are you doing Osvaldo and  I showed him beer farm basically and now he is the happiest farmer of the network because  
**[0:16:29-0:16:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:16:29):**  he was the first and now he is happy for two main reasons.  The first one is that he has for the first time clients all around the country with no  marketing costs, with no digital skills and he saw how people respect him just because  he is a farmer and the second reason why he is happy is because he is receiving money.  I mean he is receiving not just more money than the normal, the traditional supply chain,  
**[0:17:12-0:17:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:17:12):**  he is receiving also advanced money because with beer farm I give to my father and the  other farmers every three months the advanced payment of the fruit that they are on the  tree so if he picked the fruit in November, in October he already has collected all the  money about the fruit that he is going to sell online.  Which is very, just to be clear, which is very different from what a normal supermarket  
**[0:17:44-0:17:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:17:44):**  would do because if somebody would pick the oranges in November when would a normal supermarket  maybe pay this?  Well the first thing that I have to say that it is not the supermarket that pays because  the farmer doesn't sell directly to the supermarket, there are a lot of middlemen in the middle  that they collect fruit and ship to like other cities and other collective operatives so  
**[0:18:17-0:18:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:18:17):**  it's a long chain but the farmer normally receives the payment of the fruit in three  steps.  The first is around 10% in the beginning when he starts to pick the fruit and the second  part of the payment that is around, it depends of course 30-40% in two-three months after  he picked the fruit and then the rest, the last part of the money he receives in four,  
**[0:18:52-0:19:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:18:52):**  five, six months, it depends on a lot of things but for the farmers it is a dream to receive  the money before picking the fruit.  And then of course you're paying more than the 25 or the 20 cents you would normally  get.  90 cents, now I'm giving to my father 90 cents per kilo.  
**[0:19:15-0:19:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:19:15):**  And is that like this 20, 25 to 90 is that a normal ratio that you're also seeing at  the other fruits, the other farmers you have on the platform now?  Is that like the let's say three, four times as much?  Yeah basically it depends, I saw that in the south it's more common to have like three  times more payment with beer farm, in the north it depends from 50 to 70% more but it's  
**[0:19:46-0:19:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:19:46):**  always more basically.  Which is key because that gets to a very important point.  What do you see in farmers that want to take care of the land that have gone organic or  are in the process maybe have gone beyond organic and are looking at their soil even  differently?  
**[0:20:03-0:20:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:20:03):**  So if we would pay more like you're doing, if that would mean that they would do more  for the land, is price one of the constraints they have now that holding them back to do  more?  Of course, well I have a question to you.  If you would be a farmer and if you don't have money to let your family eat, do you  
**[0:20:29-0:20:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:20:29):**  think first to your family or to your crops?  It's obvious to your family but you see that with your farmers as well that because they  are, you're still small obviously but because they are part of beer farm that they start  to look at the future.  Yes, they are starting to look at the future and all the farmers, the local farmers that  
**[0:20:55-0:21:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:20:55):**  I met, they are something in common.  They deeply love, they respect the land where they are.  They understand that the land, the soil, the crops are their past, present and future of  the family.  So basically they want to respect and cultivate their crops in a natural way because there  
**[0:21:29-0:21:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:21:29):**  is a difference between the small local farmers and the huge multinational farming companies.  The local farmer leaves the crops that he cultivate.  The huge companies, they don't care about basically the crops because they don't live  there.  It's a huge company and they think just about the profit.  
**[0:21:56-0:22:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:21:56):**  So the local farmer, if he has the opportunity to have a good income and to let the family  be sustainable, he of course is going to improve the soil and the land because he knows that  if he respects the soil, the soil will give back good fruit.  The farmer wants to leave the crops to his sons, to his daughters.  So basically if he respects the soil, the soil will be more fertile, more productive.  
**[0:22:39-0:22:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:22:39):**  So basically yes, if they have more money, the local farmer, they will invest in improving  the soil moisture, the soil quality.  Of course, I have no doubt about that.  That makes it extremely interesting.  And now for a small look into the future of Be Your Farm, you are offering I think three  
**[0:23:05-0:23:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:23:05):**  to four or five different types of fruits, olive oil as well.  What do you see in the medium to long term?  What's your vision for Be Your Farm?  Yeah, basically now we are still a small startup.  We have nine kinds of fruits and five farmers online and another one with the kiwi is coming.  
**[0:23:32-0:23:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:23:32):**  But basically what we want to do is to become a big shared farm.  We want to connect people with local farmers in order to have a huge local farm where who  produce the food and who bring to the table are connected.  And it doesn't care if you like oranges, zucchini or apple, you can grow everything you want  in your shared farm.  
**[0:24:07-0:24:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:24:07):**  And you just say to the farmer, hey, I want to taste this, this, this.  You follow the growing or everything you want, then you receive it.  So this is what we want to do, a big shared farm.  And you are at an interesting moment in Be Your Farm's history because you've been self-funded  so far and you've been an accelerator for a bit, the most famous in Italy.  
**[0:24:32-0:24:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:24:32):**  But now, like next week or when this is edited and online, there's going to be a very exciting  new development.  Can you share a bit more about that?  Yeah, it will be the first time for us to try to become bigger and to go market with  the real version of our product.  
**[0:24:55-0:25:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:24:55):**  And we want to do it with a crowdfunding campaign, an equity crowdfunding campaign.  Because we think that all our users, all the people that we met in our way, all the people  that love Be Your Farm, they can be part of Be Your Farm, not just like users, but like  stakeholders.  So we will launch this campaign in a few weeks.  
**[0:25:24-0:25:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:25:24):**  And we hope that people will love the same concept that we promote, so the sharing farming  in order to support local farmers and enjoy real fresh fruit.  So finger crossed for us and we are working on it.  And I want to thank you so much.  And of course, I will keep my fingers crossed as well for your time, Osvaldo, in explaining  
**[0:25:52-0:25:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:25:52):**  the struggle of organic fruit farmers in Italy, but also in many other southern European countries  and actually also northern European countries of that risk and of the price and of the unfair  position they are in.  And like you said, we are at a level where we have technology and hopefully a level of  consciousness that we can start changing these systems.  
**[0:26:15-0:26:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:26:15):**  And it seems like an interesting first attempt to do just that.  Thank you so much.  Thank you, Kun.  You just listened to an interview with Osvaldo De Falco, where we discussed the importance  of short links between farmers and consumers and what fair prices mean for farmers.  
**[0:26:32-0:26:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:26:32):**  Thank you for making the time to listen to this podcast and making it all the way till  the end.  I hope you enjoyed it as much as I did.  If you found the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  
**[0:26:45-0:26:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:26:45):**  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  join my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  
**[0:27:07-0:27:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:27:07):**  You can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or in the description  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food, how to put money to work in regenerating  
**[0:27:34-0:27:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:27:34):**  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to put money  to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011 and recording  these podcasts since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  
**[0:27:54-0:27:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:27:54):**  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  What questions should you ask?  
**[0:28:05-0:28:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:28:05):**  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  
**[0:28:13-0:28:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:28:13):**  For whom is this course?  You, the soil builders and investors in this space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management consultants, etc.  
**[0:28:31-0:28:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:28:31):**  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  
**[0:28:47-0:28:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:28:47):**  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  
**[0:29:06-0:29:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:29:06):**  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to ride along.  
**[0:29:19-0:29:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:29:19):**  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  
**[0:29:40-0:29:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:29:40):**  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  
**[0:29:55-0:29:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2017/12/08/osvaldo-de-falco/#t=0:29:55):**  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  