### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2018-40-10)
**[0:00:00-0:00:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com slash course or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  Welcome to another episode of investing in regenerative agriculture investing as if the  planet mattered podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and  
**[0:00:25-0:00:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:00:25):**  agriculture space to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil,  people, local communities and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why my focus on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  
**[0:00:45-0:00:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:00:45):**  And it's time that we as investors big and small and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  In March last year we launched our Patreon community to make it easy for fans to support  our work and so many of you have joined as a member.  We've launched different types of benefits, exclusive content, Q&A webinars with former  
**[0:01:05-0:01:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:01:05):**  guests, ask me anything sessions plus so much more to come in the future.  For more information on the different tiers, benefits and how to become a member check  patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or find the link below.  Thank you.  Welcome to investing in regenerative agriculture, investing as if the planet mattered.  
**[0:01:24-0:01:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:01:24):**  In these interviews I'm talking to people who are scaling up the regenerative agriculture  sector either by increasing the inflow of investment capital or by scaling up the enterprises  on and in the ground and by doing so exploring what it means to be an impact investor in  regenerative agriculture.  Why my focus on regenerative agriculture?  
**[0:01:43-0:01:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:01:43):**  Because the roots of so many of the issues we're facing in the world today can be found  in agriculture.  From droughts, migrant flows, obesity, social issues, water wars, climate change, hunger,  they all have a connection to how we treat the land, grow food and what we eat.  I hope you will enjoy this interview as much as I did making it.  
**[0:02:02-0:02:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:02:02):**  If you have any comments please share them on Soundcloud or Twitter and if you think  this content is relevant or interesting for someone else please feel free to share the  interview.  You're going to listen to an interview with the writer of the books Dirt and Growing a  Revolution, David R Montgomery.  
**[0:02:16-0:02:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:02:16):**  We discussed the world's oldest problem, the loss of soil fertility and how David went  from being a pessimist to being a cautious optimist and what made him believe that this  time it's different.  Enjoy!  So welcome to investing in regenerative agriculture, investing as if the planet mattered.  
**[0:02:32-0:02:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:02:32):**  I'm Kuma Sayan, your host, and in the podcast of today I'm joined by David R Montgomery,  a MacArthur Fellow and writer of the book Growing a Revolution, where he makes a passionate  pledge for building soil by ditching the plough, covering soil and diversifying crop rotations.  He has traveled the world visiting farmers large and small, traditional and organic,  who are very successfully building soil and going against most of modern agriculture science.  
**[0:02:55-0:02:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:02:55):**  I'm going to ask him all about what he learned and what needs to happen to scale this.  Welcome David.  Oh thank you Kon, it's a pleasure to be here.  So to start with a personal question, as a geologist how did you end up in regenerative  agriculture?  
**[0:03:07-0:03:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:03:07):**  Well it's a long story but I'll give you the quick version of it.  Now we have time.  Yeah I'm the kind of geologist who works on landscape evolution, so I'm a geomorphologist  and as part of that I learned to study soil erosion because erosion is how landscapes  get shaped and when you're looking at soil erosion the other half of the equation is  
**[0:03:28-0:03:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:03:28):**  soil production.  So I've trained to look at the balance between the rates that soils are produced and the  rates that soils are eroded over geologic time, over long time frames.  And the second popular book that I wrote was called Dirt the Erosion of Civilizations that  looked back at the problem of soil erosion through history and that merged archaeology  
**[0:03:50-0:03:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:03:50):**  and geology and it turned out that by the time I was done writing that book I had written  a history of farming and because the practice of plowing the soil was something that had  led to topsoil loss that had impacted civilizations around the world time and again through history.  And this ended up leading me to start thinking about soil as a system that could be influenced  by human actions and not just over geologic time.  
**[0:04:17-0:04:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:04:17):**  And I got really interested in the effects of farming practices, how we have traditionally  farmed, how we're farming today and that eventually led me to think about whether we could reverse  the problem of soil erosion and degradation and to do that I got into looking at farmers  who'd restored their soil on farms around the world and that led me right into the world  of regenerative agriculture because that's really what regenerative agriculture is all  
**[0:04:41-0:04:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:04:41):**  about is rebuilding the fertility of the soil as a consequence of farming and reversing  this long history that I wrote about in the dirt book.  So the dirt book and the growing revolution book are kind of bookends of looking at the  nature of the problem and realizing how to actually solve it.  You call it in the book and it's even a chapter, mankind's oldest problem, I don't know if  
**[0:05:04-0:05:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:05:04):**  I got the chapter title exactly right, but it's the one thing we've been battling with  every century and many civilizations have gone under because of that.  What makes it different this time?  Why would we be, I wouldn't say arrogant, but be optimistic enough to think, okay, this  time we got it right and we can actually build a system that is more anti-fragile and more  
**[0:05:28-0:05:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:05:28):**  sustainable in the long term?  Well that question kind of encapsulates the story of my transformation from something  of a pessimist about this problem when I was writing dirt and looking at the history of  land abuse over the century.  You call it dirt, so yeah.  
**[0:05:42-0:05:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:05:42):**  Yeah, and that's what if we basically take soil, you know, healthy fertile life filled  soil and we lose the organic matter and we lose the native fertility, we're turning it  into dirt, something that just has the geology and not the biology and it's the combination  that makes for healthy fertile soil.  But the, you know, what really sort of turned me around in going from being a pessimist  
**[0:06:06-0:06:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:06:06):**  on the issue to being an optimist on the issue was seeing examples of modern farmers who  had actually pulled it off, who had actually adapted their practices in ways that rebuilt  the organic matter, rebuilt the fertility of their land and they did it through intensive  farming.  And this was a very optimistic thing because if we can change that pattern of soil degradation  
**[0:06:29-0:06:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:06:29):**  as a consequence of farming into one of soil building as a consequence of farming, we could  solve that really old problem.  And what really makes it possible now is I think a few things.  There's on the one hand, we've learned a lot and we've got examples of farmers who have  done it that we can learn from as I did.  
**[0:06:48-0:06:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:06:48):**  And there's, if we combine the ancient wisdom of things like crop rotations and planting  legumes and diversifying our rotations so we're not just growing one or two things time  and time again in the same field, those things are really ancient wisdom that have been used  by traditional societies around the world but that also use the plow.  And it's the disturbance of the land through tillage, through plowing that has led to the  
**[0:07:14-0:07:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:07:14):**  long term slow degradation of soil fertility by disrupting mycorrhizal fungi that help  feed the plants and by burning down soil organic matter over time.  We now have modern technologies that we can use to couple those ancient ideas of crop  rotations and keeping the ground covered with cover crops and more diverse rotations.  We can couple that with less disturbance, either no till or minimal tillage applications.  
**[0:07:44-0:07:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:07:44):**  And you put those three things together under the label of conservation agriculture and  you've got a new sort of style and philosophy of farming that really seems to work to build  soil fertility because it's those three things done together, minimizing the disturbance  in effect feeding the soil organic matter through cover cropping and diversifying rotations  which helps with micronutrient provisioning and pest suppression.  
**[0:08:10-0:08:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:08:10):**  That allows us to build up soil organic matter which can restart a lot of the biological  processes that are essential to native soil fertility, sort of nature's way of farming.  And the other half of that, so we have this knowledge of how to put these pieces together  into a new system of farming that really seems to work.  And on the other hand, there's the economic pressures that are affecting modern farming  
**[0:08:35-0:08:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:08:35):**  where if you go talk to most farmers, they're not really anxious to pay a lot more for fertilizers  and pesticides or diesel.  Those are really high ticket items in terms of modern farming.  We rely on them a lot and they actually have become progressively more expensive in terms  of on-farm economics.  
**[0:08:54-0:08:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:08:54):**  While at the same time, the large harvest that we've been producing in the 20th and  21st centuries have depressed the prices for the commodity crops that a lot of farmers  in the developed world grow.  They're in a squeeze basically.  Exactly.  
**[0:09:07-0:09:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:09:07):**  They're in a squeeze where they've gotten so good at growing so much stuff that the  price they get for their product is depressed, especially relative to their value since it's  the one thing everybody needs other than water and air.  And at the same time, the cost of the inputs that they've been trained to rely on to produce  those harvests have gone through the roof.  
**[0:09:28-0:09:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:09:28):**  So they're caught in a squeeze in the middle.  And you see that play out in my country, the United States for example, with the great  decline of the family farms and the growing size of farms.  The old adage of get big or get out that was thrown around in the 1970s was a direct consequence  of that.  
**[0:09:45-0:09:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:09:45):**  And so what gives me hope is that we've learned this sort of new way of farming that can build  soil fertility and as a consequence of that, it allows the farmers that I visited to spend  less on diesel because they're not using their tractors as much.  They're not tilling as much.  They spend less on fertilizer because they've rebuilt their native fertility of their land  
**[0:10:06-0:10:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:10:06):**  enough that they can cut their fertilizer use by a half to 90% or more.  And they aren't using anywhere near as much in the way of pesticides.  And so that's greatly reducing their input costs.  And what happened to their yields?  They either were maintained or they went up over time.  
**[0:10:24-0:10:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:10:24):**  So they're spending less to grow more.  It's a good recipe for short term farm economics.  And so we're at this juncture now where for one of the first times as far as I can tell  in history, the short term economics for farmers really are lining up with the long term interest  of society in protecting and rebuilding the fertility of our land.  
**[0:10:47-0:10:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:10:47):**  There's a lot of what I talked about in the dirt book looked at how the short term incentives  to maximize this year's return and this year's harvest led to the overuse of fertilizers,  the overworking of land and the progressive degradation of it over generations of farming.  These two trends in terms of knowing – figuring out how to do conservation agriculture and  the sort of modern economic trends are really pointing in the direction of real optimism  
**[0:11:16-0:11:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:11:16):**  that we may be able to solve these problems because if farmers can do better by adopting  them and they improve the fertility of their land in ways that reduces pollution, that  means our ability to feed everybody but has side benefits of storing carbon in the ground  and protecting on-farm biodiversity which is important given just the sheer acreage  globally that is in agricultural land.  
**[0:11:42-0:11:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:11:42):**  This is a real moment where these kinds of practices could catch on because it's not  a question of ecology versus the environment.  It's a real win-win scenario.  Extremely interesting that overview of the pressures and why the time is now but still  I'm suspicious when somebody says, yeah, but this time it's different, especially  
**[0:12:01-0:12:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:12:01):**  if we have a few millennia of very different experiences with soil and civilization.  But you have examples in the book where very simple measurement of soil carbon in soil  is higher on some of the farms you visited compared to a native forest.  So there is something to it.  What would you say to the skeptics and say, yeah, but everybody always says that this  
**[0:12:23-0:12:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:12:23):**  time it's different?  Well, I would say that as a scientist, it's good to be a skeptic.  That's exactly the right question one should be asking.  Why is it different this time?  I think there are two angles to answering that.  
**[0:12:35-0:12:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:12:35):**  The first one, the most basic one is that we have to get it right this time.  We don't have any new places to go to once we degrade farmland globally.  We have to, as a global society, we've got to learn how to farm in ways that will maintain  the fertility of our land if we're going to be able to maintain the agricultural foundation  of civilization.  
**[0:12:56-0:13:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:12:56):**  So at one level, there's sort of a real imperative this time.  And at the other level, the reason I can argue that it's different this time is I've visited  farms around the world who've already done it.  It's not abstract.  It's not a theory.  
**[0:13:09-0:13:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:13:09):**  That's one of the reasons I took six months off from my teaching job at the University  of Washington to basically travel around the world and visit these farmers is I wanted  to see for myself and not just sort of read about it or listen to people about it but  go to these farms, dig holes in the ground, look at their soil, learn the history of the  farm, understand what they did to rebuild their soil and then stand back and understand  
**[0:13:33-0:13:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:13:33):**  the farm economics that they went through and then stand back and try and draw the generalizations  and patterns that one can from a suite of experiences.  And it's really the sort of confluence of a new way of thinking about the soil that  really is truly new in terms of combining these three practices of minimal disturbance,  cover crops and crop rotations.  
**[0:13:56-0:14:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:13:56):**  You can look back through history and there's very few examples where people put together  that system in practice on the land at a large scale.  So there's sort of a new way of thinking which is sort of the seeds of any sort of revolution  in practice is they're preceded by a revolution in thought.  And I see that we've gone through that in science.  
**[0:14:14-0:14:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:14:14):**  We've learned enough now about the role of microbial organisms and soil biology in soil  fertility to start applying those ideas from a scientific perspective into the applied  realm of agriculture.  And it's changing the way we think about the land, we think about the soil and how we treat  it.  
**[0:14:34-0:14:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:14:34):**  The fact that we know so much more about the soil and we're discovering more every day  after feeling I see reports coming out of just the amount of things in there in a teaspoon  or depends on which one you read that we didn't know maybe a year to a year or five years  ago.  It's amazing the whole world of sort of microbial science not only in the soil but also in like  
**[0:14:53-0:14:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:14:53):**  the human microbiome that's all over the news where we're learning new things about the  organisms that live within us and the ways that they can actually benefit and bolster  our health and promote our well-being is you know 30, 40 years ago that was kind of crazy  talk and now it's all over the journals as people are understanding the mechanisms through  which it works.  
**[0:15:17-0:15:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:15:17):**  So we've got this new scientific perspective that we can bring to bear on the problem and  we're also at a moment where the kinds of practices farmers are taught and trained to  use are very much reliant on very expensive inputs that are not going to be getting any  cheaper in the near future and that come with very real and increasing environmental and  social costs in terms of the global carbon budget but also in terms of things like groundwater  
**[0:15:45-0:15:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:15:45):**  pollution in the American Midwest for example, nitrate pollution in the Gulf of Mexico.  There's all kinds of forces that are sort of converging on the idea that if we could  have a style of farming that wasn't necessarily organic but that used less in the way of agrochemicals  and fertilizers, diesel and pesticides.  And just to be clear this is fundamentally less, it's not 5 or 10 percent you're talking  
**[0:16:09-0:16:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:16:09):**  of examples of 80, 90 and most of them going in some phase completely off.  Yeah you know at least off by half and in some cases up to 80, 90 and you can do these  practices organically so you could go completely off of them and if you could do that and still  maintain our ability to feed everybody, our ability to maintain our harvest then that  is a recipe, it's a set up for a whole new way of thinking about it and if it's more  
**[0:16:35-0:16:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:16:35):**  profitable for farmers to do this once they get through the transition which I found to  be remarkably short.  It's a set up for increasing adoption as people learn about it.  You know obviously it takes time for new ideas to filter out of the initial adopters who  experiment with it and tinker and figure out how to make these practices work and the people  
**[0:17:00-0:17:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:17:00):**  I visited around the world in equatorial Africa and Costa Rica and across North America they  had in their words made the mistakes to try and figure out how it is to tailor these general  principles of minimal disturbance, cover cropping and diversified rotations, how to tailor that  to their land, their economy, their climate, their soils and once we've learned how to  regionalize those general principles then it's faster to get new farmers on board in  
**[0:17:30-0:17:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:17:30):**  terms of how to adopt them because as these guys were saying they've already made the  mistakes.  So what's holding them back?  What's holding their neighbors in Ghana and the farms you visited but also in the US and  also in Costa Rica, what's holding them back so far?  
**[0:17:46-0:17:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:17:46):**  You know there's a couple things and I think that the biggest thing is that change is difficult.  We tend to want to continue doing things the way we've been doing them simply for the reason  that that's the way we do things and so it can take a while for any kind of new idea  to get out of the realm of the initial adopters and spread through people who might benefit  from it, who might actually be interested in adopting it if they knew about it or if  
**[0:18:11-0:18:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:18:11):**  they knew how to do it.  So there's the inherent resistance to new ideas.  There is the problem that a lot of people don't know about this and a lot of farmers  don't know about it and it goes these three principles of minimal disturbance, cover cropping  and diversified rotations really run 180 degrees counter to the conventional wisdom in most  
**[0:18:33-0:18:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:18:33):**  modern in terms of the way that we've farmed for the last hundred years sort of the modern  conventional farming in the Western world where we use intensive tillage, a lot of fertilizer  and pesticides and we tend to grow one or two crops, functional monocultures.  And also in organic, I mean tillage is part of the organic movement, has been part for  a long time.  
**[0:18:53-0:18:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:18:53):**  So even there we see a lot of destruction.  I did an interview with Sally Cohen, an impact investor who rented out part of her land to  an organic farmer and at some point she just took it back under her management because  she saw that organic farmer keep plowing and plowing and plowing and plowing.  Yeah.  
**[0:19:09-0:19:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:19:09):**  And you know, that was one of the things I learned in writing the dirt book was that,  you know, when we look at the farming practices that, you know, helped take down classical  Greece or undermine the Roman Empire, it was not modern agrochemical farming.  It was organic agriculture and the key culprit there was excessive tillage, too much use  and reliance on the plow.  
**[0:19:32-0:19:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:19:32):**  And there's a lot of organic farms that especially any that are on any kind of sloping land and  aren't on a river flood plain, you know, where tillage is causing lots of damage to the soil.  So it's really not a question of sort of conventional versus organic.  It's a question of recalibrating the way we think about the soil and think about the land  to try and adopt practices that build the microbial life that if it's working for us  
**[0:19:59-0:20:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:19:59):**  in the soil, is a real advantage.  It's more efficient really when you have these trillions of organisms per teaspoon of soil  doing things in there that will promote the growth and health of your crops.  That's a lot better than basically spending a lot of time and fossil fuel to work against  them and undermine their ability to work for us.  
**[0:20:22-0:20:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:20:22):**  And that's sort of the essence of what we were doing with modern conventional farming.  So the real trick I think is to figure out how to adapt farming methods to cultivate  that beneficial life in the soil.  And there's some general principles for how to go about doing that and that's essentially  what I learned by going and interviewing these farmers who had already done it.  
**[0:20:46-0:20:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:20:46):**  Because I didn't want to engage in abstract speculation about it.  I wanted to go to farms where you could go, okay, it used to be a half a percent organic  matter or two percent organic matter.  And these farmers had rebuilt their soil organic matter or their soil carbon content back up  to on the order of five, six, eight, ten percent.  
**[0:21:05-0:21:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:21:05):**  Which is not coincidentally the same transition that I saw my wife do to our yard in North  Seattle where we live over the course of transforming our side yard which had been a lawn into a  lush garden.  And the practices that she used there are very parallel in principle to the practices  that these farmers used to restore life to their land around the world.  
**[0:21:30-0:21:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:21:30):**  And what really comes out of the book as a key, you have to do all three.  If you do two of the three and you're still plowing a lot, it simply doesn't work.  I mean, these three are working together, otherwise you're not restoring the soil.  And that's probably, that's maybe what we forgot in many of the examples, many of the  studies that have been on the organic side, etc. in the past decades.  
**[0:21:53-0:21:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:21:53):**  If you only look at two of the three or one of the three, it simply isn't a complete system  and simply doesn't work enough and you get these negative results.  Yeah, it doesn't reliably work if you only use one or two legs of this three-legged stool  of the system of conservation agriculture.  And there's a fourth leg that one could add which is livestock and reintegrating livestock,  
**[0:22:16-0:22:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:22:16):**  animal husbandry into cropping systems.  And I go into that a little bit in the book but it wasn't the main emphasis of the book.  And I think that that, you've just put your finger right on one of the big problems in  terms of thinking about adoption is that in reviewing the literature, because what, you  know, in addition to visiting farmers, I dug into the scientific literature because that's  
**[0:22:37-0:22:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:22:37):**  what I do for a living and tried to sort of calibrate, if you will, what I was seeing  and hearing in the field on their farms with what other people's experiences and what studies  had found on different farms and in labs and academic settings around the world.  And there's a real shortage of studies that have looked at the combination of all three  practices.  
**[0:22:59-0:23:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:22:59):**  There's a lot of studies that will look just at say adopting no-till farming where you  don't use the plow and instead...  And a lot of herbicides.  Yeah, exactly.  Like you might use like massive amounts of herbicides although there's some other techniques  
**[0:23:12-0:23:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:23:12):**  with cover crops that can get around that.  But if you just look at no-till, you see really mixed results in terms of soil building.  And it depends a lot on sort of what you're doing in addition to the no-till.  Or if you just look at cover crops, again, there's sort of mixed results on average better  than not using them.  
**[0:23:29-0:23:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:23:29):**  And with diversified rotations, again, you can see a boost from using them.  But if you're doing full tillage in a mixed rotation, you don't get anywhere near the  benefit that you get if you adopt all three of these practices together in a new system  of farming.  And there's one thing that scientists have really tend to be very good at.  
**[0:23:47-0:23:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:23:47):**  It's isolating elements of a system so you can study those and sort of figure out, well,  what's this piece doing?  It's much harder to actually study the effectiveness of a whole system because you've got a lot  more variables going on.  It's a lot more complicated system to try and look at.  
**[0:24:03-0:24:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:24:03):**  And it doesn't lend itself to sort of like clean academic tests of, well, what about  this one little piece?  But of course, that can cause a problem if it's the interaction among the pieces that's  actually producing the effect.  You know, consider for example like an old-fashioned watch, you know, sort of like an old wristwatch.  
**[0:24:22-0:24:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:24:22):**  You can take all the pieces, you can take one apart and you can understand how all the  individual gears work.  But if I took one apart, I'd never be able to put it back together because I don't understand  the system of how all those pieces work together.  And I think in terms of conservation agriculture and this new philosophy of farming under regenerative  
**[0:24:41-0:24:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:24:41):**  label, there's that problem in the sense that we need some long-term studies that look at  how these pieces interact and work together because there's evidence out there on the  land in real farms that they do work.  You know, I've dug holes, I've compared the soil structure, compared the soil carbon contents,  the soil life in these farmers' fields and the fields next door, and it's like night  
**[0:25:03-0:25:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:25:03):**  and day.  It would be very useful to have a lot more attention academically on studying that full  system.  And from what I can tell, it's the emphasis on cultivating the beneficial life in the  soil that's really the catalyst for why it works so well.  
**[0:25:17-0:25:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:25:17):**  It's interesting you mentioned that actually Sally Caughan, the woman I mentioned before,  really struggled to find, even if they would pay for it, scientists and academics that  wanted to follow the transition on their land because there wasn't a clear one to five-year  plan.  No, they were going to do it adaptively and looking at what the soil needed year after  
**[0:25:35-0:25:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:25:35):**  year and adapting to that.  And they were much more comfortable, they being the scientists, looking at their vineyard  that they're starting to grow in a beyond organic way.  But the normal terrain was just too difficult to grasp because it wasn't a clear we're going  to do this type of vegetables for X amount of years and that's it.  
**[0:25:53-0:25:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:25:53):**  No, they were probably going to be a mix and they're probably going to change it and it's  going to be adaptive.  So they were really struggling finding people that wanted to study or could study that.  Yeah, it really challenges the way we think about how to set up scientific experiments  in agriculture, how to evaluate things.  
**[0:26:10-0:26:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:26:10):**  And it also sort of goes against the grain of the kinds of advice that people give to  farmers.  If you think about, at least in the United States, the kinds of people who are mostly  advising farmers are usually trying to sell them things and they're trying to sell products,  whether it's an herbicide or a fertilizer or a new piece of equipment.  
**[0:26:30-0:26:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:26:30):**  And to adopt this new suite of practices, if you are tillage-based, if you're working  with the plow, you do need new equipment, you need no-till planter and John Deere would  be happy to sell you one.  But the real transformation is in thinking about the land and the practices one adopts.  And there's very few chemical supply companies that will encourage farmers to adopt practices  
**[0:26:53-0:26:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:26:53):**  that enable them to use far less of their products.  Just like I'm always very suspicious when petrol selling companies are telling you they're  selling you something that uses less of their product.  Yeah, and there's this sort of classic thing in economics where if the price of an energy  source, for example, goes down, it can often use the, it can basically lead to using far  
**[0:27:17-0:27:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:27:17):**  more of it.  But yeah, that's, I mean, one of the things that I found interesting coming from a geological  background on all this is, you know, I don't really have, I wasn't trained to believe that  there's a particular way we should be farming or should not be farming.  I sort of came in with an open mind, if you will, I'm not trying to sell anybody anything.  
**[0:27:38-0:27:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:27:38):**  And I wanted to go and visit farmers and see for myself how they had changed their land.  And I came away deeply impressed with how fast they've been able to do it.  And that the fundamental underlying thing that changed was how they thought about their  soil.  And so in Growing Revolution, I basically argue that this new way of thinking about  
**[0:28:00-0:28:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:28:00):**  the land and thinking about how to adapt these general principles of farming to particular  places could be the foundation for a new agricultural revolution that's different than the previous  ones because it's about how we think about the land.  And this regenerative agriculture movement is something I think aligns really well with  it because these principles are the foundation for both.  
**[0:28:23-0:28:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:28:23):**  And I want to just take one step back on something you mentioned before, the quality of produce  and the quality and the connection between the soil and the life and the biodiversity  in the soil and the life and the biodiversity in us.  I start to see, but it's mainly because I'm focusing so much on this topic that slowly  we also start to see the connection between the quality we grow with the amount of attention  
**[0:28:48-0:28:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:28:48):**  and the amount of work we put in the soil and the quality of the produce and the amount  of nutrients in it.  Is that something you see as well or is it something I happen to see in a few snippets  around?  No, I think you're onto something.  
**[0:29:01-0:29:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:29:01):**  My wife Anne and I wrote a book in between the Dirt Book and the Growing Revolution Book.  We wrote one called The Hidden Half of Nature, the Microbial Roots of Life and Health.  And in that book we started to look into that question in terms of how does healthy fertile  soil influence the way that micronutrients get out of the soil itself and into crops  and then what are the parallels between the functions that a microbiome serves in the  
**[0:29:28-0:29:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:29:28):**  root zone of plants and in the human gut.  And these systems are remarkably similar.  They're kind of very similar.  The one is the other inside out.  Probably the lack of research into these systems is also remarkably similar.  
**[0:29:42-0:29:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:29:42):**  Like what you just described on soil is probably the same on our gut.  They're very parallel.  And so in The Hidden Half of Nature we went into those parallels, the state of research  in both things.  And what we came away with was the assessment that in terms of the microbial communities  
**[0:30:01-0:30:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:30:01):**  in both systems are serving purposes that are essentially symbiotic with their host  organism whether it's the plant or whether it's a person.  And they're facilitating nutrient transfer and acquisition particularly of micronutrients  and of the sort of precursors to the microbial metabolites, things the microbes produce that  serve as precursors to things that our body will then make that are necessary for health.  
**[0:30:26-0:30:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:30:26):**  And they also tee up and inform a plant defense system or our immune system and they're involved  in chemical signaling that just sort of helps us navigate our relationship to the external  world.  And we sort of teed up in that book the question that you're asking of well to what degree  does the way that we grow our food for example influence its nutritional quality for us.  
**[0:30:48-0:30:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:30:48):**  And Ann and I are now starting to work on a new book together that's going to look pretty  much at that question because there's all kinds of connections between the way that  say the mycorrhizal fungi in the soil help to acquire mineral micronutrients, things  like copper and boron and zinc and iron, things we don't need a lot of in our bodies but that  are absolutely essential to the proper functioning of enzymes and processes in our bodies that  
**[0:31:18-0:31:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:31:18):**  are critical to our health.  And if you look at what's happened to the micronutrient concentration of food over the  last 50 years, it's dropped radically by a quarter to over half depending which study  you look at and which fruit, vegetable, meat or dairy product you look at.  But the overall trend is that while we've been growing more calories, the quality of  
**[0:31:40-0:31:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:31:40):**  those calories in terms of all the other stuff we need for health have been declining.  And we're digging into that now to try and look at more into the studies that have actually  addressed that of which there aren't enough that aren't, we could use a lot more attention  to this issue.  We've tended to focus on the question of how do you feed the world with calories and I  
**[0:32:03-0:32:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:32:03):**  think now we need to think a lot more about how do we feed the world with very high quality  nutritious calories.  And looking at that question, I mean you haven't done the research yet on the book, but what  do you think of these vertical farms, hydroponics that take the soil out of the equation and  there are a lot of arguments for it because it uses a lot less water, you can grow it  
**[0:32:23-0:32:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:32:23):**  in cities, etc.  I always have the fear that you just described that we're missing something we cannot measure  yet but we might do in a few years on the nutrient level.  But I don't know if you shared that fear.  That is a really good question.  
**[0:32:36-0:32:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:32:36):**  I think it's a very legitimate fear and we're hoping to wrestle with that in the new book.  I can't give you a solid opinion on it at the moment because we're still sort of trying  to figure out.  It's a good cliffhanger.  Oh yeah, it's a bit of a cliffhanger but it's a very well placed concern.  
**[0:32:49-0:32:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:32:49):**  I mean and obviously things like hydroponics are going to be essential for space travel  and things like that.  But whether we should be feeding cities that way depends a lot on where do you get the  micronutrients to put into the hydroponics because if plants are getting a lot of their  mineral micronutrients from the fungi in the soil that extract those elements from the  
**[0:33:15-0:33:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:33:15):**  soil particles, then if you're growing hydroponically, you have to add all those micronutrients yourself.  So where are you getting them from or are you growing micronutrient deficient food if  you're not adding them?  And what's the energetics of how you get that stuff?  If you're having to import copper from South America to feed your vertical farm in New  
**[0:33:34-0:33:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:33:34):**  York, that may not be very efficient whereas instead if you just used the organic matter  that the city produces as garbage every day and composted that back to make soil and then  grew the same food in urban farms in soil, you might have much more nutritious food.  Those are the kind of things that Anne and I are hoping to wrestle with a bit more in  the new book that we're starting to work on.  
**[0:33:59-0:34:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:33:59):**  Extremely interesting.  And you mentioned it a few times, but I'd like to dive a bit deeper into that.  The profitability or the let's say the money side of things.  You visited these farms and you said many of them are doing much better financially  because of the lower inputs, maybe because they can sell quality as well.  
**[0:34:19-0:34:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:34:19):**  That's a separate discussion, but mainly because they are reducing their bills quite dramatically.  Yes, and it was mainly from bill reduction because I visited farms all over the world,  mostly conventional farms because I wanted to look at the question of could we actually  transition modern conventional farms both on subsistence farms in the developing world  and large operations in the developed world.  
**[0:34:42-0:34:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:34:42):**  Could we transition them to much lower input use?  I also visited an organic farm, the Rodale Institute in Pennsylvania to see whether or  not these same principles could work in an organic system and they can.  But I'm mostly conventional farmers in part because that's where the real opportunity  lies to sort of change the world if you will in terms of how humanity tends to farm.  
**[0:35:08-0:35:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:35:08):**  And I was really impressed with how much savings there was from the reduced input use.  If you can reduce the cost of one of your primary costs of production by half or more  in a system, that's going to affect the bottom line of the system as long as it doesn't affect  the output, your productivity.  All the farms that I visited after they'd made this transition were growing increased  
**[0:35:34-0:35:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:35:34):**  yields, not decreased yields.  They were growing more food and spending far less on inputs to do it.  The yield bumps in a few cases were quite significant and most they weren't all that  significant but to me what the significance was is that they didn't lose yield.  They were growing just as much if not more food and so they were basically, in terms  
**[0:35:56-0:36:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:35:56):**  of the effect on the farm's bottom line, the reduced cost of the inputs was money that  went straight to the farmer instead of to his fertilizer dealer.  Which is a nice shift in terms if you look at the farmer, obviously not if you're selling  fertilizer.  Yes, exactly.  
**[0:36:11-0:36:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:36:11):**  With any kind of major transition in thinking or technology, there's going to be winners  and losers.  And from my own perspective, I think it's about time the farmers won.  Yeah, because they spend an insane amount of hours producing our food and many actually,  I saw some data last week, live under the poverty line which is crazy because they cannot  
**[0:36:34-0:36:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:36:34):**  afford their own food if they would sell it.  So one of the main challenges you mentioned for a broader acceptance of regenerative agriculture  or conservation agriculture is crop insurance and policies.  For impact investors, there is of course a lot of lobbying there to do and a lot of work  on the philanthropy side but on the investment side, not too much.  
**[0:36:58-0:37:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:36:58):**  What do you see after visiting all of these farms, both big, small, organic versus non-organic,  what do you see as the role for impact investors or investors in general that want to put money  to work in this space and want to help this transition while making investments?  Well, you know what, there are sort of three big sort of things I think I identified at  the end of the book of sort of opportunities to promote this kind of thing.  
**[0:37:22-0:37:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:37:22):**  One was the crop insurance, the other was looking at setting up demonstration farms  to sort of show farmers how to adapt these practices so they don't have to run the risk  of experimenting on their farm.  Neither of those are probably the best place to point individual or foundation investors  to.  
**[0:37:40-0:37:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:37:40):**  But the third one is where I think there could be big opportunities and that's in transition  assistance and even sort of acquiring farms and leading them down this road of regenerative  agriculture.  There's an awful lot of farmland in the US at least that is leased out and farmed by  people who don't actually own it.  
**[0:38:00-0:38:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:38:00):**  And so there's a problem there and I talk about this historically in the dirt book.  The problem of sort of tenant farmers having an interest, no long term interest in rebuilding  the fertility of their land has been a real problem and I could trace that problem all  the way back to the Roman Empire.  It's been a huge problem in farming for a long time in different areas.  
**[0:38:18-0:38:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:38:18):**  So I've run into some people and organizations that are working with farmers to essentially  purchase farms that have been degraded, farmland that is relatively cheap because the soil  has already been degraded and then buy it and transition it to regenerative farming  and if it can be done profitably in real time but build value in terms of the fertility  of the land over time, to me it looks like a good investment.  
**[0:38:46-0:38:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:38:46):**  There was a time in the 1940s and 50s when farmland was valued by the organic matter  content of its soil.  How fertile is the land?  And now we value it by how much, what we can harvest with large agrochemical inputs.  It's been sort of divorced from the native fertility of the land.  
**[0:39:04-0:39:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:39:04):**  As we look out to what's going to form the value in farmland in 20, 30, 50 years from  now as we try and transition off of our overreliance on fossil fuels, land that you can farm intensively  and produce a lot of food on without using a lot of those inputs that will in all likelihood  get more expensive through the rest of this century.  That seems to me is a real investment opportunity.  
**[0:39:29-0:39:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:39:29):**  No, definitely.  Looking at especially long term focus.  That's the key here in general.  It's the key for any farmer that wants to leave the land maybe to their children or  to any generation after the land.  
**[0:39:44-0:39:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:39:44):**  And that's the perspective.  As a geologist I can't help but come from that perspective because to me if we could  make this transition in 30 years that's remarkably fast.  You think it's centuries normally or even longer.  Yeah, centuries are round off error in terms of geologic time.  
**[0:40:01-0:40:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:40:01):**  But we don't have centuries to solve this problem.  We need to do it much faster.  And that's where I'm hoping that these kinds of ideas catch on and spread among farmers  around the world.  I was just at a conference yesterday back east where I was introduced to a gentleman  
**[0:40:19-0:40:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:40:19):**  from Cornell who had used ideas like this in terms of building more productive rice  systems in Asia and had had great success not only in growing more food with less inputs  but in growing food that had better micronutrient density.  And so I think that hopefully we're on the cusp of really rethinking how we do agriculture.  Which hopefully even means that you need less of it if there's more in it that you need.  
**[0:40:50-0:40:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:40:50):**  Less empty calories and more nutrient ones which would help even more in this equation  because we still have to feed probably 9-10 billion people.  So final question.  Let's imagine there's a gigantic room full of impact investors listening to this podcast.  They're all interested.  
**[0:41:06-0:41:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:41:06):**  They are on board.  They want to get into the regenerative agriculture space, into conservation.  They want to put their money to work.  What would be your piece of advice, obviously not investment advice, but what would be your  piece of advice?  
**[0:41:20-0:41:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:41:20):**  Where to start?  What would be the first step for you?  You mean other than supporting us to write the next book?  Buying the book is a first.  But they've read the book, they've bought the book, they've bought 10 copies for their  
**[0:41:30-0:41:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:41:30):**  friends and now they want to do something with their investment capital.  Well you know I think that if there's looking at how to partner with or put together networks  of people to look at either providing transition assistance to farmers whether in terms of  short-term loans for new equipment that they needed to buy or just sort of financially  backstopping someone taking the risk of a transition and you know anytime you change  
**[0:41:54-0:41:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:41:54):**  practices there's at least a perceived if not real risk.  And that's the bottom part of the hockey stick.  But also sort of thinking about what the opportunities are for partnering with farmers to take degraded  land and turn it back into productivity.  Something like a third of the world's farmland has already been abandoned due to soil degradation.  
**[0:42:21-0:42:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:42:21):**  That problem of feeding the world you mentioned of the 9 or 10 billion person planet would  be a whole lot easier if we restore the degraded farmland around the world.  So I'd encourage people to think about the model of trying to acquire farmland that has  been degraded and turn it around.  Basically rebuild its fertility and turn it back into a net asset.  
**[0:42:44-0:42:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:42:44):**  I think that's amazing advice.  Thank you so much David for sharing.  I would definitely be checking in when the new book comes out because I think it's one  of those pillars or one of the lags of the stool we're missing or we're going to hear  a lot more about if we would talk in a year from now.  
**[0:43:00-0:43:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:43:00):**  A lot of the things we discuss would be quite obvious.  So I'll be checking in and I'll be following you and thank you so much for your time this  morning.  I know it's very early.  Great, well thanks.  
**[0:43:10-0:43:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:43:10):**  I appreciate it.  It's a pleasure to talk and if anyone's interested in following us on Twitter we are active there  with our tag of at dig then the number 2 and grow at dig2grow.  And we can keep people updated on stuff we learn along the way and about when the new  book will come out.  
**[0:43:26-0:43:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:43:26):**  Perfect.  I would definitely link it plus a lot of the things we discuss in the show notes down below.  Okay, great.  Pleasure to talk to you, Kon.  You just listened to an interview with David R Montgomery.  
**[0:43:38-0:43:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:43:38):**  If you're interested in more, please have a look in the description below for the links  to his books where you can learn a lot more about the fascinating examples of farms and  farmers which went against most of modern agriculture science and build up a lot of  soil real fast.  Thank you for making the time to listen to this podcast and making it all the way till  
**[0:43:56-0:43:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:43:56):**  the end.  I hope you enjoyed it as much as I did.  If you have any comments or ideas for future guests, please share them on SoundCloud or  Twitter and if you think this content is relevant or interesting for someone else, please feel  free to share the interview.  
**[0:44:09-0:44:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:44:09):**  And I hope to see you again here soon for more of these type of interviews.  If you found the investing in regenerative agriculture and food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few seconds.  
**[0:44:28-0:44:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:44:28):**  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  join my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or in the description  below.  
**[0:44:48-0:45:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:44:48):**  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  
**[0:45:15-0:45:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:45:15):**  After a hundred interviews and more than a hundred hours of audio asking the question  how to put money to work in regenerating soils and I've been following the space since 2011  and recording these podcasts since 2016 we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework?  
**[0:45:34-0:45:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:45:34):**  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees and what questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  
**[0:45:44-0:45:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:45:44):**  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  You the soil builders and investors in this space, the soil builders, people working in  this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers, vehicle builders, crowd investing,  
**[0:45:59-0:46:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:45:59):**  platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food companies, permaculture, key line  designers, holistic management consultants, et cetera, et cetera.  People that are building soil at scale and the investors who are putting their own money  to work through their family office or as private individuals or people who are putting  other people's money to work through foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies,  
**[0:46:21-0:46:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:46:21):**  et cetera.  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  
**[0:46:31-0:46:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:46:31):**  that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very different means.  So I'm inviting you if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  
**[0:46:46-0:46:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:46:46):**  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides.  So you don't have to ride along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  
**[0:47:09-0:47:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:47:09):**  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  
**[0:47:25-0:47:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:47:25):**  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately, that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  
**[0:47:41-0:47:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/17/david-r-montgomery/#t=0:47:41):**  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  