### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2018-41-10)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com slash course or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  You're going to listen to an interview with Shamik, co-founder of Farmerson.  We're going to talk about the issues facing Indian farmers and how Farmerson is trying  
**[0:00:21-0:00:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:00:21):**  to bring back old methods of natural farming while using the latest technologies.  And using this tech to bring these complex natural farming methods and rotation systems  to smallholder farmers.  And why India and China are very interesting markets when it comes to regenerative agriculture.  And how Shamik raised his first seed round from investors that weren't used to investing  
**[0:00:42-0:00:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:00:42):**  in anything but tech and software.  Enjoy!  Just a small correction, Shamik connected with me after and corrected me that not 25  farmers per hour but 25 farmers per day commit suicide in India.  Which is of course still way too much but luckily 24 times less than what we discussed  
**[0:01:00-0:01:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:01:00):**  in this interview.  Welcome to another episode of investing in regenerative agriculture.  Investing as if the planet mattered.  Podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  
**[0:01:18-0:01:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:01:18):**  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small and consumers start paying much more  
**[0:01:37-0:01:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:01:37):**  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  Before we get started, I've been recording these interviews next to my day job and I  will definitely continue to do so and release about an episode a month.  But at the same time I would love to take this further, share more interviews, their  many more stories to share on investing in regenerative food and agriculture, more depth,  
**[0:01:58-0:02:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:01:58):**  improve the quality, maybe even doing some video series.  So I started a Patreon community, which makes it easy to support creators like myself.  If these podcasts have been of value to you and if you have the means, I invite you to  support me and make this happen.  For more information, please find the link to my Patreon account in the description below.  
**[0:02:19-0:02:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:02:19):**  And now without further ado, the interview.  Enjoy.  So welcome to investing in regenerative agriculture, investing as if the planet mattered.  I'm Kumo Sayin, your host.  In a podcast of today, I'm talking to Shamik Chagavati, co-founder of Farmasyn, based in  
**[0:02:33-0:02:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:02:33):**  Bangalore, India.  On Farmasyn, everyone can rent mini plots of farmland close to the city.  You choose your vegetables and farmers then grow them organically for you and you keep  track of the harvest using the app.  Basically, it's a real life version, organic version of FarmVille.  
**[0:02:48-0:02:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:02:48):**  Welcome Shamik.  Hi, Koen, how are you?  I'm good, I'm good.  Thank you so much for making the time.  Just to start with a personal question after a career at Amazon and other high tech jobs,  
**[0:02:59-0:03:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:02:59):**  what made you go back to the land and start something very, very different and close to  Bangalore?  Right.  So I think there are two reasons for that, right?  One is as a consumer myself, I don't have access to chemical free food, which I can  
**[0:03:16-0:03:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:03:16):**  actually trust, right?  Because the supply chain of fresh produce in India, the way it works is that, let's  say I'm buying something which is being marketed to me as organic, and I go ahead and place  an order on an online site.  The unfortunate thing is that because there are so many intermediaries in the supply chain,  
**[0:03:34-0:03:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:03:34):**  a lot of times the produce that comes to me is not really organic and most consumers now  know this as well.  So there really is no source for, or a very limited source for chemical free food for  Indian consumers at this point of time, because most of us believe that what is being marketed  to us as organic is not really organic.  
**[0:03:51-0:03:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:03:51):**  That's number one.  So from my personal perspective, I wanted to have a source of chemical free food.  On the other hand, farmers in India have a big problem in the next half an hour or so  as we talk to each other, probably about 20-25 farmers in India are going to commit suicide,  right?  
**[0:04:09-0:04:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:04:09):**  And a large reason for that being income problems.  And we'll talk a little bit in detail about what sort of issues they face.  So that's also something that we have been talking about a lot.  We read it in newspapers, we see farmers protest, etc.  And we wanted to do something around this.  
**[0:04:22-0:04:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:04:22):**  So these are two of the reasons why we said let's do something very meaningful.  We have built a lot of technology in various different companies, Yahoo, Amazon, etc.  But let's do something for India and something which actually impacts a lot of lives.  That's amazing.  And can you just because I did a very brief introduction, but can you just walk us through  
**[0:04:40-0:04:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:04:40):**  what Farmizen is, what it means, how long you've been operating and how it's going basically.  We're now in November 2017.  So what's the current state of affairs?  Okay, so we launched somewhere in June, so not too long back, right about what, five  months back.  
**[0:04:54-0:04:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:04:54):**  The idea really has been to, the easiest way to explain how Farmizen works is think of  it as a real life FarmVille, right?  So just like we used to play this FarmVille game on Facebook, and we used to get a patch  of land, plant different things, then harvest them, take care of them, all of that stuff.  So this is very similar.  
**[0:05:10-0:05:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:05:10):**  The only difference being is that you won't earn virtual coins, you earn actual vegetables,  right, while doing that.  It seems much better.  So consumers basically have an app which is available on both Android as well as on iOS.  They use that app to control a mini farm.  
**[0:05:26-0:05:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:05:26):**  A mini farm is 600 square feet in size.  It's divided up into 12 raised beds.  There is already drip irrigation, etc.  Set up and consumers pick and choose what they want to grow in each of them.  Whereas climate kind of allows us to grow multiple different veggies all throughout  
**[0:05:41-0:05:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:05:41):**  the year.  We don't have a very strong winter season, etc., for example, right?  And in the app, they keep on seeing a bunch of updates, right?  So for example, when their tomatoes are flowering, they would get an update in the app and they  would know what's happening.  
**[0:05:54-0:05:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:05:54):**  When it's ready for harvest, they can come and visit the farm, harvest their own produce  themselves.  They can also come and volunteer at the farm, etc.  But very often what happens is people get busy, right?  They might be able to come for four weekends and then there are deadlines at work, etc.  
**[0:06:07-0:06:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:06:07):**  So they get busy for a couple of months.  And at that point of time, we would actually do a home delivery of their veggies.  So we would harvest it and deliver it to their homes.  The way this works internally is we operate in partnership with farmers, right?  So farmers are responsible for land, labor, water, electricity, supervision.  
**[0:06:26-0:06:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:06:26):**  So the production aspects of it, right?  While Farmizen takes care of everything else, right?  So marketing, customer engagement, customer service, all of the technology behind it,  and I'll explain a few bits of tech pieces that we have as well.  All of the inputs, so we want to make sure that the farmers use high quality seeds, high  
**[0:06:43-0:06:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:06:43):**  quality organic inputs.  So we supply those to them as well, right?  And the deliveries, usually most of Indian farmers would not be able to afford or even  take out the time to have a delivery truck and figure out how to do these deliveries.  So we take care of that as well.  
**[0:06:58-0:07:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:06:58):**  So it's just like, for example, when you have the Amazon marketplace, right, where sellers  sell their products, but Amazon takes care of everything else, right?  So it's very similar to that, where we work in a partnership with farmers.  Now, so the consumers have an app, right?  Similarly, farmers have an app as well, right?  
**[0:07:15-0:07:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:07:15):**  And the reason farmers have an app is because most of the farmers that we partner with,  they have typically grown maybe three or four different types of vegetables before, right?  And they specialize in that.  Many of them have come from a mono cropping sort of a background.  Whereas in our situation, it's completely multi cropping based, right, which means that,  
**[0:07:31-0:07:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:07:31):**  for example, currently, in this season, we support about anything between around 40 to  50 different types of vegetables, right?  So these farmers obviously do not know how do I manage what sort of planting regimen  should be used?  What pests could attack each of these plants?  
**[0:07:47-0:07:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:07:47):**  So they don't know all of these things.  So which is why we created an app for the farmer as well, right?  Wow, to really take care of that education part to grow from the monoculture to 30, 40,  50 different vegetables.  That's that's a huge step.  
**[0:08:00-0:08:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:08:00):**  That's correct.  So what this app does is it acts like a smart to do list, right?  So it's like a to do list for the farmer.  So the farmer goes to the field, and he sees, okay, there are these five tasks that I need  to do today.  
**[0:08:11-0:08:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:08:11):**  I there's a new customer who has come in, I need to plant on bed number one, I need  to plant tomatoes on bed number two, I need to put broccoli bed number three, I need to  put kale, right, etc.  Then they see, okay, that was the planting task.  Okay, after two days, we need to put a microbe inoculant into the soil, right?  
**[0:08:29-0:08:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:08:29):**  So I need to start preparing it.  And I'll tell you a little bit about how we try to create these microbe solutions, etc.  And we try to do them in a very natural way, rather than actually buying a lot of inputs  from the market.  So we tell them what is the formula for creating that, right, and what they need to do.  
**[0:08:46-0:08:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:08:46):**  So it not just helps them in terms of figuring out pests, diseases, planting regimens, but  it basically gives them a very structured to do list.  Remember, a lot of farmers in India are not even literate, right?  So which means that our app needs to be extremely simple.  So our app basically has voice support, so they could click on an icon, right, and it  
**[0:09:06-0:09:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:09:06):**  will basically read out the instructions to them in their language that this is these  are the five things you need to do today.  Once they do that, they click a big green button, and the update goes to the consumer,  right?  So the consumer knows my plants have been watered today, de-weeding has been done, this  
**[0:09:21-0:09:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:09:21):**  specific organic fertilizer was applied.  So they keep seeing all of those updates, which means that when they get delivery of  the carrots, for example, right, they can basically go back into their app and they  could see, okay, these carrots were sowed on this day, right?  This is when the things had a pest attack, and this was what was applied on it, right?  
**[0:09:40-0:09:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:09:40):**  And this is when it got ready.  So they pretty much see the entire traceability aspect of it.  So that's how this works.  Now, just taking a step back, why did we do this, right?  I talked about this whole chemical free stuff.  
**[0:09:53-0:10:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:09:53):**  So the reason why farmers in India use chemicals is not because they don't care, it's because  they don't have any other option, right?  Farming in India is a big vicious cycle, right?  Where most farmers on an average, they make very little money, not enough to actually  have a living wage, right?  
**[0:10:14-0:10:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:10:14):**  The problems that Indian farming faces are as follows.  There is a big problem with respect to financing, right?  There's a lack of access to adequate credit in the system.  The risk in the agriculture value chain is completely skewed by towards the farmer, right?  They produce the most value, but because there are so many intermediaries in the supply chain,  
**[0:10:34-0:10:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:10:34):**  the farmers take most of the risk, right?  The retailer takes very little risk, the commission agent who's there in the middle, he takes  very little risk, right?  And so this is one part.  Second part is there is also a lot of price risk as well, right?  
**[0:10:47-0:10:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:10:47):**  Very often, the farmer might have spent two, three months getting a very good yield of  tomatoes.  And when they go to the market, they realize that the prices have crashed so much that  it hardly even covers the transportation cost of taking it from the farm to the clearing  house, right?  
**[0:11:02-0:11:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:11:02):**  So that's the second problem.  A bunch of distribution inefficiencies are also there, beyond the fact that there are  on an average about five to six intermediaries from farm to fork.  The other big problem is that there is a huge lack of cold chains in the Indian scenario,  right?  
**[0:11:17-0:11:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:11:17):**  The cold chains that we have in India is hardly enough to cover 10% of what is actually required,  right?  So which means that there is a lot of wastage of produce as well, right?  In fact, the estimates in India are about post-harvest wastage is almost 40 to 45%,  right?  
**[0:11:33-0:11:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:11:33):**  Across multiple different type of agricultural commodities.  So there are a lot of distribution inefficiencies.  In addition, there are also production inefficiencies, right?  Farmers have limited access to quality inputs, know-how, technology, etc.  The typical way that the farmer operates is they go to the local seeds and pesticide shop,  
**[0:11:51-0:11:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:11:51):**  right?  And they go and ask this guy, hey, what do I grow?  What should I grow?  Right?  And the pesticide shop owner kind of acts as the plant doctor, right?  
**[0:12:00-0:12:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:12:00):**  And he basically tells him, this is what you do.  If there's a problem, put these chemicals.  If that problem comes, put that chemical Z, right?  So this is how it operates.  Along with all of these inefficiencies, the other big problem is that average farm size  
**[0:12:13-0:12:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:12:13):**  holding in India is very small.  So 85% of Indian farmers own less than four and a half acres of land.  And this average farm size is actually declining every year, right?  So the farms are getting smaller and smaller.  Because they're being cut up because they go down in generations.  
**[0:12:28-0:12:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:12:28):**  Absolutely, absolutely.  You are right.  Because they're like, there was one father, he had a four acre farm.  Now he has two sons.  So the farm is going to get divided between them two acres, two acres each, right?  
**[0:12:39-0:12:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:12:39):**  So because of that, the average farm size being so low in India, the problem is, I mean,  just and from a comparison perspective, an average US farmer has about 100 times more  land than an average Indian farmer, right?  Now, so coupled with the small farm sizes and all of these inefficiencies, what happens  is that it's extremely difficult, probably even impossible to earn a living wage, right?  
**[0:13:05-0:13:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:13:05):**  The typical farmers that we talk to now, they are within a 20-30 kilometer range of the  city at the current stage at Farmison, right?  And what we see is they make about somewhere around five to 6000 rupees per acre, right?  As their monthly income, which means just to put it into US dollars, that's less than  $100 per acre, right?  
**[0:13:26-0:13:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:13:26):**  Per month.  So you have a, and most farmers in India, although the median size I mentioned is about  four and a half acres, if you talk to most farmers, nine out of 10 farmers, they'll say  they have about one and a half acres or two acres of land, which means that they're basically  after putting all of this hard work, they're making a couple of hundred dollars, right?  
**[0:13:48-0:13:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:13:48):**  Every month, right?  And that too, it is not guaranteed because of all of the risks that I mentioned, there's  a big risk that crops will fail, in which case you have put in three months of effort,  you have taken a loan to buy your seeds, etc.  And then you are supposed to get your 200-300 dollars and that just vanishes, right?  
**[0:14:07-0:14:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:14:07):**  So because of this, farmers have been committing a lot of suicides, etc. in India.  It's a big problem in India right now.  Now, what do you do if you're a farmer and you know that if you make a mistake or if  your crops fail, you are going to lose all of your money and you will not have money  to eat, right?  
**[0:14:23-0:14:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:14:23):**  What do you do as a farmer?  As a farmer, you try to reduce your risk.  And the easiest way to reduce short term risk is by adopting practices, growing practices,  which are harmful to the soil and environment, right?  So you will end up using chemical pesticides, although as a farmer, you know that it's probably  
**[0:14:37-0:14:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:14:37):**  killing your soil in the longer run, but you will end up doing that because it's a matter  of your survival.  So that's what has been happening with the Indian farmer.  And because of this, it's not just a problem with the farmers, this is all affecting consumers  as well, right?  
**[0:14:50-0:14:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:14:50):**  Because India's topsoil quality, which was amongst the best in the world, has been deteriorating  rapidly, right?  Because of a lot of this chemical farming, etc.  The historically speaking, India had a very, very interesting culture of doing farming  in a very natural way, what's called natural farming, right?  
**[0:15:09-0:15:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:15:09):**  Very similar to some of the principles of Fukuoka's natural farming, for example, right?  So we try to adopt a bunch of those sort of things also at Farmison.  There is a renewed interest in regenerative agriculture in India.  Andhra Pradesh, one of the states in India, for example, recently said, hey, we are going  to adopt zero budget natural farming.  
**[0:15:33-0:15:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:15:33):**  And I'll talk a little bit about the zero budget part of it.  We are going to adopt zero budget natural farming as the preferred methodology of farming.  There's another state in India, very small hill state called Sikkim.  Sikkim has become the first organic state, right?  So everything that's grown in Sikkim is completely organic, because the government does not allow  
**[0:15:49-0:15:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:15:49):**  anything inorganic to be sold in terms of imports, etc.  Right?  So some of this is already changing, so which is good.  But we wanted to kind of participate in this process of reviving Indian agriculture in  a way which is very sustainable.  
**[0:16:05-0:16:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:16:05):**  So that's the way this thing works.  Did that answer your question?  Yeah, definitely.  And it raises, obviously, a lot of other questions.  I think the mission is enormous, extremely important and at a very interesting time.  
**[0:16:19-0:16:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:16:19):**  I mean, the focus in general, I think on food and quality and what actually is in the food  you're eating plus transparency and what now is possible with technology puts you at a  very interesting moment.  I was wondering if the farmers and the farms you work with and you partner with, how do  you keep track of the soil and the land and how do you keep track of what actually is  
**[0:16:42-0:16:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:16:42):**  the farmer putting in his app, what he or she is doing that had actually happened?  Absolutely.  That's a great question.  So various parts of our business model have been thought through from various different  directions.  
**[0:16:53-0:16:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:16:53):**  For example, you mentioned right now what's the guarantee that the farmer is actually  doing what he's saying, right, when he's clicking on the big green button.  So a couple of things.  First of all, we encourage our customers, right, farmisans to visit the farms as often  as they can.  
**[0:17:10-0:17:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:17:10):**  Right.  Even if they don't come every weekend, every two or three weekends, they end up visiting  the farm, they end up doing stuff on their own, etc.  So which means at any point in the farm, let's say, let's take a farm which has 200 subscribers,  right.  
**[0:17:21-0:17:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:17:21):**  So they are the sensors basically for you.  Correct.  So think of it as a crowd-sourced audit, so to speak.  Right.  So the second thing that we do is we actually send out drones, right.  
**[0:17:31-0:17:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:17:31):**  And this is where some of our earlier technology background kind of help us.  So what we have ended up doing is usually agricultural drones, etc. are quite costly,  right.  And they might not be, they might put a big cost burden.  But what we have done is essentially use consumer level drones, right.  
**[0:17:47-0:17:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:17:47):**  And we have built some technology on top of that, which helps us monitor a lot of these  things, right.  So we send a drone out to the fields every three, four days.  What that does is it does, it takes a fairly high resolution image of all of the mini farms  in the farm, right.  
**[0:18:04-0:18:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:18:04):**  And these are all individual beds as well.  So for example, if you have 200 subscribers, that's 200 into 12, 2400 different raised  beds in which crops are growing.  So we get all of these high images of, high resolution images of each of those beds, right.  Those get uploaded to a central server, our horticulturist or slash agronomist who sits  
**[0:18:23-0:18:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:18:23):**  in our office, he basically gets to see all of those images on a daily basis, right.  So now let's say a farmer has marked in the app saying, I have done de-weeding, right.  Usually in natural farming, when you are not using weeding sites, etc.  Weeding is a very large part of their effort, it will take 20-30% of their effort easily,  right.  
**[0:18:44-0:18:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:18:44):**  So the farmer has said, hey, I have done de-weeding on this side of the farm, but the horticulturist  could see it and he could see weeds in the picture, right.  So he knows that, okay, what he said is not what is being done.  So then he can intervene.  So these sort of things.  
**[0:18:59-0:19:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:18:59):**  Also, this allows us to monitor things like growing growth stages of the plant, right.  And to adapt your coaching app for the farmers, of course, not just because if they don't  do something, but maybe some of the growing is going differently than you imagined.  So we can intervene immediately.  So that's the second aspect of how we try to monitor this.  
**[0:19:18-0:19:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:19:18):**  Third thing, and this I think I have not highlighted so far.  And this is actually the most important aspect of it, is that our business model is a subscription  based business model, right.  So consumers pay 2500, about $40 per month, consumers pay, which includes everything,  all the deliveries, all the inputs, their renting of the farm, whatever, right.  
**[0:19:40-0:19:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:19:40):**  Now because of that, farmers are assured of an income every month, right.  So they have zero incentive to apply chemicals or take short term measures, because essentially  the consumers are taking a large part of the yield risk on them, right.  So thereby, the farmers do what is right for their soil.  See end of the day, farmers are a lot more sensitive to the fact that the soil needs  
**[0:20:04-0:20:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:20:04):**  to be alive and good because their livelihood depends on it, right.  And they have seen too many instances of soil fertility going down over time, right.  It's a real partnership with aligned incentives.  So which is why because of these incentives, there is basically no reason for farmers to  do anything which is outside the system because they get paid based on inputs, not based on  
**[0:20:25-0:20:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:20:25):**  outputs, which is a fundamental shift from how agriculture always has happened, right.  No, definitely.  And to give a state of just to do a picture at the moment, the end of November 2017, how  many people of course, if you're okay sharing and share to the level of you want to share,  how many farms, how many people are on the platform?  
**[0:20:45-0:20:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:20:45):**  Sure.  So right now, we just we are just at I think five farms right now, right, a few more are  launching, right.  And we are at about 350 customers right now, our target is to reach about 2000 subscribers  by January.  
**[0:21:03-0:21:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:21:03):**  So that's happening.  We are not demand constrained right now.  We are more supply constrained in the sense that what we want to do is we need to find  always the right farming partners, right, to make sure that this is a farmer who, who's  also equally committed to sustainable farming, right.  
**[0:21:21-0:21:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:21:21):**  So and very interesting, a lot of the, so initially, we started trying to reach out  to farmers directly, etc.  And we saw that it was difficult to convince them because they are quite, they would have  a lot of, they get confused with the model.  Are you sure this is something very new, etc.  
**[0:21:37-0:21:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:21:37):**  But what's happening now is the existing farmers, they are referring other farmers, right.  And they come to the field, see how it's working, see the fact that they have been able to get  customers going, etc.  Right.  And that they are making their money as well.  
**[0:21:53-0:21:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:21:53):**  And this thing is working.  So once they come to the farm, see it, then they are also trying to build it up.  We will still, we will, we will still not very quickly go to 50,000 subscribers, etc.  Because there are a lot of things we are discovering as well, primarily with respect to the production  process, right, which we want to make sure that those get solved with time.  
**[0:22:12-0:22:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:22:12):**  For example, since we are doing everything in a natural mode without any pesticides,  etc.  Pest attacks are a big problem that you're trying to solve, right.  And we are also learning while doing this entire thing.  So the way we try to solve pest attacks is by fairly standard mechanisms.  
**[0:22:29-0:22:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:22:29):**  So we plant trap crops, right, for example, mustard greens, etc, which basically attract  the pests, and they leave the main crops aside, right.  So those sort of things, we are also experimenting with specific biocontrol agents as well, right,  introducing predatory insects into the fields, etc, which eat other insects and bugs, right.  We also do a bunch of different things, for example, and some of these are very specific  
**[0:22:52-0:22:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:22:52):**  to India as well.  For example, we have this flower called marigold, right, and we plant a lot of marigold between  our beds, because not only does it attract pollinators, but it also ends up, there are  alkaloids in the roots of marigolds, which repel a lot of pests, right.  So there is a lot of learning that's happening at our end as well.  
**[0:23:12-0:23:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:23:12):**  So our farmer app, we are updating with all of these things.  So we want to make sure that we grow gradually, not grow absolutely suddenly with a lot of,  so we see a lot of consumer demand though, and usually what happens is there is some  level of virality in how this proposition works, right.  Once a consumer starts getting his produce.  
**[0:23:31-0:23:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:23:31):**  Of course, it's amazing to share, like, the vegetables from my farm just arrived, of course,  I put it on Instagram.  Absolutely, absolutely.  So most, so we haven't, we just started, in fact, we just started experimenting with advertising,  etc, maybe have spent like $100 so far.  
**[0:23:49-0:23:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:23:49):**  But otherwise, so far, all of these customers have clearly come through word of mouth and  one existing customer introducing another customer, right, and telling them, hey, I'm  going to the farm next time, can you come?  Interesting thing is, see, India cities are also, we have become concrete jungles, there's  not too much of greenery, there are not too many public parks inside the city, right.  
**[0:24:09-0:24:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:24:09):**  Now these farms are all located within perimeter areas of the city.  So these are also turning out to be good spots to just spend your, you know, you go there  on a Saturday afternoon and spend three, four hours there, right.  Maybe do a picnic there.  So these are also starting to develop as those sort of spots, just green areas where you  
**[0:24:27-0:24:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:24:27):**  like to spend your weekends at because of a lack of public parks in the city, right.  So when somebody comes to a farm, they invariably get a few friends along, right.  And they say, hey, we are going to have a small tea party here, right.  So those friends come in and they say, oh, can I sign up for this?  Okay, let me get onto the waitlist.  
**[0:24:43-0:24:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:24:43):**  So when it opens up, we'll sign up for this, right.  So that's how most of the growth has been happening.  No, extremely, extremely interesting.  And just to take one step back and look at the control of what I have as a subscriber  versus your organic rotations.  
**[0:24:59-0:25:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:24:59):**  That's something you can manage, obviously.  But if I keep saying with all my neighbors, I want only carrots, how much space is there  for your agronomist and horticulturist to really manage that and build up the soil and  put all the beds versus the control as the subscribers have.  Sure.  
**[0:25:18-0:25:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:25:18):**  So if I understand the question, what you're saying is that can they grow multiple different  things in different beds or do they grow just one thing?  Is that what you're asking?  No, I'm yes and no.  I'm mostly looking to build up your soil.  
**[0:25:31-0:25:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:25:31):**  In general, you need quite a complex rotation system.  And you need you as a farmer, you need to be in control or as in this case, an organization  above the farmer or next to the farm need to be in control and figuring out, okay, maybe  better this year to put the tomatoes there instead of there.  But how does that clash with me as a subscriber that maybe wants the tomatoes there?  
**[0:25:52-0:25:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:25:52):**  Absolutely.  So that's a very good point.  So the way we do it is when people click on a particular bed in their app, right, and  they say, okay, I had tomatoes growing here and I need to rotate the crop.  So they click on the bed and then there's a recommended list of crops, right?  
**[0:26:06-0:26:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:26:06):**  So we give them, this is the top most recommended.  Okay, you're already down.  Yeah, you already decreased the amount of options and basically, I would also teach  people about rotation.  So basically, they can still choose something which is not recommended.  
**[0:26:19-0:26:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:26:19):**  So they can still go ahead and plant tomato.  But we highlight it in the app saying that, you know what, your yield is at risk, the  soil quality will be at risk if you do this.  So they still have the freedom to do it.  But we make it very obvious to them that if you do it, it's not good.  
**[0:26:32-0:26:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:26:32):**  Right?  Try to, these are the recommended ones, right?  And they choose from that recommended list.  That's extremely interesting and a big education part as well, I can imagine, because most  people wouldn't think about that unless you are in farming, or natural farming.  
**[0:26:45-0:26:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:26:45):**  Absolutely.  There are some very interesting features which we are launching in the next couple of months  in the app.  So we are trying to gamify, to incentivize users to further right behaviors, right?  So the way we are trying to do this, and this will be so I'm just giving you a sneak peek,  
**[0:26:58-0:27:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:26:58):**  this will be launched fairly soon, is that as they, so let's say we want to have consumers  come to the farm, because it's beneficial for our business model, it's beneficial for  consumers to see it, right?  So it's very important that consumers come to the farm.  So how do we incentivize that?  
**[0:27:13-0:27:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:27:13):**  So when they come to the farm and they do a check in at the farm, right?  We will basically give them some points, right?  Similarly, other sort of behaviors as so they can chat with other growers also inside the  app, right?  So they can converse with other growers.  
**[0:27:26-0:27:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:27:26):**  And we see most people using that to share recipes, etc.  Because many people are also discovering new types of vegetables.  And they are like, okay, I'm going to plant this, but what can I make out of this, right?  So people use that in app chat to share a lot of recipes, etc. with each other and in  general discussions, learning about farming and things like that.  
**[0:27:45-0:27:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:27:45):**  So we want to encourage conversations there as well, right?  So the idea is that encourage for all of those behaviors, which we want our consumers to  do, which are beneficial for our business and for the community, we will incentivize  them with specific amount of points, right?  Those karma points or whatever they could redeem for various different interesting things.  
**[0:28:04-0:28:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:28:04):**  So we are trying to do a few tie ups with natural and organic farmers on the fruit side  of things, right?  So, so the idea is that if you are a very engaged vegetable grower, right, because you  are doing a lot of actions on the app, you're coming to the farm, you're volunteering at  the farm, you might end up accumulating enough points for you to basically buy a bunch of  
**[0:28:22-0:28:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:28:22):**  fruits as well.  And those fruits are going to get directly delivered for certain farms, right?  These are not going to be in the farmville model that we are doing because you can't  do it for fruits easily, right?  Because fruits have a very long, just the same cycle, etc.  
**[0:28:34-0:28:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:28:34):**  But what if you could earn these karma points and then redeem them against fruits, right?  That's something that we are trying to do.  Yeah, to slowly add more of your, more of your daily shopping, coming from something  and you of course partner only with the organic fruit farms, you can actually trace and trust  and are transparent.  
**[0:28:51-0:28:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:28:51):**  Yeah.  So I just wanted to take a couple of minutes telling you a bit about the farming methodology  that we try to follow, right, the pillars of it.  So the three or four key pillars of it is, one is instead of adding a lot of compost,  etc. from outside, which using industrial compost can be questionable, right?  
**[0:29:11-0:29:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:29:11):**  It's great to use home compost.  But when you use compost that is being manufactured in a factory, right, there are certain issues  with that, right?  For example, in hot Indian summers, that compost actually decomposes and releases a lot of  carbon dioxide, etc. into the air as well, right?  
**[0:29:28-0:29:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:29:28):**  Because we have fairly hot summers and stuff like that.  So what we try to do is more of following, put in a lot of mulch once your plants have  grown, that prevents the weeds, that prevents evaporation of water, it gives more shelter  for earthworms, etc. as well.  Then on top of that mulch, put microbe solutions and those microbe solutions are not microbe  
**[0:29:49-0:29:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:29:49):**  solutions that you buy from the market, but things which you create at the farm using  ingredients which are available very nearby, right?  So cows are a very important part of that, because what we use is we use cow dung, cow  urine, we use jaggery, local jaggery to provide the energy for the microbes to multiply, we  use pulse or leguminous flowers, flowers as in like cowpea flower, etc. those to provide  
**[0:30:16-0:30:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:30:16):**  the protein that is required for those microbes to actually do cell division, right?  And we use those to create microbe solutions, which then you pour onto the mulch so that  they start decomposing the mulch in situ, right?  Rather than adding compost from outside.  So that starts forming the top humus layer, for example.  
**[0:30:33-0:30:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:30:33):**  The second thing is that these microbes that you introduce to the soil and most of these  microbes die away when you do chemical farming, etc.  So when you introduce these microbes into the soil, they form a good relationship with  the plant roots, right?  So they help the plants absorb a lot of the minerals which are already there in the soil,  
**[0:30:51-0:30:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:30:51):**  right?  Just like microbes in our body, inside our gut help us absorb a lot of the nutrition,  right?  Similar thing exists with bacteria and plants as well with microbes and plants as well,  right?  
**[0:31:03-0:31:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:31:03):**  We just try to kind of unlock those sort of things.  And in our, the way we plan our farms, etc.  We put in a lot of moringa, right, where that's very good for nitrogen fixation, for example,  we put in a lot of pulses, etc. as inter crops, right?  Those kind of help do again a lot of nitrogen fixation.  
**[0:31:19-0:31:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:31:19):**  So what we are essentially, our philosophy is that nature already knows how to grow things.  Let's just give nature a toehold and get out of the way, right?  That's what we try to do.  So we don't try to add too many different inputs only just as is necessary.  When you talk about pest repellents, for example, again, you could use things like neem oil,  
**[0:31:40-0:31:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:31:40):**  etc. which you can buy from the market, or you could choose to make some of these insect  repellents, right?  A bunch of these insect repellents can be made by crushing leaves of various different  types of plants which are typically available in many farms, right?  Or in and around those farms, right?  
**[0:31:56-0:32:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:31:56):**  So you crush those leaves together, right, make a juice out of it, and then you spray  that on.  So we are trying to follow a lot of these indigenous recipes, so to speak, right, from  both the inputs perspective, from microbe solution perspective, as well as from pest  repellent perspective, rather than buying stuff from outside.  
**[0:32:13-0:32:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:32:13):**  There are of course some things that you need to buy from the market as well.  But the idea is that one is about regenerative agriculture, secondly is about reducing the  reliance of farmers on input companies, right?  This sort of agriculture has actually been practiced in India for hundreds and thousands  of years.  
**[0:32:34-0:32:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:32:34):**  It's just that in the last 30 or 40 years, we have kind of forgotten about a lot of those  and tried to take systems from outside which were not really meant for our small farm situations.  Yeah, you're basically I mean, looking back at the history of farming in India, this last  30 years was a very small bleep in history.  And now, hopefully in the next 10, 20, 30 years, you move back with all the technology  
**[0:32:59-0:33:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:32:59):**  you have now obviously, to the natural and this gets very close to zero budget farming,  but actually done in a high tech way and done in soil measurements and soil technology that  we have now obviously that they probably knew in the time before, but we've lost that sort  of sensitivity to reading the soil.  So basically, the way we think about it is that we need to use technology to improve  
**[0:33:20-0:33:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:33:20):**  things etc.  But let's also not forget what worked in the past, right and try to combine them together.  Very interesting.  And what's your vision in terms I mean, you're building up here, you're adding new partners,  obviously, but what's your long term vision for this company?  
**[0:33:36-0:33:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:33:36):**  Is it going beyond vegetables?  Are you going to add maybe at some point, are you going to add fruits?  Are you going to go to a more perennial system where trees are part of it?  Is there a meat part or dairy?  What are your ideas?  
**[0:33:48-0:33:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:33:48):**  So I think we definitely want to focus only at this point of time, at least, in the next  couple of years only on the fresh produce side of things, right.  But there are essentially what we are about is connecting consumers to farmers and making  consumers a part of the production process itself, right.  That's essentially what we are trying to do.  
**[0:34:10-0:34:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:34:10):**  So the way it actually manifests itself might be different in the mechanics from what we  are doing currently.  For example, just to if you consider our current thing about as a real life farm bill, right.  Maybe what this could evolve into later on could be for example, a Kickstarter for farming,  right.  
**[0:34:30-0:34:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:34:30):**  Let's say grains, right.  Let's say we want consumers to be part of the production process of rice, right.  Now rice, of course, you need to, you cannot do some of these techniques that we're talking  about or this sort of a model would not work.  Maybe the consumers could focus on, you know, let's say the consumers are growing rice in  
**[0:34:50-0:34:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:34:50):**  collaboration with the farmer and they keep monitoring it through our app, right.  The farmers similarly have an app which helps them actually manage their farm and stuff  like that.  So all of those pieces remain the same.  The difference being that now that let's say two tons of rice have been created in that  
**[0:35:04-0:35:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:35:04):**  farm, we provide the market linkage part of it, right, and we get the rice to the market.  Some of it we deliver to the consumer for his personal use, but the remaining gets sold  and the proceeds get distributed between the farmer and the consumer.  And maybe we take a small cut out of that, right.  This is one model that this could evolve into if we choose to grow into things beyond fresh  
**[0:35:24-0:35:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:35:24):**  produce, right.  Our immediate plans though are for the next couple of years, we just want to get to five  or six cities in India, get to 20,000 subscribers in each city.  Also about let's say 100,000 subscribers each paying 40, 50 dollars per month.  That's our initial plan, right.  
**[0:35:41-0:35:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:35:41):**  Once we get to this, then we'll think of how do we expand into other things.  I don't think we will get into meat or dairy, etc.  It's a very different business, right.  So I don't think we'll get into that.  And of course with the size of the market and the size of the issues you mentioned before,  
**[0:35:59-0:36:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:35:59):**  just in fresh produce there's a lifetime of work to do.  So I don't want to distract you, but I'm just interested in the vision.  I'm very interested in what you mentioned before on the sort of kick-starting, kick-starter  of farming.  New models like that could fix a lot of the issues you mentioned before, take out some  
**[0:36:19-0:36:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:36:19):**  of the incentives, some of the incentives that are really destroying soil, destroying  farmers' lives and of course destroying our health.  So that's interesting to hear that there's at least the thought and at some point probably  also the time and resources to do that.  So the other interesting thing, because you bring up the dairy, etc. part of it.  
**[0:36:38-0:36:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:36:38):**  See, I mean if you talk to folks who work with the environment, etc., right, a lot of  them will have a lot of comments to make on how the dairy industry has played a big role  in destroying our environment, right.  So the interesting thing is that at least the sort of agriculture that we used to follow  in India and which we are trying to bring back depends a lot on integrated farming using  
**[0:37:02-0:37:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:37:02):**  cows, etc., right, using farm animals to create a lot of the inputs that are required, right,  which goes back to interior soil.  So that's what we are trying to do.  So maybe there are some aspects, for example, if you have one cow in your farm, right, you  can actually create those microbe solutions, etc., and fertilizers for almost 30 acres  
**[0:37:23-0:37:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:37:23):**  of land, right.  So any of these small farmers, we highly recommend that if you have 4 or 5 acres of land, just  keep one cow.  That cow is going to give you a lot of inputs in terms of what you use on the soil back  in to enrich it.  
**[0:37:37-0:37:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:37:37):**  But you're not having the cow because you want the meat or the milk, but you're having  it because it's part of a farming system, a natural farming system, which is a very  different mindset, obviously, than growing as many cows as possible in a factory and  sell it because of that.  Very interesting.  
**[0:37:55-0:37:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:37:55):**  As we're bringing up, I mean, you brought up the Kickstarter, etc., I want to just touch  upon for a few seconds on investing and investors and the money side of things.  You have raised a seed round, which I have to congratulate you with, obviously, because  I don't think many in the regenerative agriculture space are now in that process or are thinking  or looking, but there are not too many that actually did it.  
**[0:38:19-0:38:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:38:19):**  Can you talk a bit about that?  How did these discussions with the investors go and were they interested?  Obviously, they were because they joined, but were they interested in the model and  how far, how difficult was it to do that?  Sure.  
**[0:38:32-0:38:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:38:32):**  So I think a couple of things.  So when we started talking to investors, etc., I think first was, and we started talking  to investors even before we launched our first farm, right.  So obviously, there was initially some hesitation from potential investors that, hey, this sounds  like a very crazy idea.  
**[0:38:48-0:38:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:38:48):**  It does not sound like, OK, see in India, a lot of investments happen because there  was, let's say, oh, there is a Uber which succeeded in US.  So let's do a Uber for India, right.  Or there's some other company in US which let's do that same model in India.  So a lot of, unfortunately, a lot of investing in India happens based on models which have  
**[0:39:11-0:39:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:39:11):**  worked elsewhere.  And this was a very new sort of a model.  So there was obviously some hesitation around it.  But when we launched our first farm, that got subscribed by with, I think, 79 subscribers  within like a week of launch without doing any marketing, etc., right.  
**[0:39:25-0:39:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:39:25):**  So that immediately investors got started, OK, it looks like there is adequate interest  for something like this.  The second thing was, is it possible to actually grow?  So there were a lot of hypotheses around production, which we wanted to prove out.  Can we actually produce enough food to replace 70, 80 percent of the vegetable requirements  
**[0:39:42-0:39:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:39:42):**  of a small family, right, of a, let's say, a husband, wife and a kid sort of a family?  Can you do that through just such small areas?  So that we were able to prove that as well.  So once these two proof points were there, that there is adequate interest and it's possible  to actually do this production, then investors, then folks that we started talking to, they  
**[0:40:02-0:40:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:40:02):**  were a lot more receptive.  We ended up, but still we decided to take a smaller round, right.  So we raised about 300 K USD and we raised it from one fund, one institutional fund called  Venture Highway, right.  And remaining folks are all angels.  
**[0:40:22-0:40:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:40:22):**  So it's angels and one institutional fund.  Very, very interesting.  And did many of them, I can imagine, oh, actually, did they visit the farm or was it very different  from what they expected?  So people did visit the farm.  
**[0:40:38-0:40:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:40:38):**  It was, I think they were quite intrigued to see that, oh, this is actually working,  right.  So some of them did visit the farm, some of them did not because they were actually not  in the city, right.  Some of them are based from Delhi and we are in Bangalore.  
**[0:40:52-0:40:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:40:52):**  Yeah, no, that's it.  And I can imagine it's been a while for many probably visiting a farm, especially one that's  working and also producing a lot more than the typical small acre farmers.  Very interestingly, because obviously we were talking to investors, etc. before launching  the first farm.  
**[0:41:10-0:41:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:41:10):**  So out of those 79 subscribers, three of them were VCs.  Three of them were folks who work in venture capital farms.  Yeah, no, that was going to be my question.  I imagine, I mean, any good investor would try the product before they, if it's there,  obviously, would try it before making the investment and also just to see in general  
**[0:41:28-0:41:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:41:28):**  if it works.  And for the farmers, how can you, I mean, you've been, let's say farmers and soil in  six, seven months into the first farm.  What has been the difference for them and for the soil and has it been a steep, I can  imagine a steep learning curve?  
**[0:41:44-0:41:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:41:44):**  Absolutely.  So I think two or three things.  One is that the current farmer at least is making almost four times what he was making  earlier, right.  Four to five times.  
**[0:41:53-0:41:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:41:53):**  Wow.  So that's number one.  Number two is that it's predictable, right.  So it's not depending on whether my crops will succeed.  So not only have his returns have become four, five fold, but his risks have become very  
**[0:42:06-0:42:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:42:06):**  minimal, right.  The only risk that he faces is that, oh, maybe things don't work out well and maybe subscribers  cancel and there is some time period where not all of my mini farms are sold out.  So that's the only risk that he faces, which has not turned out so far.  So far that farm has been always completely sold out, etc.  
**[0:42:27-0:42:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:42:27):**  So for farmers, it's a big win.  Now from the soil perspective, the best example of that we have seen, which kind of tells  us that the soil is becoming much better is that we now see a lot of earthworms in the  soil.  Earlier we couldn't find any, right.  
**[0:42:41-0:42:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:42:41):**  So this specific farm, what was happening is that this was left uncultivated for some  time.  For a couple of years after that millets were being grown in it.  So one of the issues, right, and this is something important to talk about as well.  I was mentioning that we curate specific types of farmers, etc.  
**[0:42:57-0:43:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:42:57):**  So ideally we want to work with land which has not been used for some time or things  like millets, etc. have been grown because millets is a very hardy crop.  It's a grain crop.  It's a very hardy crop.  So nobody uses pesticides on them, right.  
**[0:43:10-0:43:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:43:10):**  Because we want to use land which is not already ridden with pesticides because it takes quite  some time to go, those pesticides to drain off, etc.  So which is why it's important for us to also select the right farmers because if the soil  is already hurt using pesticides, we don't want to expose our consumers to that, right.  So ideally it should be land which is not being cultivated right now and just lying  
**[0:43:33-0:43:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:43:33):**  there or maybe you are growing fodder in it.  So it's usually lower quality land which we then start enriching, right.  And we see a lot of earthworms that have come up into the soil now, right.  Now if you dig up into the soil, you'll see a lot of earthworms.  So that's one of the like proof points for us.  
**[0:43:48-0:43:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:43:48):**  The key indicators.  And what does the farmer think of all the people that come now to his farm and see his  farm almost as a, of course as a supermarket, as a way where their food comes from but also  as a park?  Right.  
**[0:44:01-0:44:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:44:01):**  So for him it's actually, it's interesting.  Initially he was not used to this, right.  Because see from a farmer who was completely focusing on production, now he's somebody  who needs to, he sees somebody coming to the farm, he smiles at him, etc.  So initially there was definitely some adjustment period, right, where he had to also learn  
**[0:44:21-0:44:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:44:21):**  that okay folks are going to come visit my farm, right.  Because so far it was my farm, I do whatever I do here.  So there was definitely an adjustment period around that.  But I think after a period of time people, the farmers also start enjoying it because  people start volunteering, right.  
**[0:44:36-0:44:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:44:36):**  So there's one of our customers right now.  She is a yoga teacher during the early mornings, right.  So early morning she would do her personal yoga classes, etc.  She would teach at the institute.  And then after lunch she would basically come and spend four hours at the farm, right, every  
**[0:44:52-0:44:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:44:52):**  day.  Every day other than weekends of course.  So like five days a week she would come to the farm, spend four hours not just working  on her plot but pretty much volunteering with everything that the farmer is doing, right.  So the farmer, that's a great thing.  
**[0:45:04-0:45:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:45:04):**  He now knows that when customers come to the farm some of them will probably become volunteers  and will help him with his labor, right.  So that dynamic works out well.  And just to ask a final question because I want to be conscious of your time.  I'm always imagining there are a lot of Smart Impact investors listening to this podcast  
**[0:45:25-0:45:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:45:25):**  and they're all ready to get into regenerative agriculture.  They've heard it or they're ready to get into minimum input or zero budget or natural  agriculture, whatever stamp we put on it.  What would be your advice if you would be talking to Smart, let's hope Smart Impact  investors that want to get into this space, what they should look out for?  
**[0:45:44-0:45:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:45:44):**  I think see when impact investors look at things they need to, I think they need to  have a much larger investment horizon, right, or a payback horizon than in other industries,  right.  Because very simple things, right.  Let's say that you are investing in a company which has come up with a very different production  
**[0:46:00-0:46:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:46:00):**  technique, right.  It's going to take quite some time.  You can't like, you can't tweak your model or you can't pivot your model in a few months  like you can do in other sectors or other businesses, right.  So that's something to keep in mind that you probably need to think about your investment  
**[0:46:14-0:46:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:46:14):**  horizons.  That's number one.  Number two, I guess, I think both India and China are actually very interesting markets  to look at from regenerative agriculture point of view because of a couple of things.  One is that the soil quality has been deteriorating rapidly in both of these countries.  
**[0:46:33-0:46:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:46:33):**  Second is also the fact that both of these countries are kind of a little trust deficit  streams, right, where consumers don't trust even if something is mentioned as organic  certified etc.  Right.  So I think a large number of opportunities are coming up around that, right.  
**[0:46:50-0:46:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:46:50):**  How do you like build trust by getting consumers connected back to things etc.  And I think a large number of these opportunities are in India and China right now.  That's an extremely interesting point of view.  It's definitely and they are two of the biggest markets in the world and in need of so much  and there's so much growth still going on there probably.  
**[0:47:12-0:47:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:47:12):**  Hopefully we can avoid some of the mistakes we made here and we went down a bit too far  to the right and maybe or to the left depending on how you look and now you are still at a  crossroad although the situation of course is extremely bad with 25 farmers have committed  suicide actually more since we've been talking but there's still a way to go back to the  agriculture with the new technology that you were doing 30-40 years ago.  
**[0:47:35-0:47:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:47:35):**  So the other thing is some of the systems which are available for example if you look  at other countries right if you look at US.  In US community supported agriculture in general has been something which has been picking  gathering steam etc. over some time.  There are about I think 15,000 farms in US which follow community supported agriculture  
**[0:47:57-0:48:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:47:57):**  in general and that's their take in how to do regenerative agriculture.  But I think whenever you are investing in any of these businesses you need to look at  both the farmer side as well as the consumer side.  Is there a consumer demand?  A and B with the business model can farmers actually operate with that business model  
**[0:48:15-0:48:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:48:15):**  right because farmers in different parts of the world in developed countries etc. might  be a lot more savvy they might be able to do marketing themselves right or if you give  them some tools they might be able to use it and do their own marketing and things like  that right.  But the situation is a little different in countries like India right where many of these  
**[0:48:35-0:48:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:48:35):**  farmers are also not very literate.  So that adds a very interesting dimension and when you evaluate in opportunities you  probably want to see how are those situations handled right.  You came up with a new business model but how do you get not very educated farmers to  also adopt those right.  
**[0:48:52-0:48:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:48:52):**  That's a that's another angle I think you should think about.  To really take in the local situation into account.  I want to thank you so much Shamik for taking the time and sharing your extremely exciting  story so far and I think there will definitely be checking in six months or a year from now  to see where you're at and of course in the next years and years as the model is getting  
**[0:49:14-0:49:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:49:14):**  better and growing.  Nice talking to you too Koen.  You just listened to an interview with Shamik of Farmerson.  We really discussed how to reintroduce regenerative agriculture into the Indian agriculture system.  Thank you for making the time to listen to this podcast and making it all the way till  
**[0:49:31-0:49:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:49:31):**  the end.  I hope you enjoyed it as much as I did.  If you have any comments or ideas for future guests please share them on SoundCloud or  Twitter and if you think this content is relevant or interesting for someone else please feel  free to share the interview.  
**[0:49:43-0:49:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:49:43):**  And I hope to see you again here soon for more of these type of interviews.  If you found the investing in regenerative agriculture and food podcast valuable there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few  
**[0:50:00-0:50:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:50:00):**  seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means please  join my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or in the description  
**[0:50:20-0:50:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:50:20):**  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food.  How to put money to work in regenerating soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while  
**[0:50:46-0:50:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:50:46):**  doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to put money  to work in regenerating soils and I've been following the space since 2011 and recording  this podcast since 2016 we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  
**[0:51:03-0:51:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:51:03):**  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision-making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees and what questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  
**[0:51:15-0:51:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:51:15):**  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  
**[0:51:23-0:51:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:51:23):**  You the soil builders and investors in the space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management consultants, etc. etc.  People that are building soil at scale and the investors who are putting their own money  
**[0:51:44-0:51:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:51:44):**  to work through their family office or as private individuals or people who are putting  other people's money to work through foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies,  etc.  Is this course free?  No.  
**[0:51:57-0:51:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:51:57):**  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  that among the listeners of this podcast we have people with very different means.  So I'm inviting you if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  
**[0:52:17-0:52:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:52:17):**  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to ride along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  
**[0:52:33-0:52:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:52:33):**  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  
**[0:52:53-0:52:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:52:53):**  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  
**[0:53:07-0:53:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/21/shameek-chakravarty/#t=0:53:07):**  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking, click on  the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  