### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2018-41-10)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  You're going to listen to an interview with Les Szabo, Director of Constructive Capital  at Dr. Bronner's.  
**[0:00:19-0:00:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:00:19):**  We discussed what a soap company is doing in the regenerative agriculture space and  why they are, as a non-food company, actually got so much involved in the forefront of this  movement.  Les is going to explain why it makes so much sense and why they don't want to be anywhere  else at this moment.  
**[0:00:36-0:00:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:00:36):**  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture.  Investing as if the planet mattered.  Podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  
**[0:00:56-0:00:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:00:56):**  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  So many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat our land,  grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we, as investors, big and small, and consumers, start paying much  more attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  
**[0:01:15-0:01:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:01:15):**  Before we get started, I've been recording these interviews next to my day job and I  will definitely continue to do so and release about an episode a month.  But at the same time, I would love to take this further.  There are more interviews, there are many more stories to share on investing in regenerative  food and agriculture.  
**[0:01:31-0:01:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:01:31):**  More depth, improve the quality, maybe even doing some video series.  So I started a Patreon community which makes it easy to support creators like myself.  If these podcasts have been of value to you and if you have the means, I invite you to  support me and make this happen.  For more information, please find the link to my Patreon account in the description below.  
**[0:01:52-0:01:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:01:52):**  And now, without further ado, the interview.  Enjoy!  Welcome to investing in regenerative agriculture, investing as if the planet mattered.  I'm Kung van Zeyen, your host.  Today I'm joined by Les Zabo, Director of Constructive Capital at Dr. Bronner's, the  
**[0:02:06-0:02:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:02:06):**  top selling brand of natural soap in North America.  Les oversees business development activities for the company which includes impact investing,  philanthropy, and commercial support of Dr. Bronner's global supply chain projects.  Welcome Les.  Thank you very much for inviting us.  
**[0:02:21-0:02:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:02:21):**  And to start with a personal question which actually is in two parts.  One, how did you personally get into this space of natural cosmetics and regenerative  agriculture?  And of course, we would love to hear also how Dr. Bronner's from a soap company started  as a soap company but also is now really looking at this regenerative agriculture space.  
**[0:02:42-0:02:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:02:42):**  I think that your audience is both European as well as North American.  So maybe just a bit in terms of backstory here.  The company is family owned and operated.  It was founded by Emmanuel Bronner in 1948.  And it was actually founded as a religious nonprofit but the IRS didn't agree with that  
**[0:03:01-0:03:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:03:01):**  designation.  So we paid a huge amount in back taxes and eventually became a corporation and now we're  a registered benefit corporation but still with a very strong social mission.  And the company is today run by Emmanuel's grandsons David and Mike Bronner.  And they still take their role as stewards of their grandfather's vision very seriously  
**[0:03:26-0:03:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:03:26):**  and the company is as mission driven as when it was first founded.  Today we give away roughly 40% of our profits equivalent to about 8.4% of our revenue to  activism and philanthropy.  This last year in 2016 that translated to about $9 million.  And we have a number of key issue areas that we focus on.  
**[0:03:51-0:03:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:03:51):**  And regenerative agriculture is one of our most important issue areas.  But also the other areas that we focus on in terms of our giving include animal advocacy,  the environment, drug policy reform and also criminal justice reform.  And historically most of our giving has been via 501c3 activity as well as a C4 activity  in the political realm.  
**[0:04:16-0:04:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:04:16):**  Sorry, just for the European audience, what does that mean?  C3 is a registered nonprofit and a C4 is also a nonprofit but it is focused more on political  and policy work.  So we've been doing impact investing via our own supply chain since mid-2000s.  But the philanthropic investing really outside of our supply chain is relatively new for  
**[0:04:44-0:04:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:04:44):**  us and we could talk about examples of both if that's interesting.  Yeah, definitely.  I think that the journey of the company starting to, I think how agriculture got into the company  seems to be through the supply chain, right?  That was the trigger to look at that system because you are of course taking supplies  
**[0:05:04-0:05:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:05:04):**  from somewhere and usually somewhere from a farm.  Was that the trigger that led to a focus on how we treat the land and all the people on  it?  We use predominantly agricultural raw materials for our soaps and our personal care products  and that includes coconut oil, palm oil, olive oil as the main fatty oils.  
**[0:05:26-0:05:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:05:26):**  And then we also have, based on our different fragrances, we use many different essential  oils.  Coconut being the largest volume just because that's the most popular fragrance that we  sell.  In terms of the interest in regenerative ag and how that developed, yes for sure it was  
**[0:05:45-0:05:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:05:45):**  triggered by the kind of supply chain issues and the fact that even though we're a personal  care company, we do have this agricultural supply chain.  It's important to mention that really the company sees regenerative ag as a potential  solution for a number of these issue areas that we've been involved in for many years.  So in addition to the environmental issues, we've been involved in animal welfare, fair  
**[0:06:10-0:06:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:06:10):**  labor, fair trade, rural economic development and public health.  And historically these have been very distinct movements and for the first time we see this  sort of confluence around regenerative agriculture as a potential solution for many of these  larger societal problems.  Sort of umbrella of the underlying root system underneath it.  
**[0:06:36-0:06:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:06:36):**  It may be useful to just mention our own definition of regenerative ag since there's quite a few  that are floating around these days.  For us it's obviously about sequestering carbon into the soil and reversing climate change.  But it's also about providing economic stability for farmers, ranchers, farm workers and then  also critical is the animal welfare component.  
**[0:07:00-0:07:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:07:00):**  And then just in general it's really about creating these more resilient ecosystems and  communities.  So whether it's an investment in our own supply chain or it's more of a philanthropic investment,  we're really looking at things from that community perspective and trying to incorporate all  of those different elements and living systems, whether it's the farm or the community or  
**[0:07:24-0:07:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:07:24):**  the soil, really the entire macro picture on what's going on in terms of that agro ecosystem.  Which is something that really fits you as a company I think from what I read.  The beginning of the company and the level of consciousness you have, it's almost impossible  not to do it as a holistic or as an ecosystem approach.  Emmanuel Bronner was a real pioneer in that sense.  
**[0:07:50-0:07:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:07:50):**  The company has a term called constructive capitalism, which is where we give back to  the people and the earth that help us make that profit.  And that sort of philosophy was there from the company's origin.  And back in the 50s the DuPont mantra was better living through chemistry.  And back then the formulations were all about natural ingredients and now everything has  
**[0:08:17-0:08:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:08:17):**  pretty much come full circle.  And the pioneering work that he did back in the 50s and 60s seems to have caught on in  more of a mass market way.  Not only the product, but obviously the consciousness and what that means and how you run a business.  You were definitely very, very early, but it seems to be that you're on serving the  
**[0:08:37-0:08:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:08:37):**  right wave.  You're definitely at the front of this movement and are capturing a lot of that energy and  a lot of the direction actually shaping it as well.  And I don't know if you were part of the company, I don't think you were, but do you know or  do you remember the first time that you really stepped into investing in your supply chain?  
**[0:09:00-0:09:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:09:00):**  That you went from just taking the resources from a partner farm or a partner to actually  becoming a proper partner and co-investing or investing with an agriculture partner to  shape up that company and make some steps in hopefully a regenerative way?  In terms of regenerative ag investing, the supply chain obviously is where your sphere  of influence is greatest.  
**[0:09:23-0:09:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:09:23):**  And that was our starting point.  And in our supply chain, we use roughly 5000 metric tons of these raw materials a year,  these agricultural raw materials.  And the first step was really in 2003 when the company decided to go certified organic  for all the major raw materials.  
**[0:09:42-0:09:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:09:42):**  Was there a trigger for that?  Or what was the decision?  Was there something that triggered that?  Or was it a process that was obvious to go at some point?  And 2003 was the year to do it.  
**[0:09:52-0:09:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:09:52):**  Well, it was more about growing these raw materials without polluting the earth or poisoning  farmers and farm workers.  When you look at the level of pesticides and herbicides and synthetic inputs, I mean, it  was environmental, obviously, but for us, it was also very much a social issue in that  how these synthetics were impacting farmers and farm workers.  
**[0:10:17-0:10:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:10:17):**  Even with the organic certification, we realized that that didn't give us enough transparency  into our supply chain and the social and economic conditions of our producers.  And organic certification really does not have any substantive social criteria attached  to it.  So, technically, a product could be certified organic and it could be made using some type  
**[0:10:40-0:10:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:10:40):**  of forced labor.  So, for us, the next level would be to figure out how we can increase this transparency  and work directly with farmers on the ground and understand those conditions that they're  operating in.  So, about 2007 is when we made the commitment to go fair trade.  
**[0:11:05-0:11:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:11:05):**  And back in that time, when we made the commitment to go fair trade, there were no sources of  organic fair trade coconut oil and palm oil.  So, essentially, we built these projects ourselves.  You were forced to be the impact investor there.  We were forced to, exactly.  
**[0:11:24-0:11:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:11:24):**  It wasn't any sort of grand design to be vertically integrated.  That wasn't really the intention.  You just needed good raw materials and you wanted to be sure that the value chain was  clean, as clean as possible.  So, you had to create it yourself.  
**[0:11:37-0:11:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:11:37):**  Exactly.  The first project was in Sri Lanka and it grew out of a tsunami relief project.  And the gentleman who launched that project, his name is Gero Le Zan, and he's now our  director of special operations.  And he built that project from the ground up and also built our project in Ghana from  
**[0:12:00-0:12:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:12:00):**  the ground up.  And today he oversees all of our major supply chain projects.  But that project in Sri Lanka is currently 1,100 farmers and 18,000 acres of certified  organic land.  And the mill staff is around 300 people.  
**[0:12:21-0:12:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:12:21):**  So, we're producing about 2,000 metric tons a year.  And that entity by itself is doing roughly 10 million in sales.  So, we buy from the project, but there's also other like-minded brands that very much understand  what's going on there on the ground and the community impact that we've had that buy from  that operation as well.  
**[0:12:48-0:12:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:12:48):**  And I will definitely share the video which is on YouTube in the description of the podcast  because it's truly amazing.  Your description is already interesting, but I think if you see the video of it and the  impact that the tsunami had and now what grew out of that as a company is truly impressive.  What's your relationship with the company?  
**[0:13:11-0:13:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:13:11):**  Are you an investor?  Are you partly owner?  Or are you just between brackets and have a supply relationship now with them?  We're an owner of the company.  So, there's three projects that we own and operate ourselves.  
**[0:13:26-0:13:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:13:26):**  Serendipal, the project in Sri Lanka is one.  The second is the project in Ghana, which is palm oil.  And then we just launched a joint venture in Samoa to produce the cosmetics grade coconut  oil.  It's a joint venture with a local company.  
**[0:13:45-0:13:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:13:45):**  Wow.  Okay.  So, you really got involved and set it up and are still running it basically as a separate  entity.  They're wholly owned.  
**[0:13:52-0:13:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:13:52):**  Well, the joint venture obviously is.  Yeah, obviously not.  But the other two entities are majority owned by Dr. Bronner's and it's a sister company.  That's a sort of holding company for all of our supply chain projects.  It's called Surrender World.  
**[0:14:07-0:14:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:14:07):**  So these projects sit under that entity.  And yet, when you dove into your supply chain and started to really clean it up and started  to even in this case also supply to others, which of course amplifies your impact quite  a lot.  And yet you decided to focus even more on agriculture and even to look beyond cosmetics  
**[0:14:28-0:14:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:14:28):**  and start to push the boundaries of the food sector as well.  What triggered that and how much of a push can we see?  Are we going to see Dr. Bronner Food at some point?  What's going to be your role in that food space instead of just the cosmetic space,  which is of course huge, but still a part of a much bigger system?  
**[0:14:49-0:14:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:14:49):**  Yeah, well, the project in Sri Lanka is producing a food grade coconut oil.  So originally that project, the idea was to provide a primary source for our cosmetics  grade oil because the coconut oil is the primary ingredient in our soaps, but because the capacity  of that operation was so significant, we realized we had the opportunity to do food grade oil  as well.  
**[0:15:19-0:15:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:15:19):**  And the whole sort of coconut oil trend was just taking off.  So we already are in the food space and there is a possibility that we could do other food  products.  That's a sort of ongoing internal conversation about which direction our new product development  is going to head.  
**[0:15:40-0:15:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:15:40):**  Because you mentioned food grade oil and cosmetic grade oil, what's the difference?  Because the SMAO one is going to do cosmetic grade oil, right?  Which one is more difficult to get?  Is it the food one or the cosmetic one?  Or depends it on the coconut?  
**[0:15:54-0:15:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:15:54):**  The food grade is virgin coconut oil.  So that's a much higher quality product.  And the cosmetics grade oil is produced and then refined.  And if you look at the impact investing ecosystem, which you are part of because you are also  an impact investor, and what do you see the role could be for impact investors that are  
**[0:16:20-0:16:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:16:20):**  hopefully all listening to this podcast that want to get into the regenerative agriculture  space and you are a family company, family owned company.  I don't think there are any plans, but correct me if I'm wrong, to get impact investors or  any type of investors into the company.  But do you see a role in the ecosystem that you are part of for impact investors?  
**[0:16:39-0:16:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:16:39):**  And if yes, what would that role be?  Yeah, we definitely are beginning our journey in terms of projects that are straight impact,  like I said, philanthropic investing, which is separate from our own supply chain.  I could just mention a couple of the projects that we're working on right now.  One is with White Oak Pastures.  
**[0:17:01-0:17:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:17:01):**  Will Harris, the owner, is one of the top regenerative livestock farmers in the country.  He's amazing.  I mean, he has an incredibly high bar operation on so many levels.  On the ruminant side, everything is grass fed, grass finished.  So Will is the only farm in the country that's step five plus on global animal partnerships,  
**[0:17:26-0:17:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:17:26):**  animal welfare rating system.  I mean, he is very much thinking in terms of this larger ecosystem, in terms of animals,  in terms of the soil, his soil organic matter has gone from less than 1% to as much as 5%.  So he's improved the soil fertility immensely.  And we saw an opportunity to work with him.  
**[0:17:51-0:17:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:17:51):**  There was one that we identified mutually that we thought we could assist in, which  is the animal feed question.  On the ruminant side, you have lots of momentum with grass fed beef, and you have really great  work being done by Cienega Capital and Tomcat Ranch and Armonia.  These impact investors have done a lot to create the right infrastructure for growth  
**[0:18:19-0:18:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:18:19):**  in the grass fed beef sector.  And I think the growth is around 25, 30% a year, and it's up to five or six or 7% of  total beef purchases in the US.  So there is momentum there.  And I think from a consumer perspective, it's the idea of grass fed beef is pretty straightforward.  
**[0:18:39-0:18:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:18:39):**  And yes, there are issues related to certifications and standards, and you do have some players  that are cheating.  But for the ruminant side, most people understand what they're getting when they purchase a  grass fed beef or meat product.  Where we see a larger challenge is on the monogastric side.  
**[0:19:01-0:19:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:19:01):**  So that's with the pigs and the chickens.  And when you think about pastured poultry from a consumer perspective, you're assuming  or sort of the implication is that that chicken is eating grass and bugs, eating off the land,  which is actually not the case.  And both in terms of chicken as well as pigs, those animals diets are 80 plus percent supplemental  
**[0:19:25-0:19:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:19:25):**  feed.  So if that feed is coming off farm, and it's coming from soy corn monocultures, we didn't  fix anything, basically.  Exactly.  I mean, if you look from that sort of broader macro perspective, then that is the farthest  
**[0:19:42-0:19:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:19:42):**  thing from being regenerative.  And so what we're working on with Will right now, because his chicken and pig feed is from  off farm, it's from a conventional source in Georgia.  We'd like to see and Will would like to see as well, full holistic kind of closed loop  system in terms of his operation.  
**[0:20:04-0:20:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:20:04):**  And so we are helping him finance the purchase of a large parcel of land adjacent to his  property that's going to allow him to grow his own grains and produce his own feed.  And so and that is also where the feed mill comes in.  Exactly.  He would have his own feed mill, and he would then be producing regenerative organic feed  
**[0:20:29-0:20:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:20:29):**  for his animals.  Oh, wow.  Yeah, it's extremely interesting.  A lot of people, like you mentioned, seem to forget that pigs and poultry are not necessarily  grass eaters or cannot feed themselves only with bugs.  
**[0:20:43-0:20:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:20:43):**  And I actually had Emer and Co, the founder, Jesse on the podcast, I think half a year  ago, I mentioned that as one of his biggest challenges.  They are selling poultry of regenerative farms and heritage poultry and the feed issue and  not being able to purchase the feed you want or produce the feed you want, but in this  case, purchase it is really holding him back on that journey of regenerative agriculture.  
**[0:21:10-0:21:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:21:10):**  So it seems a huge miss.  And so when you have helped him purchase that land and also get that feed mill up and running,  what would be the next step? Is there a bigger role for you to play in the feed mill discussion  in the US?  I should also mention another project that we're working on with a new venture called  
**[0:21:29-0:21:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:21:29):**  Regenerative Organic Feed Company.  This is a team of folks that formerly worked with Coyote Creek Ranch in Texas.  And Cameron Mulberg, who is the principal there, is really an incredible feed formulator.  And Cameron and his partners are looking to establish regional feed mills across the country.  So the first one would be in Georgia.  
**[0:21:54-0:21:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:21:54):**  The second one would be in California.  And this is all based on regenerative organic principles and practices.  So that's a separate investment from our project with Will, but we see the need for more economic,  but at the same time regenerative organic feed because there are a lot of pastured poultry  operators who want to make that switch to organic regenerative, but right now they just  
**[0:22:21-0:22:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:22:21):**  can't afford it.  Yeah, no, definitely.  I mean, somebody has to supply this as well, which is extremely interesting.  Is that a place or not maybe these specific projects, but in general projects like these  that you will, I'm sure will develop and keep developing many more of these?  
**[0:22:38-0:22:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:22:38):**  Are those places where you would like to work with impact investors or maybe already are  working with outside impact investors?  Yeah, the regional feed mill project, we're already working with other impact investors  on that project.  Another one would be we have been working with Patagonia and Rodale Institute and actually  
**[0:22:57-0:23:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:22:57):**  Will Harris as well on a project to launch a regenerative organic standard.  And that is taking kind of organics as a baseline and layering on top of that regenerative practices,  you know, again, based on this larger agro ecosystem thinking, also incorporating animal  welfare as well as farmer and farm worker fairness issues.  So it's thinking about how these issues can be really addressed in one certification.  
**[0:23:29-0:23:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:23:29):**  We know that that certification is, I mean, it's very much an aspirational standard and  we along with Patagonia probably will not meet the sort of gold level standard out of  the gate.  It's a goal.  Yeah.  
**[0:23:44-0:23:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:23:44):**  It was important to just put out there because there are so many players now that are using  regenerative in many different ways.  And we think that, you know, it's important to provide our definition of what it is and  provide the specific practices and the specific metrics and the specific outputs that really  would define regenerative organic agriculture.  
**[0:24:07-0:24:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:24:07):**  You know, timing wise, we see, I mean, you've heard the term eco label fatigue where consumers  just...  Or label fatigue in general.  Yeah.  Yeah.  
**[0:24:17-0:24:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:24:17):**  There's just too many certs and labels out there right now.  And because consumers really don't think in terms of just one issue area, it's not like  they're interested in fair trade, but they're not interested in organics or they're interested  in animal advocacy, but they're not interested in the environment.  It's all, I mean, I think most consumers are interested in purchasing products from companies  
**[0:24:42-0:24:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:24:42):**  that are doing the right thing on all those levels.  But having said that, the standard is only one piece of the puzzle for farmers and ranchers.  And so we're working with Patagonia right now to establish financing a vehicle that  would support and assist farmers that want to adopt the standard and want to move to  a regenerative organic operation.  
**[0:25:07-0:25:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:25:07):**  I mean, it's obviously very much situational in terms of what that farm needs.  It could be a working capital issue.  It could be equipment financing, or it could be a land issue.  Like the example of White Oaks.  Yeah, exactly.  
**[0:25:23-0:25:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:25:23):**  This is in the works right now, but we are looking to establish a fund that would support  farm operations.  And would it be open to others, to other investors as well?  Yeah, definitely.  Definitely.  
**[0:25:36-0:25:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:25:36):**  Super interesting.  We'll take the first step in terms of organizing this.  I think we'll be playing a sort of GP role here, but we're very interested in connecting  with other impact investors that see potential here.  It's interesting how two privately owned companies or family companies like yourself and Patagonia  
**[0:25:57-0:25:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:25:57):**  are really pushing the boundaries.  And both of them are not from the food sector originally.  Of course, you are active in it because you set up this project in Sri Lanka and are getting  really active in it.  And Patagonia has its food products and also the fund.  
**[0:26:13-0:26:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:26:13):**  But originally it wasn't the original product, but you're becoming really the two that are  pushing the boundaries there.  It's fascinating.  Yeah, that's a good point.  And a few people have pointed that out to us.  
**[0:26:29-0:26:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:26:29):**  So kind of interesting.  Do you get any pushback from customers that say, why are you pushing so hard on the animal  agriculture piece?  I'm vegan and I'm buying the soap.  Or from internally as well, push back on this agriculture focus.  
**[0:26:46-0:26:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:26:46):**  Stick to the soap and clean it up as much as possible.  Or is that generally, is everybody on board with that broader focus that you have now?  We see allies there.  We see a connection forged between those folks that even if they are vegans, they want to  work more closely with the people that are involved with animal agriculture in a broader  
**[0:27:14-0:27:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:27:14):**  sense.  So for example, Will Harris, Will works very closely with Compassion and World Farming  and whose director is a vegan as well.  And you just have very unlikely allies here, but it's becoming the norm I think that these  different organizations coming from very different movements are seeing the importance of linking  
**[0:27:38-0:27:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:27:38):**  their efforts and teaming up to cause significant change.  And 99% of meat in the US is still produced by CAFOs and industrial ag.  So we can argue on the fringes about veganism versus a more humane, regeneratorian diet.  But the point is that the common enemy here and the common challenge is to really eliminate  CAFOs and industrial ag in general.  
**[0:28:13-0:28:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:28:13):**  CAFOs being factory farms, right?  That's correct.  Yeah, I see that, like you said, the discussion on the fringes is about that 1% of grass fat  or and of course there needs to be a huge push to make that regenerative and at the  same time reducing our meat intake and dairy intake significantly.  
**[0:28:34-0:28:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:28:34):**  But we cannot deny that the main enemy quote unquote is the animal factory farming system.  But here in Europe as well in the US, I think there are some differences.  But in the end, the majority or a high 90% comes out of that system and has run its course,  has run in so many issues, apart from even the animal welfare part, which is hugely important,  but just the environmental part and the social part of the factory workers and the animal  
**[0:29:00-0:29:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:29:00):**  and the farm workers already makes it the highest target basically on the list of agriculture  change.  And I can see that now I can see it with investors I talked to there, the people in the UK, Gemma  Recolor Foundation, who are really showing just from an investor point of view, the risks  you're running if you're exposed to that, and the scandals that are just coming one  
**[0:29:21-0:29:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:29:21):**  after the other.  And we haven't seen the end of that.  So it's very nice to see that these unlikely allies are getting together and focusing their  energy and their significant energy and time on taking on the real beast in the room.  You know, depending on which study or research you reference, food systems and agriculture  
**[0:29:43-0:29:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:29:43):**  contribute somewhere between 20 to 40% of total GHG emissions globally.  And as Paul Hawkins stated, these industries have the greatest climate change impact, both  as a source of the problem, as well as a potential solution.  That's exactly the reason I'm doing these podcasts.  That's the biggest leverage point we have, or the biggest node in the system.  
**[0:30:06-0:30:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:30:06):**  I mean, of course, we have to change all our energy to renew, etc.  But we also have to draw down like Paul Hawkins is saying, and the biggest node we have, the  biggest acupuncture point is agriculture and how we use land.  And we've been misusing that or mistreating that, I would say, for way too long.  If you look at his the project Drawdown book, it lists the 100 most impactful solutions  
**[0:30:32-0:30:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:30:32):**  to global warming.  Of the top 28 are food and agriculture related.  And the other one is education of girls in Africa.  Yeah, which we're doing.  Yeah, no, I mean, probably you're doing all 10.  
**[0:30:45-0:30:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:30:45):**  Yeah, fascinating.  And to ask a personal question, how did you get to Dr. Bronner and get into the regenerative  agriculture space?  My wife and I were part of a founding team that launched a hemp food company back in  the early 2000s.  
**[0:31:03-0:31:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:31:03):**  And through the hemp food company, we developed the first hemp protein powder and the first  hemp milk.  And Bronner's has been supporting the legalization of industrial hemp in the US for many, many  years.  So that's how we connected with the Bronner's.  
**[0:31:22-0:31:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:31:22):**  And I was also part of an apparel manufacturing company.  That was really my primary day job.  And we ended up selling the hemp food company.  And then my wife started working for Dr. Bronner's and she's now marketing director.  And I was continuing working with my apparel manufacturing company.  
**[0:31:42-0:31:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:31:42):**  And then my partner was diagnosed with cancer and passed within three months.  And I sort of stepped back from everything and was trying to kind of figure out the next  steps.  And I was lucky enough to get to be involved with a consulting project for Bronner's on  the supply chain front.  
**[0:32:00-0:32:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:32:00):**  One thing led to another.  Now I've been full time with Bronner's for almost five years.  And in terms of the impact investing piece, that's something, like I said, is relatively  new for Bronner's and something that I've been advocating for just because in addition  to that, you know, the nonprofit work and the policy advocacy work, I definitely see  
**[0:32:21-0:32:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:32:21):**  impact investing as another tool in the arsenal.  And so and of all the different issue areas, the most logical place to start that type  of impact investing is really within that agricultural space because you have lots of  opportunities with companies that are looking to make change.  It's a little bit easier with agriculture than it is in drug policy reform or criminal  
**[0:32:46-0:32:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:32:46):**  justice reform.  I can imagine.  Yeah, you cannot do too much than divest from prisons in terms of investing.  Yeah, I mean, it's really just a timing thing.  It worked out really well.  
**[0:32:57-0:33:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:32:57):**  And I feel very, very privileged to be doing this kind of work and also working for a company  like Bronner's.  They're pretty unique.  I don't I spent my entire career working on my own with my own entrepreneurial ventures.  This is the first time I've worked for a company and I couldn't see myself working for any  
**[0:33:22-0:33:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:33:22):**  other company.  So it's...  I think you picked a very special one.  So to I want to be conscious of your time to end this podcast, I would like to ask a  question.  
**[0:33:32-0:33:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:33:32):**  So let's imagine there is a full room of smart impact investors listening to this podcast  that are interested, ready to get into regenerative agriculture.  And I imagine you maybe you can speak a bit more on the US side, but also maybe a bit  general.  Where should they start?  
**[0:33:48-0:33:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:33:48):**  What should they look out for?  What would be your, of course, not investment advice, but your advice in general for investors  that want to get get into this space?  I was just at a regenerative economy conference last week in Northern California.  And I met a gentleman by the name of Spencer Beebe.  
**[0:34:07-0:34:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:34:07):**  And he's the founder of Eco Trust, which is based here in Portland, Oregon.  And he mentioned this idea of place based investing.  To me, it really resonated just because when I look at our supply chain projects, and I  look at even projects like white oak pastures, it's very much about looking at that entire  living system on a case by case basis.  
**[0:34:34-0:34:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:34:34):**  And rather than thinking in terms of portals or industries or asset classes or anything  else, think about what's going on with that particular locale and what are the elements  and how can we grow the capacity of that system to evolve and become more resilient, more  biodiverse, more healthy, more value creation overall.  And so it just struck me that, you know, when we think about impact investing in many situations  
**[0:35:06-0:35:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:35:06):**  where we're sort of segmenting things in a very traditional way, and maybe sort of rather  than kind of maximization or optimization for one element or one species or one metric  or one commodity, we think about the impact of the entire system evolving and improving.  That to me is a really kind of powerful way of thinking about impact investing within  the region ag space.  
**[0:35:36-0:35:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:35:36):**  Obviously, this wouldn't necessarily apply for all other industries.  But I think for regenerative ag investing, it's a really powerful lens through which  to think about things.  And it is really the, you know, this sort of maximizing for a single variable.  That's what has been at the heart of the problem with industrial ag here in the States.  
**[0:36:00-0:36:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:36:00):**  And when you do maximize for that single variable, that's when things get thrown out of balance.  So when you think about a soy corn monoculture, or CAFO, or fast food chain, everything is  about maximizing yield or profitability or efficiency.  And it becomes this race to the bottom because you're ignoring all of those other social  and environmental externalities that you're creating.  
**[0:36:26-0:36:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:36:26):**  And eventually, the system fails.  I mean, it collapses.  And I think that we're very close to that point with agriculture in the US.  I think it was the FAO that just recently published a research showing that we have  only 60 harvests left if we continue to deplete the soil, mine the soil at its current rate,  
**[0:36:52-0:36:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:36:52):**  and then we're done.  I mean, there's no more soil based agriculture.  And it's, I think, partly due to this extraction mentality and unidirectional mentality that  we've adopted with our agriculture.  And looking at it in this more holistic way is, to me, a lot more powerful.  
**[0:37:14-0:37:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:37:14):**  And you have quite a few thinkers out there, John Fullerton and Carol Sanford, that are  providing frameworks and models for how to think about a regenerative system.  And I feel like we're well along on that path.  And I mean, you just have different folks coming up with different metrics and different  definitions.  
**[0:37:36-0:37:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:37:36):**  And we're really about creating case studies that work and demonstrate that a certain type  of agricultural system is viable commercially.  And I think we've proven that with our own supply chain projects.  But you also see it with Will and Wide Oak Pastures.  So the way that he's impacted that community of less than 100 people, he's created 140  
**[0:38:03-0:38:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:38:03):**  jobs, he's building housing for his employees, the average hourly employee makes, and these  are hourly employees, not management employees, makes $36,000 a year when the average income  in that county is $18,000 a year.  And then what he's done in terms of animal welfare, I mean, for him, it's all about how  these pieces work together.  
**[0:38:25-0:38:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:38:25):**  And I think that both he and certainly we very much are investing to be able to create  systems or models that are replicatable.  I mean, Will is such a high profile rancher here and farmer in the US, that I think that  if we can close the loop on the feed issue, then that's something that we want to be able  to prove to other farmers and other natural product companies, food companies, as well  
**[0:38:58-0:39:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:38:58):**  as consumers, that this is doable.  And it's very much open source.  So there's nothing proprietary here.  We in our projects welcome the opportunity for anybody and we've had our really our closest  competitors come and visit our operations.  
**[0:39:17-0:39:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:39:17):**  And we're happy that when that happens, and I'm sure Will is happy to have visitors come  and see what's going on on his farm.  And so how do we roll this out?  And how do we take this and repeat it and repeat it over and over and over again to  get from that 1% to 99% is going to require a lot of work?  
**[0:39:39-0:39:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:39:39):**  I should say the we are doing our impact investing, but there's also there's other kind of nonprofit  ventures that we're supporting as well.  Gabe Brown, who is probably the top crop regenerative farmer in the country, and he's supporting  us on the project with Will.  Will is a livestock guy and Gabe is coming in and helping us develop the right sort of  
**[0:40:04-0:40:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:40:04):**  rotations and the right sort of stocking densities to make this project work with Will.  And Gabe just launched along with three other partners, what's called the Soil Health Academy,  and it's a nonprofit venture.  And it's farmer to farmer training on regenerative practices and principles.  And we're supporting that effort.  
**[0:40:27-0:40:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:40:27):**  He and his partners are going around the country doing trainings specifically for farmers,  but also, you know, corporations and nonprofits as well on really kind of how to practical  advice in terms of adopting these principles.  So like I said, there's there's more than one lever to pull and we have to fire on all  cylinders at this point because we are in crisis mode.  
**[0:40:52-0:40:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:40:52):**  Definitely.  No, I mean, the 60 harvest left means we have only a few years to get the systems up and  running because they take time and it takes time to build up soil and we definitely don't  want to reach number 59 or 58 because it means we're out of time.  To your question about where should impact investors start, if they're just trying to  
**[0:41:13-0:41:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:41:13):**  get a lay of the land of what is regenerative agriculture about and what are sort of the  main issues related to land management and soil fertility, there's a new book out by  Josh Tickell called Kiss the Ground.  And there's also a movie by the same name that's going to be launched sometime, I think,  in Q1 of next year.  
**[0:41:36-0:41:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:41:36):**  The book itself is an excellent primer on these issues and very well written and very  accessible from a non-technical, non-farmer perspective.  So I think people would really get a good basic understanding of the key issues involved  with RegenAg.  And then there's another book by David Montgomery called Growing a Revolution.  
**[0:42:02-0:42:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:42:02):**  He's the next one to interview.  I have lined up probably or next week or the week after.  Both of those are fantastic kind of intro lessons into RegenAg.  Perfect.  Les, I don't want to take any more of your time.  
**[0:42:16-0:42:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:42:16):**  We've gone almost over the hour.  But I want to thank you so much for sharing the stories, for the examples, for your lessons  learned, your advice.  And I'll definitely be checking in and checking in on the different projects you mentioned,  but also on the projects that are to come in the future.  
**[0:42:34-0:42:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:42:34):**  Thank you so much.  Yeah, thank you very much.  Really enjoyed talking to you.  You just listened to an interview with Les Szabo.  I hope after this interview you understand why a soap company is so much involved in  
**[0:42:47-0:42:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:42:47):**  the regenerative agriculture space.  Thank you for making the time to listen to this podcast and making it all the way until  the end.  I hope you enjoyed it as much as I did.  If you found the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast valuable, there  
**[0:42:59-0:43:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:42:59):**  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few  seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  
**[0:43:15-0:43:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:43:15):**  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  join my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or in the description  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  
**[0:43:42-0:43:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:43:42):**  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After a hundred interviews and more than a hundred hours of audio asking the question  
**[0:44:00-0:44:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:44:00):**  how to put money to work in regenerating soils and have been following this space since 2011  and recording this podcast since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in this space over the last years?  How have we built our decision-making framework, what to focus on with the podcast, how have  we picked interviewees, what questions should you ask, what is happening in this space,  
**[0:44:23-0:44:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:44:23):**  what should you read, what should you listen, what should you watch, how to approach this  space.  For whom is this course?  You, the soil builders and investors in this space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  
**[0:44:38-0:44:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:44:38):**  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management, consultants, etc.  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  
**[0:44:58-0:45:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:44:58):**  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  
**[0:45:12-0:45:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:45:12):**  that among the listeners of this podcast we have people with very different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  
**[0:45:27-0:45:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:45:27):**  It's currently a series of 17 videos mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to write along.  We're gonna look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  
**[0:45:51-0:45:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:45:51):**  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're gonna look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  
**[0:46:07-0:46:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:46:07):**  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment please find professional investment advice.  
**[0:46:22-0:46:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/16/les-szabo/#t=0:46:22):**  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  