### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2018-02-29)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  You're going to listen to a conversation about the role of a trader in the organic  fruit and vegetable business in Europe, or as Aosta likes to call themselves, a conductor  
**[0:00:22-0:00:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:00:22):**  of an orchestra.  We dive deeper into the connection between health and organic produce, and how to monetize  sustainability, plus changing your profit and loss statements to reflect this sustainability,  and we discuss the biggest threat to sustainability, anonymity.  The sound quality of this interview is not always perfect, as we recorded this live at  
**[0:00:43-0:00:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:00:43):**  the headquarters of Aosta.  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture.  Investing as if the planet mattered.  Podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  
**[0:01:02-0:01:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:01:02):**  and ecosystems, while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much more  
**[0:01:20-0:01:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:01:20):**  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  Before we get started, I've been recording these interviews next to my day job and I  will definitely continue to do so and release about an episode a month.  But at the same time I would love to take this further, share more interviews, there  are many more stories to share on investing in regenerative food and agriculture.  
**[0:01:41-0:01:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:01:41):**  More depth, improve the quality, maybe even doing some video series.  So I started a Patreon community which makes it easy to support creators like myself.  If these podcasts have been of value to you and if you have the means, I invite you to  support me and make this happen.  For more information please find a link to my Patreon account in the description below.  
**[0:02:02-0:02:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:02:02):**  And now, without further ado, the interview.  Enjoy!  Welcome to Investing in Regenerative Agriculture, Investing as if the Planet Mattered.  I'm here with Volker Engelsmann, co-founder of EOSTA, international distributor of fresh,  organic and fair fruits and vegetables.  
**[0:02:18-0:02:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:02:18):**  They take responsibility and transparency to a whole new level and maintain a close  working relationship with more than a thousand growers in six continents.  Volker is very proud to say that none of their suppliers ever went back to chemical, non-organic  agriculture.  Welcome Volker!  
**[0:02:32-0:02:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:02:32):**  Thank you Koen.  So to start with a personal question, as I usually like to start.  How did you end up founding, co-founding EOSTA in the food, agriculture and of course the  organic part of that?  Well the slogan of this company is where ecology meets economy, so my roots are also in both  
**[0:02:50-0:02:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:02:50):**  worlds.  I think ecology for us also stands for a new society, new agriculture.  Economy stands for pragmatism.  And I learned thinking about the world and its future at a Steiner School in Germany.  Then I decided to study economics and business administration and ended up with Cargill,  
**[0:03:16-0:03:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:03:16):**  a big commodity trading company in the US.  And at some point after a few years of steep learning curves, I ran into a few growers  who said we would love to go sustainable and organic but there doesn't seem to be a market.  So I thought, alright, there should be a market for organic.  And if there is none, then we'll create one.  
**[0:03:41-0:03:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:03:41):**  And that was 25 years ago, hence EOSTA.  And now we've been 25 years later, you have 100 people working here, we're in the headquarters,  building a new headquarters which will be done in 6 months.  100 million revenue, 1000 suppliers.  What's the main lesson you see, what's the main story you want to bring forward if you  
**[0:04:06-0:04:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:04:06):**  look back at the 25 years?  The main lesson I would say is the biggest threat to sustainability is anonymity.  Because usually exploitation rides on the back of anonymity.  If I don't know you, I can exploit you.  If I don't know the impact on people and planet, I can exploit people and planet.  
**[0:04:28-0:04:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:04:28):**  So I thought we can endlessly talk about health and better climate and better environment  and social responsibility, but as long as we're not transparent about it, this will  be theory and cloud nine talk.  That's what I really learned from Cargill, a company that trades in anonymous commodities.  And food is literally commodified.  
**[0:05:00-0:05:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:05:00):**  It means anonymized.  So I thought there is no such thing as sustainability without transparency.  That's why we created this company.  And the first thing we did was not talk about people and planet, but talk about the true  and the real story behind the product.  
**[0:05:19-0:05:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:05:19):**  So that's what our Nature and More brand does.  It reveals the true story of each grower by putting a little stamp on each fruit with  a QR code and the face of the grower.  So the consumer is empowered to make an informed purchase decision because he can visit that  grower and enter into a dialogue and on the social media and talk about the grower's views  
**[0:05:47-0:05:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:05:47):**  on, for instance, soil health or biodiversity or mitigating climate change or what he does  to empower his black workforce or his migrant workforce or his workforce in general, what  he does to contribute to a fairer distribution of wealth throughout the supply chain.  And by being transparent about this, we also enable the grower to capitalize on his contribution  to people and planet.  
**[0:06:13-0:06:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:06:13):**  But you take it a few steps further than most companies or some companies that have copied  you now and showing the face of one of their suppliers.  And maybe a bit of the story you're measuring this biodiversity, you're measuring this soil  health, you're really taking this transparency, plus you're showing and sharing with your  suppliers margins and you're really making it to not even a supplier but a partner.  
**[0:06:38-0:06:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:06:38):**  It's not a linear relationship.  They are in the same boat, as we say.  What's the thought behind it?  How far are you going to push this and how far are you pushing that?  What are the examples there that really stand out for you?  
**[0:06:52-0:06:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:06:52):**  Well, Kun, I think you can't push this far enough.  Trade in our case is not about trade or buying low and selling high.  Trade in our case is about running, I mean, responsibly running a supply chain.  So we rather consider ourselves an air traffic controller rather than a trader.  So we enter-  
**[0:07:17-0:07:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:07:17):**  Or a nice sort of an orchestra.  Better, much nicer actually.  So we consider ourselves friends and partners and families with all the suppliers and customers  and other stakeholders that form this supply chain together.  In our journey to reach, to achieve more sustainability, more healthy food, a lower impact of food  
**[0:07:42-0:07:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:07:42):**  and farming on, for instance, soil or biodiversity or climate, in order to achieve a positive  impact on social, you need to not only monitor sustainability and incremental steps of development,  but you also need to empower growers to manage sustainability, which is precisely what we  do.  We go there, we team up with these growers, we send in the troops, we send in the agronomists  
**[0:08:14-0:08:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:08:14):**  and help them to embark on a journey that's called sustainability.  So that will be two M's, monitoring and managing.  But where is the third and the fourth M?  The third would be marketing, because if we would anonymize his product again, then we  would talk cleverly about sustainability, but in the end, we wouldn't change the business  
**[0:08:46-0:08:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:08:46):**  model and we would join this race to the bottom, price-wise, at the expense of people and planet.  Which is what we don't like, which we think is where the perverse incentive is in this  economy.  We talk about people, planet and profit, but I think that's outdated.  I think it's purely and exclusively about profit.  
**[0:09:12-0:09:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:09:12):**  And yet you are selling to major supermarket chains all around Europe.  How has been that their response to, we're being open about things, we're bringing our,  we're non-anonymizing our suppliers, we're bringing them into this discussion, we're  taking them onto a journey and we're not going down the rabbit hole of looking for the lowest  possible margin.  
**[0:09:35-0:09:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:09:35):**  What's the response of the traditional place where most people at the end get their fruits  and vegetables?  Overwhelming, overwhelmingly positive.  Why?  Because if we reach out to the consumer, which we try to do as much as we can, we notice  
**[0:09:58-0:10:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:09:58):**  that consumers are not only concerned as a citizen about their health and the people  and planet's health, but they also would love to take responsibility as a consumer.  And we empower them to make an informed purchase decision by talking about health and the impact  on people and planet.  So that's why I'm saying it is purely about profit, not about people and planet.  
**[0:10:26-0:10:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:10:26):**  Because if you say people and planet and profit, then usually it ends up with people and planet  are important, but profit is the most important.  I think if you only would talk only and exclusively about profit, but you would factor in the  costs of people and planet, then you would change your profit definition, which is what  we need.  
**[0:10:47-0:10:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:10:47):**  And what you did.  It's also what we did.  So marketing sustainability automatically leads to monetizing sustainability, which would  be the fourth M. We have measured the impact.  We've managed it.  
**[0:11:04-0:11:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:11:04):**  We've marketed it.  But if we really want to address the perverse incentives of a wrong profit definition at  the expense of people and planet, then you have to monetize this impact as well, which  is what we did.  So we reduced the KPIs to those 20 percent performance indicators with regards to sustainability  
**[0:11:24-0:11:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:11:24):**  that define 80 percent of the impact, which is a very pragmatic approach.  And we teamed up with various United Nations agencies such as FAO, WHO, UNEP, UNDP, with  various financial auditors.  And we concluded that organic is not too expensive, but conventional too cheap, as long as that  farming system keeps externalizing costs of people and planet.  
**[0:11:53-0:11:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:11:53):**  And we achieved enormous backup for that.  And I believe that in the next few years, sustainability will no longer be an exclusive  domain of a few green activists.  It will increasingly also be in the domain of the financial sector.  We see new banking, venture capital and investment projects popping up everywhere, including  
**[0:12:19-0:12:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:12:19):**  in the institutional investor sector, whereby people say, can we revisit the so-called Ray  rocks, the risk adjusted returns on capital, for instance, and factor in a stress test  with regards to climate change or soil erosion or biodiversity or ecosystems?  Because if we look at our present investments and we do not factor in the costs of climate  change or biodiversity loss or child labor or whatever, then that means a potential risk  
**[0:12:57-0:13:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:12:57):**  for the future ability to make a profit.  To exist in many cases.  And to exist.  So if we if we jump ahead, let's say in five to 10 years, it will be very difficult for  food and farming operators to attract capital if they do not invest in people and planet.  
**[0:13:19-0:13:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:13:19):**  At least I hope so.  And simultaneously, it will be very silly for bankers or credit suppliers or venture  capital people to invest in something of which it is not clear what the impact is on people  and planet, because it is like it's like flying in the dark without without instruments or  navigation, which we did for a while.  
**[0:13:46-0:13:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:13:46):**  And then luckily, we invented some other things.  Yeah.  And we were flying.  Yeah.  So what would be your advice if you are an impact investor, which are hopefully all listening  
**[0:13:55-0:13:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:13:55):**  to this show?  You're interested.  You're really passionate about food and agriculture.  You've done your research, read your books.  Where can you go?  
**[0:14:03-0:14:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:14:03):**  What would be the first step to to put money to work in this enormously diverse and complex  sector that is food and agriculture?  Well, I would say first of all, is not enormously complex.  It's actually quite simple.  If we want to feed the world and future, then we have to look after the resources that enable  
**[0:14:26-0:14:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:14:26):**  us to feed the world.  And one of the first resources would be soil, soil fertility, which we are killing and losing  at a rate of 30 soccer fields per minute, accumulating to 12 million hectares a year,  according to the FAO.  So first of all, let's look after our soils.  
**[0:14:44-0:14:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:14:44):**  And farmers who do not invest in soils, farmers who use mineral fertilizer and other crap  to boost productivity at the expense of soil fertility, they do not deserve to get capital  because they are undermining and mining our soil.  They're depleting their soils.  So they're undermining their ability to be profitable in the future.  
**[0:15:08-0:15:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:15:08):**  So it would be very silly for an investor to invest in such an idiot.  So secondly, we have ones that are building it.  Yeah.  So invest in those who are building soils, who are contributing to the water holding  capacity of soils, because there's the next second big issue, water, watershed management.  
**[0:15:27-0:15:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:15:27):**  The overall water household on this planet may be stable, but the extremes between floods  on the one side and droughts on the other side will become bigger and not just because  of climate change.  You know, 2% or 2.5% of all water on this planet is fresh water, of which half, I think,  is frozen and the other half, so less than 1%, is available for us, and of which 70%  
**[0:15:57-0:15:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:15:57):**  is used by agriculture.  So you're turning a big lever there.  If you manage your soils properly and you invest into the water holding capacity of  soils, then you can do with enormous amounts less water.  So irrigation in Holland may be not so expensive, but in other parts of the world, it's extremely  
**[0:16:19-0:16:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:16:19):**  expensive.  So soil, proper soil management contributing to your organic matter contents is crucially  important, not only because of fertility and your ability to produce in future, but also  because of water holding capacities.  Thirdly, because of your contribution to biodiversity, which is where your vitality bank is.  
**[0:16:46-0:16:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:16:46):**  Diversity means vitality, and we see an immediate and direct connection between diversity, biodiversity,  and the ability of a plant to deal with pests and diseases.  Which third component and the fourth component?  No, well, at first, the fourth component would be mitigation of climate change, because 40%  of all greenhouse gases are caused, are borne by food and agriculture, of which half is  
**[0:17:17-0:17:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:17:17):**  caused by mineral fertilizer, nitrous oxide emissions, and the other half by methane.  So before we talk about feeding the world, one thing is for sure, we cannot, we can't  afford to keep eating meat, as long as, you know, the footprint of its animal feed production  is so huge in terms of monoculture of soybeans and maize, that are so big that they, that  you can't rotate them with any other crop for soil fertility reasons.  
**[0:17:54-0:18:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:17:54):**  So you have to apply shitloads of mineral fertilizer, which depletes soils, which creates  a water footprint of 15,000 litres per kilo of beef, which is completely ridiculous, of  which 98% is caused by irresponsible farming techniques, which produces 20% of all the  greenhouse gases.  And then you have beef that actually produces methane, which is the other half of the 40%  
**[0:18:22-0:18:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:18:22):**  of food and agriculture emissions.  So it's simply not sustainable.  So why is it still simple?  Well, it's simple, because we have to look after our soils, water, biodiversity and climate  change.  
**[0:18:34-0:18:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:18:34):**  And what we need to embark on is in order to mitigate risk of losses, also financial  losses, we have to not only look at productivity per hectare, we have to look at climate smart,  forestry smart, water smart, and particularly soil smart agriculture.  And these suppliers of you, they are on that journey.  How closely you work with them?  
**[0:19:03-0:19:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:19:03):**  What's the, when a supplier says in South Africa, I guess they're making table grapes  for you, and they say, we want to do more Falkor, we want to do more.  What's your response?  You send in the troops, how close are you?  Because this is not a normal supplier trader relationship.  
**[0:19:18-0:19:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:19:18):**  This is a partnership that goes way further.  Can you give an example on how that works?  Just to understand that this is another paradigm of doing business in the fruit and vegetable  sector?  Well, it's actually a good example that grape grower in South Africa, maybe you deliberately  
**[0:19:35-0:19:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:19:35):**  chose it.  I think we've discussed it before.  All right.  Well, this guy is a visionary guy who at some point discovered that he can produce bigger  quantities, better quality if he invests in soil fertility.  
**[0:19:53-0:19:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:19:53):**  And it cuts down his costs, but it also cuts down his irrigation bill and his pest and  disease pressure.  It does a lot of things that are not only good for people and planet, but also is for  his income.  And then we discovered together with the World Bank that the Sundaes River Valley in South  
**[0:20:18-0:20:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:20:18):**  Africa is suffering from a huge problem because the Sundaes River stops producing water for  some strange reason.  Which is a big issue because 70% of all South Africa's citrus production is based in the  Sundaes River.  Speaking about risks.  
**[0:20:37-0:20:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:20:37):**  So they were sort of on a suicide mission.  Why?  Because all this stuff, this alien vegetation that polluted these rivers was caused by enhanced  fertile climate as a result of mineral fertilizer leakage into the groundwater produced by these  citrus farmers.  
**[0:20:59-0:21:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:20:59):**  So you see where I'm getting at.  So World Bank said, okay, we invent this project working for water, which means that we send  in labor that's providing jobs and they cut back all the alien vegetation from these rivers.  That's water.  So we provide the valley again with water.  
**[0:21:22-0:21:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:21:22):**  And that's where we moved in, teamed up with Sundaes River Citrus Corporation, a huge co-op  that controls I think 60 or 70% of the citrus production in the area.  We teamed up with them and said, how about if we take that stuff that's cut out of the  green stuff that's cut out of the rivers?  How about if we use that as a input for our compost and we produce our own compost and  
**[0:21:51-0:21:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:21:51):**  compete with mineral fertilizer suppliers?  Which is what we did.  So we started producing compost in huge numbers.  Because there was a lot of stuff in the river.  There was a lot of stuff in the river.  
**[0:22:03-0:22:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:22:03):**  Drawers began to collectively cut down on their mineral fertilizer.  So that stopped leakage.  And in the meantime, they were building soils again and investing into organic matter contents  in their soils.  So there would be no leakage and there would be no problem with the rivers anymore.  
**[0:22:23-0:22:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:22:23):**  Plus they would be more independent from external agrochemical input supply.  Which most farmers don't like to be anyway.  Which most farmers don't like to be anyway.  So it's a very silly model.  And you started to, they became, or they already were suppliers of you or you started to also?  
**[0:22:41-0:22:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:22:41):**  No, then they, not all of them, but the majority of them converted to organic, which are still  today our biggest citrus suppliers.  So then we went to the IPCC, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, and applied for carbon  credits, which we got on the delta of methane gas emission.  Because in the past, all this green stuff was land filled, producing methane.  
**[0:23:13-0:23:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:23:13):**  And now we started composting it, cutting down on the methane.  And as a result, we got carbon credits on that delta.  So we all of a sudden, without knowing, produced three yields, three income revenue streams.  One was these growers could sell their compost to also neighboring farms, income revenue  one.  
**[0:23:36-0:23:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:23:36):**  They could sell their carbon credits, revenue two.  And they could sell their citrus to us, revenue three.  So that model was then copied to municipalities and Cape Town, Durban, Port Elizabeth and  other bigger cities in South Africa, where we started collecting all the green waste,  not from rivers, but just green waste from the cities.  
**[0:24:01-0:24:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:24:01):**  Started collecting it, cutting it down, making compost and closing the carbon cycle by shipping  that back to the farmers.  Which was a model that was then copied to Mexico, Argentina, Chile, India, China, etc.  So it's a very sustainable model that does not only contribute to soil fertility, water  and capacity and mitigation of climate change.  
**[0:24:30-0:24:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:24:30):**  But it most of all frees up growers from being held hostage by an agrochemical input business  that parasites on farming, like the pharmaceutical industry parasites on your health by selling  a little bit of pills or agrochemicals with a few side effects for which they have new  pills or agrochemicals again.  So this is a very sustainable model for the input suppliers, very sustainable, but not  
**[0:25:07-0:25:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:25:07):**  very sustainable for the planet or for the growers or for the consumers.  And it's quite easy to break that.  You just need to look at returns in a different way.  Our friends call it, have a look at your natural capital returns or social capital or inspirational  capital returns.  
**[0:25:30-0:25:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:25:30):**  Well, that's precisely what we do, except that we do not only look at the returns, we  also monetize them.  So we recently created a dashboard together with EYKPMG, PWC, a few other, a few banks  in a pilot called true cost accounting for food, farming and finance, in which we actually  measured and monetized the impact on soil, water, climate, livelihoods and health, provided  
**[0:26:02-0:26:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:26:02):**  these impacts with a monetary value and produced our first profit and loss account based not  just on financial capital, but also on natural and social capital, which was a, I think a  revolutionary step.  How did it look?  I mean, normal profit and loss are usually pretty boring, but in this case, what are  
**[0:26:24-0:26:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:26:24):**  one or two highlights from that that really surprised you or really gave you a good feeling  or a bad one maybe?  Well, it was mixed.  First of all, we noticed that we were correct in the assumption that organic is not too  expensive, but conventional is too cheap, as long as we keep externalizing costs to  
**[0:26:43-0:26:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:26:43):**  future generations.  Secondly, that was quite revolutionary.  We noticed that organic apples are 19 cents healthier per kilo than conventional apples,  which is something we haven't talked about yet.  We talked about the impact on planet.  
**[0:27:01-0:27:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:27:01):**  We haven't addressed social impact or health impact yet, but this is an example that if  you leave out pesticides, which is what organic farming does, then that actually also has  a 19 cent per kilo impact on your health as a consumer, just as a consumer.  And what we simply did is we took data from EFSA, from the European Food Safety Agency,  and fed those data of pesticides and residue occasions.  
**[0:27:37-0:27:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:27:37):**  We fed that into the DALI, the Disability Adjusted Life Year calculation, which is a  monetization tool used by the WHO of the United Nations.  So this data was out there.  The data was out there, the template was out there, and we had EY validating this calculation.  That's how we achieved this 19 cent per kilo health advantage, by the way, defined in a  
**[0:28:07-0:28:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:28:07):**  very limited way, of course, because just absence of pesticides, absence of disease.  Health, as we all know, is much wider, much bigger, not just physical, it's also social,  it's mental, it's about vitality.  But this in itself was already revolutionary itself.  Thirdly, we got an overwhelming response from the financial sector thanking us for being  
**[0:28:36-0:28:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:28:36):**  the first, almost, together with other pioneers, to provide them with a dashboard so they would  have indicators to not only look at people and planet impact from a qualitative point  of view, but also from a monetized point of view.  What does it mean at the end?  Because of course they love to have that number.  
**[0:28:57-0:28:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:28:57):**  Yeah.  And if you have that number, even if it's a limited range, it means that probably the  total range is a lot bigger, you just don't know the X.  But you have already the 19 cents, or on the apple and the mango, etc., are different,  but you know, you can start calculating, which is in many cases what we miss.  
**[0:29:16-0:29:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:29:16):**  We don't know what an organic apple does to you, but we do know what a chemical one does,  so we can have that difference.  You know, finance is also about risk management, probably...  Mostly. ...totally about risk management, isn't it?  
**[0:29:32-0:29:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:29:32):**  And risk mitigation.  A bad investment kills your return, and a good investment doesn't make it usually.  So you can be pennywise, pound foolish, and ignore those ecological and social or health  risks.  Or you can say, well, even if my short-term profit driven shareholder doesn't realize  
**[0:29:53-0:30:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:29:53):**  it, I have at least a governance responsibility to warn him for certain risks.  And in the wake of the Paris Climate Agreement, it is likely that the authorities will have  a look at the impact on climate of companies and sectors and public sector, etc.  So if you want to establish a risk analysis on the possible effect of a carbon tax or  whatever will be launched, then you better be prepared.  
**[0:30:35-0:30:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:30:35):**  And the Central Bank in Holland recently launched this stress test to see what the profitability  of companies and sectors like the insurance sector and institutional investor sector would  look like if they would have to compensate for their climate change damage.  And the data is in, or they're in the process?  I don't know.  
**[0:30:57-0:30:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:30:57):**  But just the fact that they...  The Central Bank of the UK mentioned that the biggest threat to the economy or to us  is climate change.  Yeah.  Shock, which made it to the front page of Financial Times, which is good and bad at  
**[0:31:10-0:31:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:31:10):**  the same time.  I mean, that shouldn't have been news, but it's...  No, but sustainability is definitely hitting the financial sector.  And the fact...  And other...  
**[0:31:21-0:31:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:31:21):**  You see symptoms.  You don't see the real footprint yet and the consequences, but that's a matter of time.  But if you want to look beyond the garden fence and not too far away, you can clearly  see what will happen.  And the fact that Standard & Poor bought TrueCost, I don't know if you followed that.  
**[0:31:44-0:31:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:31:44):**  I didn't see that, but that's very interesting.  It's a UK-based true cost accounting NGO or...  How did they buy that?  Well, they decided if we want to establish a proper risk analysis of a company or a sector  or a government or a country, then we better factor in risks of climate change and, I mean,  
**[0:32:11-0:32:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:32:11):**  the risks of people on planet.  And so you see all these signs, you see the carbon tracker discussion around stranded  acids of the oil sector.  So I think these are all sort of the first telltales of a next decade that will show  us that will confront us with a few disruptive changes that may have a multiplier effect  
**[0:32:45-0:32:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:32:45):**  because one would say, well, okay, it's just about climate change.  But my guess is that if people start talking about climate change, they will automatically  also end up talking about the second largest carbon bank on the planet, which is soils  after the oceans.  Plus...  
**[0:33:04-0:33:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:33:04):**  It's immediately related to climate change.  So before you know, you talk about soil fertility, you talk about water, you talk about biodiversity.  Farms, health, yeah.  And yeah, and well, millions of consumers who are seriously concerned about the fact  that 70% of their health bill is food related.  
**[0:33:23-0:33:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:33:23):**  So can we get more transparency with regards to the health impact of what we eat, please?  Which is where our 19 cents come in per kilo.  So I'm foreseeing bigger moments of disruptive change that will allow new pioneers and new  startups and new businesses who capitalize on a positive impact on people and planet.  That will attract new money.  
**[0:33:55-0:34:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:33:55):**  As a matter of fact, those who are stuck in the old 1.0 profit definition, they will be  fucked to put it mildly.  And those who have factored in...  Who do you sell it to?  I mean, it's called stranded assets for a reason because you're going to be stranded  
**[0:34:13-0:34:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:34:13):**  and you're not going to be able to sell it to anybody anymore.  Yeah.  So what's next for Josta?  I mean, this huge next 10 years, a lot of disruptive change, huge changes in how many  businesses are around, many startups, like you mentioned, many newcomers coming into  
**[0:34:28-0:34:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:34:28):**  the space.  Because for you in the medium, medium long term, what do you see, what are you excited  about in the next few years?  If we talk in a year from now and two years from now, what would you be excited about  if you can share them obviously?  
**[0:34:41-0:34:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:34:41):**  No, I would love to.  Look, it's simple.  Demand for organic produce is soaring.  So is exponentially growing by 15%.  I don't think there's any IT sector that's growing so fast.  
**[0:34:54-0:34:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:34:54):**  Yet it is still small, particularly in this country, in Holland, but the average in the  rest of Europe is, you know, and if you look in mainstream retail, it's anything between  20 and 40%.  So it is already mainstream.  So we are way behind when it comes to fulfilling that demand.  
**[0:35:13-0:35:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:35:13):**  But you sell 95% outside the Netherlands.  Yeah, 98.  You're located here in 98.  Yeah.  But let's say in the Netherlands, we need to catch up.  
**[0:35:21-0:35:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:35:21):**  There's a huge...  No, you know, as an entrepreneur, you don't care about your home country.  At least I don't.  I don't care about Holland.  What happens here?  
**[0:35:29-0:35:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:35:29):**  No, it's more, you know, we are Europe-wide players when it comes to markets.  And we just see this enormously exponentially growing demand.  And we can't, we are seriously concerned about supply.  So we need new suppliers.  There's a huge investment potential for growers and investors to scale up.  
**[0:35:52-0:35:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:35:52):**  Is that something you work with others with?  Yeah, sure.  With traditional banks, investors, etc.?  Yeah.  So that's something you're probably... because at the end, you cannot do it all alone.  
**[0:36:02-0:36:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:36:02):**  I mean, you are a big company and a small company at the same time.  No, but we remain a traffic controller.  We are not a bank.  We're not a grower.  We're not, you know, we're supply chain managers.  
**[0:36:11-0:36:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:36:11):**  So we need to co-create with environmental agencies, with UN agencies, with financial  actors and with those who have a vision.  So back to your question where I see that would be the next challenge in the next few  years.  First of all, big demand for organic.  
**[0:36:32-0:36:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:36:32):**  And you need to be specific about what commodities, what crops, what products.  Secondly, I see great potential in co-creating new models of return between the sustainability  sector in food and agri and the financial sector.  So if we could come up with a new dashboard to measure impact on people and planet and  report on natural and social capital rather than just on financial capital only, if we  
**[0:37:07-0:37:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:37:07):**  would... and we have that tool and we would team up with bigger retailers and other players,  then that would be giving a boost to sustainability, I'm sure.  But that is an umbrella approach, a generic meta approach, which we will be pursuing.  If you zoom in, we've so far always been looking at the environmental benefits when it comes  to organic farming.  
**[0:37:34-0:37:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:37:34):**  We've also looked into the social benefits when it comes to fair trade certification.  But we're increasingly beginning to look and that's a campaign we will just be launching  next January.  We also be looking at the health impact of food.  And we've called it Dr. Good Food.  
**[0:37:56-0:38:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:37:56):**  So we'll provide all our packages, millions of packages, with a little campaign logo that  says Dr. Good Food.  And drgoodfood.com will be a website where chefs, but also medical doctors, dieticians  and consumers and NGOs will team up to raise more awareness for the proactive healthcare  of food.  
**[0:38:26-0:38:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:38:26):**  And we will have flash mobs at the food and veg, in the food and veg department of big  retail customers, partners, flash mobs with students in white doctor coats and stethoscopes  handing out fruit and veg and little pliers to point out what the connection is between  health and food.  Because that's the next big challenge and I smell momentum there.  
**[0:38:56-0:39:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:38:56):**  And it will contribute to our unique selling point in the market.  So in the past we've been promoting the bees, we're promoting with our Save Our Soils campaign,  we've been promoting soils.  There's a direct connection, soil, food, health.  Absolutely.  
**[0:39:14-0:39:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:39:14):**  But consumers like single issue.  Everything is connected in nature, that's the nice thing.  Yeah, you need to be specific, you have half a second to make a difference, attention to  when somebody decides left or right.  So I see momentum there.  
**[0:39:34-0:39:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:39:34):**  And then we'll take it from there.  Lots to do.  Thank you so much Fogart for your time.  We'll be checking in on all of these projects and thank you for taking the time to share.  Thank you, Kon.  
**[0:39:46-0:39:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:39:46):**  Pleasure.  You just listened to a conversation with Fogart Engelsmann, co-founder of EOSTA, where we  discussed the role of an air traffic controller in the organic food supply web.  What's next for this 30-year-old organic company?  Thank you for making the time to listen to this podcast and making it all the way until  
**[0:40:03-0:40:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:40:03):**  the end.  I hope you enjoyed it as much as I did.  If you found the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  
**[0:40:15-0:40:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:40:15):**  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few  seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  join my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  
**[0:40:34-0:40:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:40:34):**  You can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or in the description  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food.  
**[0:41:00-0:41:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:41:00):**  How to put money to work in regenerating soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while  doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After a hundred interviews and more than a hundred hours of audio asking the question  how to put money to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011  
**[0:41:16-0:41:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:41:16):**  and recording these podcasts since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision-making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  
**[0:41:31-0:41:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:41:31):**  What questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  
**[0:41:38-0:41:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:41:38):**  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  You, the soil builders and investors in the space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  
**[0:41:54-0:41:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:41:54):**  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management, consultants, etc.  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  
**[0:42:14-0:42:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:42:14):**  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very different means.  
**[0:42:28-0:42:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:42:28):**  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  
**[0:42:44-0:42:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:42:44):**  so you don't have to ride along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  if you're a soil builder.  
**[0:43:03-0:43:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:43:03):**  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  
**[0:43:20-0:43:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:43:20):**  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  
**[0:43:37-0:43:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/02/01/volkert-engelsman/#t=0:43:37):**  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  