### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2018-16-31)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  You will listen to an interview with Rufo Quintavalle who shared his story how he got  into impact investing and from there into regenerative agriculture and agroforestry.  
**[0:00:23-0:00:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:00:23):**  Plus he shares his theory of change.  Enjoy!  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture, Investing as if the  Planet Mattered, a podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and  agriculture space to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil,  
**[0:00:42-0:00:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:00:42):**  people, local communities and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat and it's time that we as investors, big and small  and consumers start paying much more attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  
**[0:01:06-0:01:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:01:06):**  Before we get started, I've been recording these interviews next to my day job and I  will definitely continue to do so and release about an episode a month.  But at the same time I would love to take this further, share more interviews, there  are many more stories to share on investing in regenerative food and agriculture.  More depth, improve the quality, maybe even doing some video series.  
**[0:01:27-0:01:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:01:27):**  So I started a Patreon community which makes it easy to support creators like myself.  If these podcasts have been of value to you and if you have the means, I invite you to  support me and make this happen.  For more information please find the link to my Patreon account in the description below.  And now without further ado, the interview.  
**[0:01:46-0:01:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:01:46):**  Enjoy!  Welcome to Investing in Regenerative Agriculture, Investing as if the Planet Mattered.  I'm Koen van Zeyen, your host.  Today I'm talking to Rufo Quintavalle.  Rufo is a writer, entrepreneur and impact investor.  
**[0:01:58-0:02:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:01:58):**  He's the author of eight books of poetry and has more than a decade of experience in  investing in renewable energy, farmland and forestry.  Welcome Rufo.  Thank you very much.  Thank you for having me.  
**[0:02:08-0:02:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:02:08):**  So just to have a bit of a background story on your story and how did you end up in forestry  and farmland.  Could you share a bit, why are you doing what you're doing?  Yeah, sure, with pleasure.  I have family money which comes from my grandfather who made his money in the car industry essentially.  
**[0:02:35-0:02:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:02:35):**  When I came into that inheritance to begin with it was not particularly something that  interested me, money, but about ten years ago and I think it's probably to do with having  children of my own actually.  I started getting a sense that this money was something that actually did matter, that  I was taking care of it on behalf of somebody else and that if I wanted to be serious about  
**[0:03:00-0:03:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:03:00):**  how it was invested for my children but also for my own peace of mind I needed to find  some kind of coherence between my values as a person and the fact that you know the pure  chance, the pure good chance that I happen to have money and it's a luxury that very  few people have.  So about ten years ago I started looking for ways to invest environmentally which initially  
**[0:03:27-0:03:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:03:27):**  meant renewable energy and after doing that for a few years I sort of stopped and said  well what do I really want to be doing if I'm going to be serious about this, how do  I become a more strategic and a more coherent and a more serious investor and the process  I went through was to not think about money at all and just to think about what mattered  to me as a person.  
**[0:03:52-0:04:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:03:52):**  This may sound slightly silly but I like food so I just sort of thought well look I like  food, where does food come from?  Food comes from farming, why not see if there's a way to invest into food and farming?  And this happened to be round about the time when a lot of people were getting panicked  by what was going on in conventional financial markets after the sort of meltdown in 2008.  
**[0:04:21-0:04:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:04:21):**  So there was interest in investing into farmland at the time as an uncorrelated real asset  and you know a sort of safe place to store your money and to conserve your wealth.  So there was farmland was kind of there in the air, there was a sort of a buzz around  it not necessarily coming from green or environmental investors but coming from the sort of more  conventional finance space.  
**[0:04:48-0:04:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:04:48):**  I wanted to do it in an environmentally respectful way so to invest into organic farmland.  So that's how farming came about partly just from that process of personal reflection,  partly for financial reasons and partly as a way to suck carbon out of the atmosphere  and get it in the ground which is a vital part of the climate equation.  And forestry a few years after that seemed like a natural next step for me and there's  
**[0:05:24-0:05:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:05:24):**  a lot of overlap between the two as well.  And in terms of do you still remember finding your first investment and how that was like  to put money into something to put money to work according to your values.  Of course renewable energy was also your values but less of a personal connection to it.  How was that first investment?  
**[0:05:43-0:05:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:05:43):**  I mean the first investing into renewable energy I just kind of to be honest I just  sort of rushed into one of the first things that came my way.  I was a little bit too hasty you know I wanted to go out there and do good in the world and  in retrospect I was too hasty but at the same time I think sometimes one can spend too long  waiting as well and you wait and wait and wait for the perfect investment.  
**[0:06:07-0:06:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:06:07):**  So it's quite good sometimes to get your feet in the water you know don't put in more than  you can afford to lose but sometimes it's good to make that first jump.  Investing into farmland I was more you know I learned from that first experience and went  a little bit more slowly and did a bit more research but it felt good.  It felt like yeah it felt like the right thing to be doing so if there's anyone out there  
**[0:06:34-0:06:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:06:34):**  listening to this you know contemplating making that leap don't be too hasty but don't be  too slow either you know set aside a bit of money you can afford to potentially lose and  put it to work and I always feel that if think about how you would feel if you do lose that  money and to me that's almost the definition of what an impact investment is because it  will mean different things to different people but if you lose the money and you feel I'm  
**[0:07:01-0:07:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:07:01):**  okay with that you know I tried to do something worthwhile and it failed to me that's almost  the definition of an impact investment and if you lose the money and you're angry and  bitter then it probably wasn't an impact investment to begin with.  And what was that first one in farmland or in forestry?  Is it something you want to share and is it something you're still happy about?  
**[0:07:24-0:07:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:07:24):**  Yeah I mean I ended up making two related investments one which was into an asset management  firm called Agro Ecological Investment Management that's based in New Zealand which is where  my mother is from so there was a kind of personal connection there but that's a company that  buys conventional farmland and converts it into organic management so I made an investment  into the asset manager itself and I also acquired subsequently acquired a farm in New Zealand  
**[0:08:04-0:08:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:08:04):**  myself so it was two related investments.  And since then how many years ago was that?  That's a good question.  More or less obviously.  Maybe six or seven years ago something like that.  
**[0:08:22-0:08:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:08:22):**  And how has the journey been since then from like six seven years ago to now we're talking  December 2017?  I think there's more I mean I've since started investing into forestry and agroforestry in  Brazil so you know very different geography going from one of the most safe and stable  and least corrupt countries in the world into a country that you know is almost the opposite  
**[0:08:52-0:09:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:08:52):**  so the journey but that's good you know you go slowly and you get experience and go as  fast as you're comfortable going but no the journey has been good and I've learned a great  deal and I mean that's something I would say as well to anyone who's interested in doing  this go out and educate yourself and attend conferences and speak to people and learn  from their expertise.  
**[0:09:16-0:09:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:09:16):**  Don't waste people's time you know don't sort of set up endless calls if you've got absolutely  no intention of investing but you know be courteous to learn from people's expertise  and it's been a really nice experience because there's people are happy to share and people  are happy to talk and you can you can learn a great deal that way so no the experience  has been good I think there's more appetite as I say there was a certain kind of interest  
**[0:09:46-0:09:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:09:46):**  in investing into real assets starting post 2008 I think there's maybe more interest now  coming from the environmental community who realize the importance of sequestering atmospheric  carbon it's not just about reducing our emissions so that's nice to see as well there's a bit  more a bit more action a bit more action now.  And in terms of Brazil can you explain a bit more about that project those investments  
**[0:10:17-0:10:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:10:17):**  or that investment and how you went from transitional funds to from conventional to organic to agroforestry  to perennial systems basically.  Yeah yeah I mean to begin with I thought well I've ticked my my agriculture box how am I  going to tick my forestry box so like I said I went to conferences I read up I met people  and tried to educate myself so I wasn't necessarily looking to get into agroforestry to begin  
**[0:10:47-0:10:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:10:47):**  with but it kind of it kind of ended up that way I have two two projects in Brazil one  which is in southern Brazil near Sao Paulo which is a mixed a mixed use property so it's  part the native rainforest and partly commercial timber so the idea there is to is to generate  enough money via commercial activities so a mix of timber harvesting and and agricultural  activities and to use that money to permanently preserve the area of native rainforest which  
**[0:11:24-0:11:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:11:24):**  I think ultimately will have more more value.  We don't really know what this is the Atlantic rainforest in the south of Brazil which unfortunately  has been almost entirely destroyed.  There's only only 7 percent of the original forest cover left but we don't know what's  in the what's in the rainforest.  
**[0:11:46-0:11:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:11:46):**  So you know one of the first things that we're doing on that on that particular project is  to start cataloging the plants that are there in this parcel of rainforests or using it  as a kind of laboratory to figure out what we've got and then you know the next step  to say well can any of this be of use whether it's as food or medicine or cosmetics or even  for industrial industrial use.  
**[0:12:13-0:12:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:12:13):**  So that's the goal there is first to get enough money coming in to preserve this area of native  rainforest second to start getting a sense of what's there in the rainforest and third  to see if any of those native crops can be planted and can be cultivated commercially.  Well then you have an incentive not just for us but for other people to go out and get  into reforestation.  
**[0:12:40-0:12:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:12:40):**  Everyone you know everyone wants to plant trees everyone wants to save the rainforest  but ultimately there needs to be some kind of commercial driver if people are going to  start doing this on a large scale.  So that's the thinking behind that project down south and then recently with some friends  of mine with a group of other investors we acquired some land way up north in a state  
**[0:13:07-0:13:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:13:07):**  called Amapa which is on the eastern eastern edge of the Amazon and this is degraded land  so it's land that was originally a mix of rainforest and savannah but which has unfortunately  been cleared and quite severely burnt.  So the dynamic there is a bit different it's to start replanting and to plant a mix of  trees some of which are sort of quite fast growing fruit trees will have a first partial  
**[0:13:36-0:13:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:13:36):**  harvest after two or three years some are slightly slower growing fruit trees which  will come to maturity around about five or six years and some of it will be very slow  maturing timber and so to have different revenue streams.  And again my broader sort of ambition there if this works is to say look there are viable  models for reforestation it's possible to plant trees and to make money and one of the  
**[0:14:05-0:14:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:14:05):**  advantages about Brazil is that things do grow very quickly there so you can have a  return on investment relatively quickly you don't need to lock up your money for 10 or  20 years which can be off-putting to many investors.  Which makes it very interesting but and again I think the Atlantic rainforest also has an  enormous value but probably not yet in dollar amounts or euro amounts to play with the agricultural  
**[0:14:35-0:14:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:14:35):**  land in the rest of Latin America they are sort of the water pump for the rest of the  space there right?  The Amazon rainforest works as a water pump the Atlantic rainforest unfortunately there's  so little left but it doesn't really do much.  So the water pump is really demolished and isn't there anymore?  
**[0:14:56-0:15:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:14:56):**  Down south I mean you know this is the part the southern part of Brazil is the part that  has seen the most industrialization it's where all the big cities are and it's where a lot  of the agriculture has been historically installed.  So unfortunately the Atlantic rainforest it's 7% of the original cover is not a lot you  know so to me the challenge there would be well how does one sort of join up the little  
**[0:15:24-0:15:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:15:24):**  pockets to the left how do you create ecological corridors to try and join up this very fragmented  landscape.  The Amazon which is much better conserved does serve this function as a water pump for  the whole of Latin America so that water evaporates from the Amazon it heads westward those clouds  hit the Andes and then turn south they go south and they rain onto southern Brazil and  
**[0:15:57-0:16:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:15:57):**  Uruguay and parts of Argentina so the rainfall patterns in that part of Latin America are  totally dependent on what's known as the flying rivers that are generated by the Amazon rainforest  and there's actually more water in those flying rivers than there is in the Amazon River itself.  It's 200 million people living in Brazil you add in big places like Buenos Aires and Montevideo  the consequences of disrupting those patterns of rainfall are extremely serious so there's  
**[0:16:38-0:16:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:16:38):**  an intrinsic value in terms of biodiversity in the Amazon rainforest.  There's also a very practical human cost if we don't reverse the process of deforestation  and start replanting trees there's a risk that the Amazon will tip from its current  state as a forest and will tip into a new equilibrium as savannah or grassland which  would have catastrophic consequences for large parts of Latin America.  
**[0:17:12-0:17:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:17:12):**  That's why you're piloting these ways of reforestation in severely degraded land.  Absolutely, just to try and prove that it can be done and to encourage other people  to do likewise.  There's a need to preserve what is left of these big forest basins whether it's the Amazon  whether it's in the Congo or whether it's in Indonesia.  
**[0:17:40-0:17:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:17:40):**  We need to preserve as much as we can.  There's a need to be replanting as well and realistically that replanting isn't going  to take the form of recreating what looks like a pristine rainforest which is an interesting  philosophical question anyway.  What is a pristine rainforest given that people have been living in these places for 10,000  
**[0:18:05-0:18:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:18:05):**  years?  But anyway, if we want to start replanting we need to find economically viable models  to encourage people to do so.  Particularly in poor countries you can't just tell people to put a fence around the forest  and don't touch it.  
**[0:18:20-0:18:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:18:20):**  People need to make money, they need to live, they need to eat.  And they've always done so in the forest but obviously with the change of lifestyle and  explosion of populations the pressure became or becomes too much.  Yeah, there's always a long history of cultivating food in the Amazon and there's a lot of interesting  archaeological work that's kind of working at the overlap between archaeology and botany  
**[0:18:50-0:18:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:18:50):**  and anthropology to try and figure out what these Amazonian societies looked like.  But it seems quite clear that there were what we would now consider as orchards or plantations  in the middle of the forest that people identified particular species that were useful to them  and rather than having to go out and forage for them, well why not plant these species  close to where you live.  
**[0:19:15-0:19:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:19:15):**  So the native rainforest for at least 10,000 years in the case of the Amazon has had some  human influence.  And people are mapping where archaeological sites are and then overlaying that with botanical  surveys and saying look every time there's a human settlement there's certain species  that occur in much higher concentrations than they would do naturally.  
**[0:19:45-0:19:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:19:45):**  So it seems fairly clear that there was some kind of commercial fruit plantation and medicine  or timber that the people in the Amazon have been cultivating certain plants for a long  time.  What's changed now is that there's huge chunks of the forest that are being cut down and  that's primarily for soy or cattle, a bit of mining as well but it's mainly soy and  
**[0:20:09-0:20:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:20:09):**  cattle that are driving that.  And soy in itself is used as feed for livestock.  So yeah, meat production is probably the biggest thing that's driving deforestation.  And is that something that you're, I mean there's a lot of talk about meat replacements,  plant-based food, etc.  
**[0:20:31-0:20:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:20:31):**  Is it something you are looking at as well?  Yes, but with the, I would put a caveat on that.  There's certain vegetables and certain fruits that have a very high protein content.  So I'm extremely interested in identifying what those are and trying to create new markets  for these.  
**[0:20:58-0:21:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:20:58):**  You know there's 4,000 fruits in the Amazon and we don't know what half of them do.  We haven't really carried out the analysis on it.  But you know, acai, which is one of the fruits that we'll be planting in Amata, which has  become a kind of trendy fruit in the US and increasingly in Europe.  Superfood.  
**[0:21:18-0:21:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:21:18):**  Superfood, yeah.  And it is, it's got a ton of vitamins.  It's also got protein in there.  So there are lots of naturally occurring plants that can be used as sources of vegetable protein.  Where I'm a little bit cautious is when you get into the more sort of high-tech approaches.  
**[0:21:39-0:21:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:21:39):**  And what makes me uneasy there is if you get to a point where certain very wealthy people  essentially own the IP on food, I'm not convinced that the social consequences of that, which  will be negative social consequences, would be enough to justify the positive environmental  ones.  So I'm a little bit uneasy about some of these meat replacements.  
**[0:22:06-0:22:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:22:06):**  In theory, it's good and we do need to significantly reduce the amounts of livestock that are being  produced and consumed.  But if we end up replacing an environmental problem with a social problem, i.e. a handful  of billionaires own the IP on food, I'm not sure that that's a good thing.  In fact, I'm sure it's a bad thing.  
**[0:22:35-0:22:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:22:35):**  We would just replace one problem with the other and probably it becomes an issue.  I think it is an issue.  You know, there's obviously a difference of opinion on this.  That's as much to do with corporate governance and with the way these investments are structured  as it is to do with the underlying technology itself.  
**[0:22:59-0:23:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:22:59):**  You know, soy, tofu, seitan, there are processed vegetable proteins that have existed for a  long time.  So the fact that somebody is making a meat replacement doesn't bother me at all.  What bothers me is who ends up owning that technology.  And if there's a serious problem to do with wealth concentration in the world at the moment  
**[0:23:28-0:23:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:23:28):**  and in places like the US, it's getting worse rather than getting better.  And if we don't address that problem, there's no hope of addressing climate change either  because the people who are causing the most damage are the wealthy people.  They have very consumer driven lifestyles, but also the very poor people because if you're  sort of desperately poor, you're going to try and make your living any way you can.  
**[0:24:01-0:24:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:24:01):**  If there's a tree, you'll cut it down, you know, burn it for firewood, whatever.  So if we exacerbate these problems of income inequality, there is no hope of addressing  climate change.  And even in and of itself, we shouldn't be driving income inequality.  So that's where my slight concern is around some of these processed food technologies.  
**[0:24:27-0:24:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:24:27):**  It's who owns the IP.  It's not the technology in itself that bothers me.  And what will you be working on?  Let's say we talk again in a year from now.  What will you be looking back at?  
**[0:24:41-0:24:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:24:41):**  And 2018 was the year of X, Y and Z.  What would you be happy to look back at?  I'd be happy if more people take the plunge and start actually allocating capital.  And that seems to be happening already.  From my own personal project, an area that interests me, you know, when you harvest fruit  
**[0:25:13-0:25:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:25:13):**  or crops, what do you do with the residues?  Some of those residues, you can recycle them back into the land.  It's not the same with timber harvesting.  Some of that will go back into the land.  Not all of agricultural residues will decompose rapidly enough to be of use in a commercial  
**[0:25:36-0:25:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:25:36):**  farming venture.  You want stuff to decompose within a year so that you can use it next year.  So what do you do with that excess of residue?  Or what do you do with the stuff that by its sort of structure doesn't decompose very quickly?  How do you put those residues to use?  
**[0:25:55-0:25:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:25:55):**  And again, it could be industrial or it could be cosmetic.  But non-food uses for agricultural residues and getting that balance right so that you're  not taking away productive land that can be used for food production.  But you are valorizing as much of what you produce as possible.  So I think that's hopefully where I will be next year.  
**[0:26:21-0:26:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:26:21):**  And who knows, maybe one day my own personal circle will join up and I'll start getting  closer to what it is that my grandfather did, which was high-tech component parts.  And there's interesting stuff going on there, you know, with natural fibers, including for  the car industry.  Cars are being built using agricultural residues, which is a pretty interesting circle for  
**[0:26:47-0:26:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:26:47):**  you.  For me personally, it would be interesting to go full circle and to end up getting a  little bit closer to what it was that my grandfather did.  I never thought that's where I would end up, but who knows?  Life can take you in funny directions.  
**[0:27:02-0:27:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:27:02):**  And looking at the people that didn't take the plunge yet but are interested, what do  you see as the two most important barriers of making regenerative agriculture and agroforestry  on a broader scale economically viable but also accepted and fit into portfolios basically?  That's a great question.  I think historically it's been an asset class for wealthy investors, both because of the  
**[0:27:35-0:27:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:27:35):**  amount of money that you need to get active in this space and also because of the amount  of time you need to tie it up for.  That most people don't have large amounts of money that they can tie up for a long period  of time.  So I think that's been off-putting to individual investors.  
**[0:27:57-0:28:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:27:57):**  To institutional investors, I think what's off-putting-  It's probably also the time.  It's partly the time.  Some people who say they're long-term investors wouldn't be prepared.  Most of them aren't going to lock up their money for 20 years and very few will lock  
**[0:28:11-0:28:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:28:11):**  it up for 10 years.  Also because I heard yesterday a lot of the bonus structures and compensation structures  are still on a very short-term basis.  So if you pay somebody to deliver short-term results, although you have in your company  headlines etc.  
**[0:28:29-0:28:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:28:29):**  We are a long-term investor.  So if you pay your people to have short-term results, they probably will get up with short-term  results.  So if the underlying structure, investment structure, but also compensation, basically  the whole internal structure doesn't line up with long-term, it's very difficult to  
**[0:28:47-0:28:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:28:47):**  get those long-term results we want.  Yeah, I think that's certainly true.  And there's maybe more flexibility from corporate investors.  If there's somebody who has an obvious strategic interest in securing their supply chain and  making it sustainable for the long term, I think you might see corporates move quicker  
**[0:29:09-0:29:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:29:09):**  than pure financial investors.  Have you seen it already in this space?  On a small scale, yes, some corporates are doing it.  Sometimes it's coming more from a quasi-philanthropic angle.  So it's a sort of odd mix of R&D meets philanthropy.  
**[0:29:29-0:29:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:29:29):**  There are some corporates who are looking more seriously at their whole supply chain.  I was chatting just last night with someone from Caring, which is a big French luxury  conglomerate.  They do seem to be looking quite seriously at their entire supply chain.  Where is our wool coming from?  
**[0:29:56-0:29:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:29:56):**  Where is our cotton coming from?  Where is our leather coming from?  They did a true price analysis, right?  For Puma and then for their whole company.  I remember that.  
**[0:30:06-0:30:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:30:06):**  Which was interesting because leather was their main...  If the true price of their whole supply chain was in their profit statement, they would  be running at a loss mainly because of their suppliers, mainly because of where they get  their raw materials from.  Right, right.  
**[0:30:23-0:30:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:30:23):**  So I think there are some companies who are looking at this in quite a serious way and  realizing that it's important to them if they want to secure those supply chains in the  future.  Sustainability isn't just a buzzword.  It's vital.  
**[0:30:42-0:30:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:30:42):**  So I think there are some corporates who are beginning to do this.  And obviously the closer your business is to the raw materials, the more of an issue  it is for you.  Because we live in quite a dematerialized world.  This maybe is a barrier as well to people investing into regenerative agriculture.  
**[0:31:05-0:31:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:31:05):**  So much of what we do seems kind of invisible.  Electricity or the Skype connection that we're using to talk to each other, that we can end  up being quite disconnected from the actual raw materials that are necessary to enable  our lives.  So the closer one can get to those raw materials, whether it's because you're a corporate that  
**[0:31:30-0:31:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:31:30):**  uses them or whether it's just some kind of life experience.  You go on a trip to the forest or you grew up on a farm.  I think the closer one can get back to those raw materials, the more likely one is to make  the plunge.  So the sort of dematerialized lives that most of us in the developed world live, I think  
**[0:31:53-0:31:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:31:53):**  is potentially an impediment to more people putting money into regenerative agriculture  as well.  And would that be, and that would be my final question, also your advice to smart impact  investors who are hopefully all listening to this podcast and that are ready or they  are interested in regenerative agriculture, they have educated themselves.  
**[0:32:16-0:32:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:32:16):**  Would it be your advice to go out and also get closer to potential investments?  And what would other advice be for people that want to take the plunge like you?  I think it's a hugely important area to be investing into because no matter how dematerialized  our lives feel, we are totally dependent on these raw materials for our food, for our  clothing and even for this Skype call.  
**[0:32:42-0:32:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:32:42):**  The computer, the servers that we're using, they're all built out of something.  They don't care.  We breathe.  Yeah.  So it's a hugely important area to be investing into.  
**[0:32:55-0:33:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:32:55):**  I guess my advice to people who are interested in this, spend a bit of time figuring out  what seems the right way for you to do it.  How much money do you have to invest?  How long can you afford?  How much can you afford to lose?  
**[0:33:12-0:33:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:33:12):**  How long can you afford to lock it up for?  Think a bit about where in the value chain you want to invest.  Do you want to be investing directly into the land itself?  Do you want to be investing into processing or distribution?  Think about geography.  
**[0:33:34-0:33:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:33:34):**  Do you want to invest in your own country or your own neighborhood or your own region?  Do you want to go into a foreign geography?  Think about water.  Unfortunately, some parts of the world, it sounds mean to say this, but they won't have  enough water.  
**[0:33:52-0:33:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:33:52):**  So it's probably not a good place to be investing, even if those places desperately need investment,  unless you can think of a way to manage those issues of inadequate water supply, that's  a risk to take into account.  And then I would say just do it.  Put a small amount to work.  
**[0:34:16-0:34:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:34:16):**  And there are ways now that exist with crowdfunding or in the US you have...  Yeah, I was going to ask that.  Actually, I always ask the last question and then I ask another last question.  But do you see now that there are ways to overcome these two barriers you mentioned,  both the time that money has to be locked in, but also that the starter amount, you  
**[0:34:38-0:34:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:34:38):**  need quite a bit of money to be in to the place.  But actually, we're answering that question right away.  So please go ahead.  Okay.  Okay.  
**[0:34:46-0:34:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:34:46):**  Yeah, I mean, I think crowdfunding is a positive development or peer to peer lending.  In the US, you now have these REITs, real estate investment trusts, which allow people  to put smaller amounts into farmland because some of them are farmland investing vehicles.  So hopefully, we'll see more developments like that.  Cryptocurrency is a big buzzword at the moment.  
**[0:35:20-0:35:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:35:20):**  I'm not 100% sure that the infrastructure exists yet for allocating money via cryptocurrency,  but I'm slightly out of my depth here.  So maybe that's something else that might develop in 2018 or 2020, that there will be  new ways for people to put smaller amounts, to pool smaller amounts and put their money  to work collectively into regenerative agriculture.  
**[0:35:55-0:35:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:35:55):**  I mean, if we can use Skype and etc. to make these calls, also, that should be possible,  right?  It ought to be possible.  It ought to be possible.  I'm a little bit wary just because I see a lot of froth and fraud going on with cowboys.  
**[0:36:09-0:36:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:36:09):**  Yeah, no, definitely.  Yeah.  I mean, get rich quick with cryptocurrencies.  As soon as they start saying get rich quick with farmland, you should be very, very careful.  Yeah, you should be very careful.  
**[0:36:24-0:36:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:36:24):**  You can get rich slowly.  Or lose it very fast.  We have this idea of losing it fast.  There are these cultural memes and messages that we hear.  So, you know, move fast and break things.  
**[0:36:40-0:36:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:36:40):**  This is what the kind of Silicon Valley venture capitalists are saying.  And I would almost say what we need is the exact opposite.  Move slowly and build things.  It doesn't mean you can't make money, but it won't be at the same rate.  It will be more sort of slow and steady.  
**[0:36:59-0:37:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:36:59):**  That's extremely interesting.  In agriculture, forestry is even more long term.  And I mean, time means a very different thing compared if you're building an app, obviously.  And I see also these discussions with investors and with fund managers and a lot of people  that they have to get used again to not a different way of investing, but a different  
**[0:37:22-0:37:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:37:22):**  pace and a different expectations.  And things don't move that fast because you have the seasons and nature is inner and slow,  but will continue to move for a long time.  So there's this very and people got a bit disconnected from that in general, probably  in life, but also in their investment practices that they expect something in quarter two  
**[0:37:43-0:37:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:37:43):**  instead of year five.  And that's quite a long we have to get slowly used to a slower pace there.  Yeah, I mean, I would this is, you know, I would sort of throw this out.  I don't know if this is my last comment or my penultimate comment.  If if we're sort of serious about sustainability, to me, there's an elephant in the room, which  
**[0:38:05-0:38:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:38:05):**  is the way stock markets perform at the moment or the way GDP growth has been performing  over the last 100 or even 200, 200 years is totally dependent on burning fossil fuels.  So it's not just, you know, ExxonMobil or Total or Shell or BP that are going to see  a destruction of value.  If we move to a sustainable economy all across the stock market, you're going to see you're  
**[0:38:37-0:38:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:38:37):**  going to see a significant correction.  I'm not saying we'll go back to sort of pre-industrial levels of growth because our technology is  far better than it was then.  But somewhere between the levels of growth we've got used to and those pre-industrial  levels of growth, there is going to be some point there will be a correction.  
**[0:38:59-0:39:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:38:59):**  And if we as impact investors or environmental investors or whatever you want to say, if  we're serious about about about sustainability, how do we anticipate that correction?  I don't know when it will come, but how do we anticipate that overall market movement?  How do we prepare for it?  And again, I would say part of the reason, one of the reasons I've ended up investing  
**[0:39:25-0:39:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:39:25):**  in the two geographies I have in New Zealand, now in Brazil, is that not all countries are  created equal.  So if we do start reverting to natural levels of growth, i.e. how much can the planet produce  in one year and we consume less than the planet produces in one year, you want to you as an  investor probably want to be in those parts of the planet that have high levels of natural  
**[0:39:49-0:39:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:39:49):**  growth.  New Zealand has pretty good growth levels.  Brazil has excellent growth levels.  And there's a sort of a strip of land around the equator worldwide where things just grow  quicker.  
**[0:40:04-0:40:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:40:04):**  Those aren't necessarily the easiest countries to be investing into, they tend to be, you  know, and poorly governed.  Which is very weird if you think about it.  It's strange, isn't it?  The places where it grows the best end up being in many cases the poorest.  
**[0:40:23-0:40:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:40:23):**  It's a paradox, isn't it?  But you know, maybe this is not for 2018, but maybe in 100 years time, try and imagine  a world without fossil fuels where we're only living on what the planet can produce in one  year rather than, you know, fossil fuels that took 300 million years to form.  Then maybe these countries that historically have been poor and have had a bad deal from  
**[0:40:44-0:40:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:40:44):**  globalization, they'll find themselves in a dominant position.  You know, that would be a pretty radical shift.  Because they can produce the food, the fibers and the oils we need.  It would seem the obvious place to source all of those products from, the places where  they grow quickest.  
**[0:41:01-0:41:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:41:01):**  I mean, I feel like we can talk another hour on that, but I want to be conscious of your  time as well.  And we'll just check in again.  I mean, there's no reason not to do it because probably in 2018 Skype will still be there.  And otherwise we find another technology to get this recording.  
**[0:41:19-0:41:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:41:19):**  Exactly.  We'll check in in 100 years time and see if my prediction was right.  I'm imagining it will go a bit faster, but yeah, we'll see.  Thank you so much for your time and we'll definitely check in before 100 years.  Okay.  
**[0:41:34-0:41:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:41:34):**  It's a pleasure.  It was a pleasure talking.  Thank you very much.  You just listened to an interview with Rufo.  I hope you enjoyed it as much as I did and all of the tips he shared on how to start  
**[0:41:44-0:41:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:41:44):**  investing in regenerative agriculture and take the plunge.  Thank you for making the time to listen to this podcast and making it all the way till  the end.  I hope you enjoyed it as much as I did.  If you found the investing in regenerative agriculture and food podcast valuable, there  
**[0:41:58-0:42:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:41:58):**  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  
**[0:42:17-0:42:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:42:17):**  join my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or in the description  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  
**[0:42:45-0:42:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:42:45):**  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to put money  to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011 and recording  
**[0:43:04-0:43:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:43:04):**  this podcast since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework, what to focus on with the podcast, how have  we picked interviewees, what questions should you ask, what is happening in the space, what  should you read, what should you listen, what should you watch, how to approach this space.  
**[0:43:28-0:43:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:43:28):**  For whom is this course?  You, the soil builders and investors in the space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management, consultants, etc.  
**[0:43:46-0:43:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:43:46):**  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  
**[0:44:02-0:44:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:44:02):**  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you.  And I'm very aware that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very  different means.  
**[0:44:16-0:44:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:44:16):**  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you, and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  
**[0:44:32-0:44:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:44:32):**  so you don't have to write along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find, or what kind of investors you could  find if you're a soil builder.  
**[0:44:51-0:44:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:44:51):**  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design, and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  
**[0:45:07-0:45:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:45:07):**  Unfortunately, that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea, or whatever you're drinking.  
**[0:45:24-0:45:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/01/31/rufo-quintavalle/#t=0:45:24):**  Click on the link below, sign up, and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  