### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2018-50-12)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  Welcome to investing in regenerative agriculture investing as if the planet mattered.  I'm Koen van Zeyen your host.  
**[0:00:19-0:00:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:00:19):**  Today I'm talking with Esther Park CEO of Cienaga Capital, the investment arm of Sally  Kauhoon who I've interviewed last year.  Together with Sally she invests and grants in the regenerative agriculture space.  We covered a lot of ground in this interview.  How Esther got started in this space, their recently launched No Regrets initiative and  
**[0:00:35-0:00:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:00:35):**  how their portfolio is doing.  Of course not just looking at the financial return.  Without further ado the interview with Esther.  Enjoy!  Welcome to another episode of investing in regenerative agriculture investing as if the  
**[0:00:49-0:00:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:00:49):**  planet mattered.  Podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  
**[0:01:06-0:01:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:01:06):**  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors big and small and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  Before we get started I have been recording these interviews next to my day job and I  
**[0:01:26-0:01:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:01:26):**  will definitely continue to do so and release about an episode a month.  But at the same time I would love to take this further.  Share more interviews, there are many more stories to share on investing in regenerative  food and agriculture.  More depth, improve the quality, maybe even doing some video series.  
**[0:01:43-0:01:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:01:43):**  So I started a Patreon community which makes it easy to support creators like myself.  If these podcasts have been of value to you and if you have the means I invite you to  support me and make this happen.  For more information please find a link to my Patreon account in the description below.  And now without further ado, the interview.  
**[0:02:03-0:02:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:02:03):**  Enjoy!  So today I'm joined by Esther Park of Senaga Capital.  Welcome Esther.  Thank you.  So to start with a personal question.  
**[0:02:12-0:02:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:02:12):**  How did you end up in the soil building space?  Well, it was a long series of accidents.  I actually started out in social welfare.  That's what I did my undergraduate degree in.  And I, as I got into the community and economic development space I started working in I would  
**[0:02:36-0:02:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:02:36):**  say first social finance.  So socially motivated finance.  So really small business and affordable housing type of lending and investing.  And then I didn't really start to get into food until I started working in social enterprise.  So in my previous life I worked at RSF Social Finance and we started a social enterprise  
**[0:03:01-0:03:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:03:01):**  lending program there.  And it just happened to be that around that time there was a big uptick in companies doing  organic and fair trade food and beverages.  And that really kicked off a lot of the work that we started in social enterprise.  So kind of by happenstance I started getting involved in food companies.  
**[0:03:27-0:03:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:03:27):**  And because RSF is inspired by the work of Rudolf Steiner some people may know that he  was the progenitor of biodynamic farming.  So as a result of being there I also was able to get a sense of what ecological principles  of farming looked like and how that related to our food system and what kinds of foods  we ended up with on the grocery store shelves.  
**[0:03:55-0:03:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:03:55):**  So that was really my entry into the food space.  I got to know a lot of terrific entrepreneurs who are very passionate about where food comes  from and why we should think about it in a very responsible way.  But I have to say that many of the companies that I worked with during that time were what  we call consumer packaged goods.  
**[0:04:16-0:04:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:04:16):**  So things that you see on grocery store shelves as opposed to those folks who are really working  directly with farms and farmers.  And so I didn't start getting a good understanding of soil health until I left RSF and started  talking with Sally Calhoun who has previously appeared on your podcast.  And she really started talking to me about what was going on on the land, what was happening  
**[0:04:46-0:04:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:04:46):**  particularly with native grasses here in California, how using livestock could really regenerate  the soil and bring back those native grasses, but also started to tell me about how soil  has the capacity to absorb carbon from the atmosphere.  So not only is focusing on soil really great for ecological and nutritional reasons, but  it's also great for environmental reasons.  
**[0:05:18-0:05:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:05:18):**  So just getting a better understanding of what role the soil plays in our entire ecosystem  really started getting me excited and passionate about that work.  And so as I worked more and more with Sally, I just started diving into the topic, doing  a lot of research, attending conferences, learning from scientists.  And now I've become a huge soil health advocate.  
**[0:05:46-0:05:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:05:46):**  So that was kind of my roundabout path into the topic of soil health.  And what was your first response?  Because it's the reason I'm doing this podcast, the role soil plays in both the carbon and  the climate discussion, as well as healthy food and healthy waterways, etc.  But what was your first, when you heard about what soil could do, what was your response  
**[0:06:10-0:06:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:06:10):**  to that?  Well, my initial response was, why didn't I know this, and why doesn't everybody know  this?  It just felt like kind of the big secret that nobody knew.  So I was surprised and I was astonished.  
**[0:06:29-0:06:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:06:29):**  And then immediately went to, OK, well, let's work on this.  Let's work on this issue for ourselves, but also let's work on it in terms of how we can  help other people come to understand this more as well.  And you have been extremely busy on that front.  Can you tell a bit more?  
**[0:06:46-0:06:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:06:46):**  Because when I interviewed Sally, and I will definitely link that podcast below in the  show notes, but No Regrets wasn't there yet.  We were talking about an initiative that was going to come out, but now it's live and it's  thriving.  Can you share a bit with me what that initiative, the No Regrets initiative, is about and why  
**[0:07:04-0:07:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:07:04):**  it's so important, and why soil is really the centerpiece of that?  Yeah.  So the No Regrets initiative has sort of two missions.  One is it's a way for us to talk about the work that we do.  So just kind of reviewing a little bit of what your conversation with Sally was, she  
**[0:07:28-0:07:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:07:28):**  has the ranch in central California, and then there's the Globetrotter Foundation, which  is the family philanthropy, and then there's Cienega Capital, which I run, and that's the  investment fund.  And so she will tell you that all these three entities are created as such for tax purposes,  but in her mind, those are all assets that are working towards soil health.  
**[0:07:54-0:07:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:07:54):**  And so we call it a regenerative asset strategy.  So we're agnostic as to the type of assets.  So whether they're real assets in the form of the ranch or philanthropic or investment  assets, all those assets are meant to work together towards the purpose of regenerating  agricultural soils.  
**[0:08:13-0:08:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:08:13):**  And so we focus on soils because that's our main focus, but it's also, the reason it's  our main focus is because there are so many cove benefits to focusing on the soil.  So A, it's better in the long run for farms for their livelihoods, for their security  in the future.  It's also incredibly important for nutritional quality of our food.  
**[0:08:39-0:08:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:08:39):**  So if anybody's interested in human health, the soil is incredibly important for that.  There have been studies both in the UK and the US that have shown a significant decline  in the nutritional density of foods in the United States.  And there are some statistics that say we need to be eating four to five times the amount  of vegetables to get the same nutritional content as we did before 1940.  
**[0:09:06-0:09:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:09:06):**  And we're eating less and less basically.  Yes, exactly.  There's also the co-benefit of water.  So a lot of the water crises that we have seen, particularly around algae blooms and nitrogen  overload is a direct result of runoff from farms that are applying chemical and synthetic  
**[0:09:28-0:09:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:09:28):**  fertilizers.  You know, plants and the soil are only able to take up a certain percentage of what is  being applied there.  The rest of it runs off into our water system and it creates problems for everybody downstream.  It creates problems for drinking water.  
**[0:09:43-0:09:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:09:43):**  It creates problems for sea life and ocean life.  And so there's lots of those kinds of co-benefits with healthy soil.  Healthy soil is able to absorb much more water and it's able to filter it as well in a way.  So all that, you know, and if you're doing, if you're really treating the soil well, you're  not adding all those synthetic fertilizers as well.  
**[0:10:10-0:10:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:10:10):**  And then there's the climate benefit.  So carbon is everywhere, but we've got obviously too much of it in the atmosphere and soils  love carbon.  Soils love to retain carbon, but they need something green growing out of it to absorb  that carbon into the soil.  
**[0:10:28-0:10:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:10:28):**  So the healthier the soil, the more carbon it can sequester.  And so we feel like with this, with the urgency of climate change that we're seeing, we really  need to focus on these agricultural soils because they can be huge carbon sinks if we  focus on them and treat them in the right way.  So we feel like, you know, soil being sort of the basis of life, we could potentially  
**[0:10:55-0:11:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:10:55):**  solve a lot of issues out there by focusing or by understanding what creates healthy soil.  And so the No Regrets Initiative, the website itself is meant to help people understand  what soil health is and what contributes to good soil health.  And it's also meant to inspire other investors and philanthropists to take action to either  start directly investing in this topic or to incorporate it into their decision making.  
**[0:11:29-0:11:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:11:29):**  So for example, if your topic is really more about urban water or drinking water, you know,  we're not asking you to change your focus to soil health, but in the work that you're  already doing, recognize the importance of soil health to the work that you're doing  and incorporate that into your decision making.  So that's really what we're looking to inspire people about.  
**[0:11:55-0:12:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:11:55):**  And so the website is a great informational hub, but we're also doing some great in-person  activities to help people see what diversity and regeneration looks like on the land to  connect with other investors and philanthropists and create some community around that as well.  This is really meant as a step beyond your obviously your own portfolio, the portfolio  you're managing.  
**[0:12:22-0:12:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:12:22):**  And is that a big transition for you guys coming from how do we put this money to work  that we manage ourselves to how do we influence others and what's the strategy on that?  Is it a big change or is that a relatively natural transition in the impact you want  to have?  I would say it's a pretty natural transition.  
**[0:12:42-0:12:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:12:42):**  I mean, we're not trying to create a vehicle for other people to invest in.  We're not setting ourselves as investment advisors.  So I think it's more a lead by example kind of model where we are actively doing it on  the ground and we're willing to share any information that we have and what we've learned  and how we're doing it as a way to inspire other people.  
**[0:13:13-0:13:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:13:13):**  Because just as land management is contextual, I think investing and philanthropy is also  contextual.  And so if somebody is inspired to do this in, let's say, Sub-Saharan Africa, we don't  know anything about that place.  We don't know anything about the culture, about the land, about the ecosystem there.  
**[0:13:37-0:13:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:13:37):**  But hopefully based on some of the examples and principles of what we're doing, they could  apply some of that to their own local context.  And obviously, here in California, we are in a pretty progressive environment.  And so what our investing in philanthropy looks like in California even looks very different  than what we're doing in say, Louisville, Kentucky.  
**[0:14:00-0:14:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:14:00):**  Yeah, no, obviously.  So just to dive a bit more into that, how does the investment strategy of Cienaga Capital  look like, where did it start and where do you...  Those are too many questions in one.  How does it look like and where did it start?  
**[0:14:18-0:14:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:14:18):**  Yeah, so our investment strategy is really to look at mission first.  So it really has to advance soil health in, again, in a contextual way.  So what that looks like, again, here in California looks different than maybe in some other states.  And just to clarify, we're only working in the United States because we feel like it's  a context that we know.  
**[0:14:45-0:14:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:14:45):**  And when we go outside of California, we try to find local investment partners to do the  work with us because they have the local knowledge and context that will help inform our strategy,  but also they can be boots on the ground in case there's some assistance needed with either  the business or the nonprofit that we work with.  I will say that we are a high risk model.  
**[0:15:14-0:15:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:15:14):**  We like to think of ourselves as the investors of last resort.  So if a company or a farm or business can get financing elsewhere, we really encourage  folks to find local sources of financing and if that's not available to them, then we will  assist.  And so oftentimes you'll find that a lot of the folks in our portfolio tend to be fairly  
**[0:15:43-0:15:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:15:43):**  early stage businesses.  We do work directly with farms and farmers, which many folks won't, so that is also unique.  And we don't have a target investment return.  So we see our return as being more than just the financial return.  So we do want to see the investment come back, but in terms of how much more it comes back  
**[0:16:12-0:16:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:16:12):**  than the amount that we invested, we're pretty agnostic to that.  That said, I do have a general philosophy around not spoiling our borrowers and investees.  I give them as market rate terms as possible because of the stage that we tend to invest.  I don't want them to be surprised when they're ready to go off into the traditional marketplace  and find other sources of financing.  
**[0:16:46-0:16:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:16:46):**  And I want their business model to be able to withstand the financial realities of going  out and obtaining that other kind of financing.  So our structures tend to look fairly traditional.  Also we are investing across the spectrum in terms of products.  So we don't just do equity investing, we don't just do loans.  
**[0:17:12-0:17:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:17:12):**  We pretty much do everything in the spectrum, and so if you incorporate the philanthropic  work as well, we're doing everything from grants to equity and everything in between.  So we're a very highly customized kind of shop.  I often make the analogy that we're like the village cobbler.  So somebody comes to us and says, I need a shoe.  
**[0:17:35-0:17:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:17:35):**  And we say, OK, well, what do you need it for?  What function does it need to serve?  And what size foot are you?  And we're trying to figure out how to outfit that shoe for that person.  And so the financing is the same way.  
**[0:17:51-0:17:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:17:51):**  When we approach or when we're approached by somebody who needs financing, oftentimes  the initial conversation is around what is the kind of financing that you need?  What is the most appropriate for where you are and where your business is?  And then we will customize it to fit you.  And so sometimes I'll pull from Globetrotter Foundation if it's, let's say, a low interest  
**[0:18:14-0:18:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:18:14):**  loan that needs to be made to a nonprofit organization.  I'll do it as a PRI from the foundation.  But if it's an equity investment into a food processing company, I'll pull that from Cienega  Capital.  So because we have the entire range of tools available to us, we can pull on any of those  
**[0:18:36-0:18:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:18:36):**  to meet the need of that particular situation.  And I mean, this creates a lot of follow up questions for me, but I will go one by one.  How has been the result so far, not the result as in the financial result, but how has been  the overview if you look at the three legs of the stool basically in terms of if you  want to share, how much do you invest?  
**[0:19:00-0:19:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:19:00):**  Did you have a lot of, because you're so high risk, a lot of failures in terms maybe of  investing, but still maybe progress in terms of soil health.  What is your general overview of how the full portfolio from philanthropy all the way to  equity has done so far and how many years are we talking about?  Right.  
**[0:19:19-0:19:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:19:19):**  So I will say that we have the performance of our portfolio is, you know, I would say  it's mixed.  It's quite good in the sense that, you know, we're pretty early on.  So I've been working with Sally for, you know, three years.  And so I think there's some seasoning that needs to happen in the portfolio.  
**[0:19:42-0:19:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:19:42):**  So it's a bit early to say because many of our investments have been just made fairly  recently.  But most of them are still alive.  Yes, most of them are still alive.  We do have, which is good after three years.  
**[0:19:56-0:19:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:19:56):**  It is.  Yeah, we have let's see.  So in Cienega Capital, we have 28 investments outstanding and we have about we have two  that are not currently performing.  So our loans and investments really range.  
**[0:20:15-0:20:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:20:15):**  We'll do we've done small loans in the range of twenty five thousand dollars to a farmer  for irrigation pipe or sheep fencing.  So we will do something that small.  We have also invested a million dollars equity investment into a company that's farther down  the supply chain.  
**[0:20:41-0:20:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:20:41):**  In no regrets total.  So this is Globetrotter, Cienega, but there are also other pots of money that we have  access to.  We have 20 million outstanding with 50 total investments.  And that number is a little bit skewed because we have a lot of philanthropic assets that  
**[0:21:01-0:21:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:21:01):**  are waiting to be utilized.  And so one of the things that we have done with those philanthropic assets is invested  them in funds.  So we're pretty clear that we want to be investing as directly as possible.  But because we have some of this money sitting around, we decided to deploy it to other intermediaries.  
**[0:21:23-0:21:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:21:23):**  And so those investments tend to look bigger.  So if you invest in a fund, oftentimes that investment is going to be a bit larger.  So those are more in the million, two million range.  So those are bigger investments that we've made there.  And when it comes to you, you mentioned a number of times the importance of soil and  
**[0:21:46-0:21:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:21:46):**  soil carbon or soil health, when it comes to measuring that, what are you doing in that  space from the farm, obviously, but also on the processing companies you're investing  in?  Yeah, so we're not currently measuring our impact in the traditional way.  And I think we're still really working on that.  
**[0:22:09-0:22:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:22:09):**  We're not really interested in counting carbon levels.  We're not interested in counting acreage.  We're not interested in a lot of the numerical kinds of impact measurement that are out there.  Yeah, it means you need to find a non-traditional way.  Yeah.  
**[0:22:28-0:22:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:22:28):**  And I have the luxury of working with a single investor.  And so we know what's going on in the portfolio.  We know that there are folks who are creating really great co-benefits.  And so some of the things that we're looking at is at the farm level, what is going on  with the diversity and with the ecosystem functions there?  
**[0:22:57-0:23:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:22:57):**  So we look at that, although we're not, again, collecting data necessarily on it.  We're also looking at how that particular business functions in the greater ecosystem.  So is it a necessary part of the ecosystem?  Is it pushing the ecosystem towards change?  And with some of the companies that are farther down the supply chain, we really work hard  
**[0:23:21-0:23:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:23:21):**  at the outset to determine whether or how deeply they're working with smaller farmers  that are regenerating the soil.  So it's really important that we see that direct tie through for companies that are  farther away from the farm.  So we're making sure that that happens upfront.  
**[0:23:43-0:23:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:23:43):**  And with some of the companies, we do also sit on the board.  So we're able to keep track of the work that they're doing with the farmers on the ground.  So I realize that can be a very unsatisfying answer in the sense that we're not really  doing a lot of collection of data around the impact.  But we do feel good about supporting what we call bright spots in moving the needle  
**[0:24:15-0:24:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:24:15):**  forward.  And so it's really based on relationships.  So what we see coming out of the relationships that we have with them.  And speaking on those relationships with farmers, you mentioned before, unlike many other investors  in the space, you actually also invest in farmers.  
**[0:24:30-0:24:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:24:30):**  And you mentioned one example of an irrigation system, et cetera.  Can you share some more examples and some more reasons why you are doing this and others  might not be doing this, as they are so key in the whole soil discussion and soil restoration?  Yeah, so a lot of people, a lot of lenders in particular, don't want to work with farms  because there is just the inherent mother nature risk that can't be controlled.  
**[0:24:57-0:25:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:24:57):**  So you know, acts of God, you can't control.  So if there's a flood or a drought or something happens in nature, oftentimes that can be  very difficult for a farm.  And it creates a lot of variability in their revenue and their earnings and their operations.  But we do know that working with farmers who are regenerating their soils, they're creating  
**[0:25:26-0:25:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:25:26):**  more resilient systems.  So earlier we had talked about how soil, healthy soil has the ability to absorb and retain  water into its system as opposed to just letting it run off the top.  And so those farms are less susceptible to drought.  They're more resilient in a drought situation than a traditional farm.  
**[0:25:48-0:25:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:25:48):**  Which should make them even more interesting for investors and lenders, et cetera.  Right, they should.  But I think, you know, that's why we're trying to help people understand this more, right?  So what should they be looking for, right?  When they're considering a farm.  
**[0:26:04-0:26:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:26:04):**  And so, and obviously if there's a diversity of activities and diversity of, you know,  life going on at the farm level, there's also a lot less risk in that as well, right?  So in the investing world, that's what they always tell you, that diversity reduces your  risk.  And I think in a lot of other situations as well, and that's true on the farm.  
**[0:26:30-0:26:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:26:30):**  But does that mean, I mean, that does make it, as I've seen in many of these podcasts,  more complex to understand as investors are used to monoculture investments and monoculture  software investments, but also monoculture agriculture investments.  And if you come with a farm which has 20 different revenue streams of 20 different products and  probably even more on the diversity side, it becomes an E, it becomes almost too easy  
**[0:26:57-0:26:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:26:57):**  to say no.  So is that what you want to prove?  Like these are interesting investments and they could be, and they are essential to make.  And you're also trying to figure out how to make them then because they've largely been  ignored.  
**[0:27:08-0:27:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:27:08):**  Absolutely.  I think that's absolutely right.  One of the things that we're really trying to work against is this sort of reductionist  way of thinking that you just mentioned.  So trying to reduce a problem down to a single element is the way that our culture has developed.  
**[0:27:29-0:27:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:27:29):**  And that's the way science has developed.  That's the way a lot of problem solving and investment also has been developed.  And so we really are trying to embrace the complexity.  And so yes, it makes it more difficult to understand, but I think at the end of the  day you get a much richer outcome.  
**[0:27:50-0:27:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:27:50):**  And so you see that on the farm level and you also see that on the investment level  as well.  And so I think if you can demystify some of the risks that are implied around complexity,  I think this is actually a much more interesting and rewarding way to invest.  So in the investment world, you're always trying to reduce your risk.  
**[0:28:19-0:28:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:28:19):**  And so in the process of reducing your risk, you try to reduce your analysis to the smallest  sort of single thing that you can point to.  And I think that what nature tells us is that that's a really sort of wrong-headed approach  in the sense that everything works together.  It's all symbiotic.  
**[0:28:43-0:28:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:28:43):**  As much as you want to try to reduce it down to one single thing, that's not the way that  nature actually works.  Which means you'll be constantly surprised.  That's right.  Can you name an example of a farmer that you've invested in or supported that really embodies  
**[0:29:01-0:29:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:29:01):**  this complexity that you've talked about before?  Let's see.  There are many, obviously.  Yeah.  Well, so, okay, let's talk about Central Grazing Company.  
**[0:29:17-0:29:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:29:17):**  So Central Grazing Company is a pastured lamb company out in Kansas.  And they raise their own lambs.  It's primarily for meat at the moment.  So they raise their own lambs, but they also source from other lamb farmers in the region.  And so they aggregate that under their own brand and they sell it throughout the Midwest.  
**[0:29:47-0:29:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:29:47):**  And the entrepreneur has really embraced complexity in terms of the landscape itself.  So the way that the sheep are raised and the way that they're rotated on their pasture  lends itself to the greatest diversity possible of the grasses and the plants that are growing  out of the ground itself.  But also she is working on utilizing the entire animal.  
**[0:30:18-0:30:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:30:18):**  So when you send an animal to processing, yes, you get the meat, but there are all these  other parts of the animal that often either get discarded or, you know, repurposed into  something else, hopefully.  But usually, particularly with the smaller animals, they get discarded.  So she is recapturing the bones to be sold to a bone broth company.  
**[0:30:42-0:30:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:30:42):**  And she is now currently working on a leather project to repurpose the hides into lamb skins  for various products that she's going to make herself, but she's also in talks with some  major fashion brands to supply, essentially, grass fed lamb skin.  Regenerative leather.  Yeah, regenerative leather.  
**[0:31:08-0:31:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:31:08):**  Absolutely.  So, you know, she's constantly thinking about how this fits into the entire system, how  we can bring more regenerative agriculture into various different supply chains.  And obviously, this increases the complexity of her business.  But she embraces it because she feels passionately that we need to do more in regenerating our  
**[0:31:35-0:31:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:31:35):**  landscapes and changing the way that we utilize animals in our everyday lives.  And how did you work with her?  So she came as a referral to us.  And we started talking with her about her business, and her business was quite small.  I mean, in some ways, it still is, but she was having typical growing pains where she  
**[0:32:05-0:32:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:32:05):**  wanted to buy and she had demand for more lambs, but she had limited capital, working  capital to be able to purchase and process those lambs and then distribute and sell them  to the grocery store chains that she was working with.  So her product is mostly frozen, so sometimes that working capital period is longer than  she can withstand or that she would like.  
**[0:32:33-0:32:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:32:33):**  And so we were able to provide her with a loan to bridge that working capital cycle.  So we gave her a line of credit initially.  And then over time, we've been plugging in different sources of financing.  We've increased her line of credit several times because she's been growing.  And then when she started to launch the Leather Initiative, then that felt like kind of a  
**[0:33:01-0:33:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:33:01):**  new venture in a way, even though it's still under the same corporate structure.  In a way, it was a startup business because it's a completely different business than  the meat business.  And so we initiated a convertible note to be able to help launch that.  And it's still not totally launched yet, but just to get over some of the initial costs  
**[0:33:25-0:33:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:33:25):**  of even just starting up that kind of business activity.  And when she was scaling her meat part, how did she make sure and still make sure that  the lamb that are grazed of the people she is sourcing from are grazed to the same standards  and the same landscape approaches she is doing?  Yeah, so that's a good question because that's something that she is still really working  
**[0:33:50-0:33:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:33:50):**  on.  So right now, there's no third party, there's no good third party audit for that kind of  thing.  Right now, all of her suppliers are animal welfare approved.  So they are certified by AWA and AWA does have a grass fed sort of aspect to their certification.  
**[0:34:13-0:34:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:34:13):**  So you can get that, but it's not necessarily a regenerative standard.  So that's still a question.  She does carefully vet her suppliers before she brings them on board.  Right now, she has about 10.  So there's not so many that she can't keep track of them and what they're doing.  
**[0:34:35-0:34:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:34:35):**  But she would like to have some kind of third party verification for the regenerative practices.  And she's also very interested in partnerships with other organizations that can help train  her farmers to keep doing better.  So that's an open question.  And I think that when you're moving in a pretty new area like this, you find that the infrastructure  
**[0:34:59-0:35:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:34:59):**  to support it doesn't always exist yet.  So that's one of the challenges that she's facing and actually a lot of the industry,  particularly in livestock.  Yeah, definitely.  And just to take one step back and look at your daily work or the last months, what have  
**[0:35:19-0:35:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:35:19):**  you been particularly busy with and focused on what kept you, not maybe what kept you  awake, but what have you been extremely busy with in the last few months that you are happy  to share?  Sure.  Well, I've been quite, quite busy.  
**[0:35:37-0:35:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:35:37):**  And it's actually not deal related.  So the interesting thing is that there's not a lot of people who have this unique expertise  of really understanding farms, farmers, soil health, and the food ecosystem, as well as  understanding the financing piece.  And so a lot of the work that I've been doing lately has actually been around being the  
**[0:36:01-0:36:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:36:01):**  quote unquote expert in the room.  So lending my expertise to various groups, various companies.  And there are two, what I'll call networks that I'm quite involved with.  One is called the California Food Shed Funders.  And that tends to be more philanthropy focused.  
**[0:36:23-0:36:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:36:23):**  But this is a pretty small but intimate group of funders who really are passionate about  the California Food Shed, but also share an analysis around what is regenerative and that  we really need to focus on regenerative farming practices and helping farmers stay viable.  And so we have these monthly calls and quarterly meetings where we take deep dives to help  improve the practice that we have around using, particularly in this case, philanthropy to  
**[0:37:01-0:37:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:37:01):**  leverage the change that we want to see here in California.  On the other side of the equation, we also have a group that's called the herd.  And this is a group of both philanthropists and investors.  And in many cases, actually, some of these folks are doing both as well.  And it's focused primarily on grass fed livestock at this point.  
**[0:37:29-0:37:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:37:29):**  But really, again, we all came from the camp of what's called holistic management, which  is a decision making framework, but has been applied very rigorously to livestock systems.  And this was pioneered by Alan Savery, who some people may know.  So we all come from that sort of background and perspective.  And we came together to really share what we're doing, to share ideas, to figure out  
**[0:38:00-0:38:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:38:00):**  ways that we can collaborate with one another.  So I've been actually doing a lot of work just with other groups who are quite close  to us and sharing practices, sharing ideas, trying to find ways to collaborate to move  the needle forward in our field.  So there's been a lot of what we call this field building activity that's been going  
**[0:38:22-0:38:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:38:22):**  on in the last couple months for me.  And when we would be talking in a year from now, like, let's say, February 2019, what  would you be liking to look back at and say, I'm very happy we have achieved this, this  and this?  What are the main things you would like to achieve this year?  
**[0:38:41-0:38:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:38:41):**  So in that particular regard, I think what I'd like to see is that we have grown the  number of people that are interested in doing this work with us, that we have fostered more  people to activate their investing in this way, and that hopefully we'll have some fruits  out of our collaborations.  There's one currently that I can't quite talk about yet publicly.  
**[0:39:12-0:39:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:39:12):**  But if this gets off the ground this year, that will be a huge success that we're cooking  up particularly for the grass fed beef industry at the moment.  And the other area that I'm really hoping to spend more time on this year is actually  figuring out how to bring more farmers of color into the conversation.  So 90% of farmers are white.  
**[0:39:43-0:39:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:39:43):**  And so it's a very undiverse field.  I was at a Midwestern farmers conference not that long ago.  And I think I might have been the only woman of color in the room out of 800 people.  Wow, no diversity.  No diversity.  
**[0:40:02-0:40:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:40:02):**  Diversity on the land, but not in the room.  Right, exactly.  So we know there are farmers of color out there.  We also know that there, particularly in California, there's a huge immigrant farmer population.  You know, in the Central Valley, we have lots of Hmong farmers.  
**[0:40:19-0:40:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:40:19):**  We also have a lot of Latino farm workers and who are becoming farm owners.  And there are programs to help these farmers become, or farm workers become their own,  you know, sort of business owners in the farming world.  So I think one of my pieces of work for this year that I'll feel successful is if I've,  you know, helped to bring some of those groups into the conversation in terms of folks who  
**[0:40:46-0:40:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:40:46):**  are working with minority and immigrant farmer populations, because I just feel like we need  to round out that conversation.  Yeah, no, definitely.  And in terms of barriers, if you look at creating or building soil at scale, what do you feel  like from an investor perspective, if you put on your investor head, what are the main  
**[0:41:07-0:41:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:41:07):**  barriers to you?  I'm seeing soil everywhere, I'm seeing people talking about the carbon, the water cycles,  etc. and of course, the biodiversity.  What are the main barriers to you to get this to scale and to get more serious capital or  serious amounts of capital invested in rebuilding soil?  
**[0:41:26-0:41:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:41:26):**  Yeah, so we have a very, I think, different notion of scale than most people do.  I think for us, at one point, we were trying to discuss, you know, what were some goals  that we wanted for the No Regrets initiative.  And at one point, you know, somebody said a billion dollars.  And while we do want a billion dollars to come into this investing space, I think what  
**[0:41:57-0:42:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:41:57):**  I would really want more than that is to have a thousand investors.  I don't want to have, you know, three investors come in and put a billion dollars into the  space.  I want a thousand investors to come in and put a billion dollars into the space.  So what I'm really looking for is to have more people doing this work.  
**[0:42:19-0:42:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:42:19):**  So kind of the farming analogy, right, is that we don't want fewer people managing larger  and larger tracts of land.  We want more farmers on the land itself.  We need more people, not fewer, working the land.  I think that in this investing space, that's what I'm looking for, too.  
**[0:42:39-0:42:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:42:39):**  I'm looking for more people to do this work, not fewer.  And let's imagine there's a room, a theater full of impact investors listening to this  podcast that are ready to jump into this space.  They have read the books, they watch the videos, they know soil is key to everything they eat,  they wear, they drink.  
**[0:43:00-0:43:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:43:00):**  Where should they start?  What's your, what would be your advice or direction for them to start exploring the  soil further and also activate their investment capital and also the philanthropic capital,  of course?  Yeah, so I think one of the first things is to obviously learn about what really contributes  
**[0:43:20-0:43:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:43:20):**  to soil health.  And so there is what we call the soil health primer on the No Regrets website, which you  can go to and find lots of information.  And there are certain rabbit holes you can go down.  So one of the things that we've done under each topic has said, read this first, because  
**[0:43:40-0:43:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:43:40):**  there's lots of papers and articles that you can read.  And you can go really in depth if you want, or you can get a higher level overview from  just looking at the read this first articles.  So some education, obviously.  But then on the investment side, we always just encourage people to do something.  
**[0:44:01-0:44:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:44:01):**  Just do one thing.  You know, make one grant or make one loan or make one investment and just see how that  works out.  See how that feels.  We really encourage people to just get started in that way.  
**[0:44:18-0:44:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:44:18):**  But the best thing that you can do in sort of seeing, finding that first thing is to  build community.  So get to know the people that are in your community that are really interested in ecological  practices around farming.  And it might take a while to find them.  
**[0:44:36-0:44:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:44:36):**  But you know, some people I know have started at the farmers market.  Just seeing who's there, asking them about their farming practices and getting to know  them and connecting with other folks in the space.  So here in California, we do occasionally put on some events that are geared towards  investors and philanthropists and are trying to build some community that way.  
**[0:45:08-0:45:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:45:08):**  So obviously there's opportunity there.  But to also connect with other people who are local to you.  I think that's excellent advice.  And I want to thank you for your time Esther.  And I will definitely be checking in on this teaser you mentioned, but you couldn't mention  
**[0:45:28-0:45:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:45:28):**  yet when that will be public and we can talk about that.  Great.  Thank you, Koen.  This was fun.  You just listened to an interview with Esther Park of Cienega Capital, where we discussed  
**[0:45:39-0:45:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:45:39):**  the importance of soil and how to invest and grant in the soil building space.  I hope you enjoyed it as much as I did.  Thank you for making the time to listen to this podcast and making it all the way till  the end.  I hope you enjoyed it as much as I did.  
**[0:45:53-0:45:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:45:53):**  If you found the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  
**[0:46:12-0:46:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:46:12):**  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  join my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or in the description  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  
**[0:46:40-0:46:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:46:40):**  Dear friends of the podcast, I am super excited to share with you the online video course  Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food.  How to put money to work in regenerating soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while  doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  
**[0:46:54-0:46:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:46:54):**  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to put money  to work in regenerating soils and have been following this space since 2011 and recording  this podcast since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in this space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework?  
**[0:47:13-0:47:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:47:13):**  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  What questions should you ask?  What is happening in this space?  What should you read?  
**[0:47:21-0:47:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:47:21):**  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  You, the soil builders and investors in this space.  
**[0:47:31-0:47:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:47:31):**  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management, consultants, etc.  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  
**[0:47:51-0:47:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:47:51):**  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  
**[0:48:05-0:48:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:48:05):**  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you.  And I'm very aware that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very  different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you, and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  
**[0:48:22-0:48:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:48:22):**  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to write along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  
**[0:48:38-0:48:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:48:38):**  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find, or what kind of investors you could  find if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  
**[0:48:58-0:49:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:48:58):**  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design, and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately, that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  
**[0:49:12-0:49:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/esther-park/#t=0:49:12):**  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea, or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up, and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  