### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2018-36-15)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  You're going to listen to a conversation about agroforestry and how to finance the  planting of trees on a farm.  
**[0:00:19-0:00:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:00:19):**  If you're interested in people building vehicles to scale up regenerative agriculture space  and build soil, this is the interview for you.  We discuss why agroforestry is so interesting, but also so challenging and why chestnuts  are amazing.  Enjoy!  
**[0:00:33-0:00:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:00:33):**  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture.  Investing as if the planet mattered.  Podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  
**[0:00:55-0:00:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:00:55):**  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much  more attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  
**[0:01:13-0:01:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:01:13):**  Before we get started, I've been recording these interviews next to my day job and I  will definitely continue to do so and release about an episode a month.  But at the same time, I would love to take this further.  There are more interviews, there are many more stories to share on investing in regenerative  food and agriculture.  
**[0:01:29-0:01:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:01:29):**  More depth, improve the quality, maybe even doing some video series.  So I started a Patreon community which makes it easy to support creators like myself.  If these podcasts have been of value to you and if you have the means, I invite you to  support me and make this happen.  For more information please find the link to my Patreon account in the description below.  
**[0:01:50-0:01:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:01:50):**  And now, without further ado, the interview.  Enjoy!  Welcome to investing in regenerative agriculture, investing as if the planet mattered.  I'm Koen Van Zeyen, your host, and today I'm talking to the three co-founders of Propagate  Ventures, completely focused on introducing agroforestry in existing, operating farms.  
**[0:02:08-0:02:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:02:08):**  Basically making sure farmers plant many more trees on their land.  I'm really excited to learn more about their work and ask them all about the nerdy details.  Welcome Ethan, Jeremy and Harry.  Thanks for having us.  Excited to be here.  
**[0:02:18-0:02:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:02:18):**  So to start with a personal question, and we're going to keep it brief because otherwise  we'll spend the next two hours on this.  How did you, the three of you actually, end up individually on the soil and how did you  end up, the three of you, working together on soil?  Yeah, it's a great question.  
**[0:02:33-0:02:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:02:33):**  It goes back far into the roots.  This is Jeremy here, just for the viewers to know voices.  So my roots are actually in family business, in and around stair and railing manufacturing,  which was intimately connected to the housing markets and through my family intimately connected  to the timber industry.  
**[0:02:56-0:03:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:02:56):**  From there I kind of got a little bit of the start in and around trees and what they do  for the market.  And then went to college, started working on organic lettuce and grass-fed dairy farms.  After college, took a stint in San Francisco working for a few innovation firms.  Learned how to design software and build software.  
**[0:03:23-0:03:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:03:23):**  Moved back to New York and survived my software life to return back to working in agriculture  and wanting to try to shift that system.  And that kind of led me into back to my roots, wanting to work with tree crops as a result.  There's a longer story there as to how Propagate Ventures came into being, but I want to give  these two guys an opportunity before we jump into how we came together.  
**[0:03:47-0:03:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:03:47):**  Hi, Koon.  Hi, Matt.  Thanks for having us.  This is Harry here.  So I was an athlete for a good amount of my life.  
**[0:03:56-0:04:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:03:56):**  I was an Olympic hopeful up until 2015 in the sport of modern pentathlon.  So my performance was dependent on the quality of food I ate, and the quality of food I ate  was dependent on the soil that it was grown in.  And burning so many calories, I not only had to ask where my micronutrients came from,  my fruits and vegetables, but also where my calories came from.  
**[0:04:24-0:04:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:04:24):**  And that led me to look into broad acre agriculture and the status quo of where humanity's sustenance  is grown.  And I grew up at a summer camp, and that land stewardship ethic led me to want to make farming  more sustainable, more regenerative with tree crops, having grown up in the forest.  And my background is in finance.  
**[0:04:58-0:05:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:04:58):**  So working through the time value of money and combining traditional finance with forestry  applied to farmland, that's really where this idea of agroforestry finance came from.  And I'll hop in here.  This is Ethan.  I guess I'm last but not least.  
**[0:05:22-0:05:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:05:22):**  So my background has been working with startup companies and consumer brands on their sustainability  strategy all through the course of small little startup companies through to larger brands  like the Super Bowl.  And so I had an opportunity to see a lot of the movement in the space of impact investing,  in the space of social entrepreneurship, and how brands, specifically consumer brands,  
**[0:05:46-0:05:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:05:46):**  were playing a role in the next phase in which we're looking at a sustainable future.  And one of the things I had started to look at through that time was what were the leverage  points really focused on the renewable energies and clean tech space for a while and the movement  we've seen there, especially in the impact investing front.  And then what is the next leverage point in terms of the impact that I think we'd all  
**[0:06:15-0:06:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:06:15):**  like to see take place?  And that led me into agriculture.  I think the three of us all had an opportunity to engage with agriculture based off of the  food we were consuming through health concerns or from on Harry's side of the coin, the importance  of the nutrients for athletic performance.  
**[0:06:38-0:06:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:06:38):**  Myself, I'm diabetic.  So the nutrient value of the food I was eating, I found, was intimately connected with what  I've been saying is if it's healthy for the earth, it's likely also healthy for me to  consume.  And that is one of the ways in which the three of us really came together and understood  
**[0:06:58-0:07:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:06:58):**  some of the leverage points in which to intervene in a system that has an opportunity to create  solutions rather than cause problems.  And that's agriculture.  Yeah, that makes extreme sense as a leverage point, the land that we have.  So I want to ask the question, so from that, how do we make land more sustainable?  
**[0:07:21-0:07:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:07:21):**  How do you get to agroforestry and introducing that?  Yeah, so as an organization, we're the onset of the research that led us to agroforestry.  We did a lot of travel, talking to farmers across the US and around the world, from anywhere  from France down into Brazil, Argentina.  And a lot of what we were seeing in terms of the motion of the industry of farming and  
**[0:07:53-0:07:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:07:53):**  how things were moving was toward some of the regenerative solutions in soil.  So that the no-till agriculture, grass-fed, holistic managed grazing.  And what we found was there was a little bit of a gap in areas where land was naturally  forest land, but it was still in productive agriculture.  So we saw that there was a missing void in this regenerative movement to be able to make  
**[0:08:24-0:08:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:08:24):**  tree crops a profitable layer to the farm landscape.  There are a few pioneers that have done this across the world in terms of their research  over the last four years that have really gone through the process of feeling into what  works and what doesn't.  And we have a lot of their work to attribute to.  
**[0:08:43-0:08:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:08:43):**  What we found was that for most farmers, putting their money into tree crops for a long-term  investment was too big of a risk relative to their cash generation, whether it be cattle  or annual grain.  So what we wanted to do was to give them the capacity to be able to potentially put those  trees in the ground without lowering their upfront risk.  
**[0:09:07-0:09:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:09:07):**  And that was a real discovery process over the course of a year of talking to a lot of  farmers across the entire industry, looking at where the gaps were in investment for deployment  of systems that were regenerative.  Agroforestry as a whole, in terms of the general practice, we landed on primarily out of its  regenerative capabilities in terms of its production from an economic standpoint, as  
**[0:09:36-0:09:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:09:36):**  well as production from an ecological standpoint to be able to regenerate soil, as well as  sequester carbon, prevent nutrient runoff, prevent soil erosion, things of that nature.  So it was a real journey in conversation to get to where we are, where we landed on agroforestry  as the primary lever that we wanted to focus on.  And during that journey of a year that you described just now, were you already the three  
**[0:10:03-0:10:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:10:03):**  of you or how did you find each other during the journey?  And if so, who started?  Yeah, so Jeremy and I were introduced in the spring of 2016 through a mutual friend.  And Jeremy and Ethan actually went to university together.  And Jeremy and I linked up and with Ethan over this, I guess, past almost two years  
**[0:10:29-0:10:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:10:29):**  now, we've been on the journey together.  And so you ended up on how to bring agroforestry to scale basically.  And can you walk us or me and the listeners through what you ended up developing and what  you're currently, of course, it's still under development, but what are the main, what can  you offer a farmer?  
**[0:10:50-0:10:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:10:50):**  Let's say I'm a grain farmer, somewhere where you're operating, what's currently the process  to start getting more trees, productive trees on my land, which I don't have at the moment,  at the moment, it's just a flat grain land without any trees, unfortunately.  Yeah, absolutely.  So the first thing that we do, we work with farmers is start with their goals.  
**[0:11:13-0:11:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:11:13):**  We have our first program that every project goes through is called a subsoil, which is  our name for it, which is an audit that allows us to determine what the farmers goals are,  their existing operation and a system design that fits that operation and that within the  budget price points and their goals for how they want to deploy those trees over time.  And then there's some other stuff that we do in the background as kind of assistance  
**[0:11:42-0:11:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:11:42):**  with regards to market analysis to determine the market for those trees through to management  workflow analysis to make sure that the labor that will be applied on that project will  be there and it will be properly executed to bring those products from those trees to  success in the marketplace.  And then from there, we have two vehicles that are depending on the farmers goals we  
**[0:12:04-0:12:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:12:04):**  utilize to deploy those trees.  One is a debt vehicle, which for specifically for farmers that want to own their own system  on their land and operate their own system, where they pay over the course of a three  to seven year term for trees that will be deployed over the course of that timeframe  across their landscape.  
**[0:12:27-0:12:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:12:27):**  Over the course of that time, they're buying into that system, we're assisting them through  to the deployment.  After the deployment, they take on ownership and then we have kind of softer market help  that we provide as a service with regards to things like helping them get their market,  their products from those trees to market.  
**[0:12:45-0:12:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:12:45):**  On the other side of it, for farmers that don't really want to operate their system,  they're focused heavily on grain or grass fed beef, but they still want the benefits  of the trees and then potentially some passive income.  What we do is we enter into a profit share partnership and take on the equity in those  trees.  
**[0:13:03-0:13:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:13:03):**  We do this through taking on a ground lease for the footprint of the trees and a very  low cost mix and then they actually engage your profit share partnership on the returns  coming off those tree crops in the long term.  What we do is then bridge project level finance requirements by bringing in outside investors  to make up the capital requirements to operate those trees over their lifetime.  
**[0:13:26-0:13:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:13:26):**  Those are the two vehicles that we have that bring trees to the landscape.  The goal really being to have productive, economically viable, and with tree crops with  an ecological underbelly that provides inherent ecosystem services in the process.  What kind of trees should I imagine as a farmer?  What can I imagine that you are working with now that you could promote to me and what  
**[0:13:55-0:13:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:13:55):**  would that look like in terms of products that you mentioned?  We primarily focus on fruit, nut, and timber trees.  Which trees would go on which landscape is dependent really on the goals of the farmer.  If the farmer is a very sociable person that runs a vegetable CSA and has 10 acres of pasture  that they want to turn into orchard, then apples or any type of poem or stone fruit  
**[0:14:24-0:14:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:14:24):**  would be a good fit for them.  Why is that?  The apples would be or any type of fruit would be a better fit for a more social farmer just  because of the amount of management needed to maintain the system.  The amount of labor hours for an apple tree to fertilize, spray compost tea, prune it,  
**[0:14:48-0:14:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:14:48):**  and harvest every year is much greater than the time requirement to plant a timber tree,  prune it every few years, and then manage the final harvest after 15 or 20 years.  It means that if a farmer likes to have people on his or her farm, apples might make sense.  If they don't, then probably another type of tree is more appropriate.  Yes, exactly.  
**[0:15:13-0:15:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:15:13):**  Timber would make much more sense for someone that is much farther away from markets or  doesn't necessarily want to interact with more employees.  I'd say poplar timber or locust timber would be a good fit.  A note on that also is a lot of the conversation isn't around what the financial goals are  around these trees.  
**[0:15:38-0:15:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:15:38):**  If a farmer wants higher returns given the footprint of the trees, fruit is a far higher  return but a lot more management risk.  Then you have timber, which is a lower management risk but a lower return relative to the footprint.  If it is a question of what with the goals of the farmer in mind, with the goals of the  project in mind, the soils and what can be possibly planted in those areas, what is the  
**[0:16:06-0:16:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:16:06):**  best fit?  That's all discovered through the audit process.  In terms of the market for the products, what do you see are the big developments in terms  of fruit and nuts and also timber in the US where you're operating?  Is there a strong push or pull depending on how you look at it towards local and more  
**[0:16:26-0:16:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:16:26):**  regenerative?  Is that something that brands are starting to look for and thus working with you guys  would be interesting?  Yeah, absolutely.  It's a great question.  
**[0:16:37-0:16:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:16:37):**  There's a lot of movement I think on the side of where brands can play a role in this and  it's something that we're actively thinking about and pursuing.  From the perspective of where a brand might play a role, there's definitely a piece in  terms of connecting with what we would define in our office as the aspirationals.  This is typically a consumer base.  
**[0:17:07-0:17:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:17:07):**  Essentially it's like millennials plus and these are the very conscious consumers that  are looking at the inputs of how their food is grown.  They're typically more on the organic side looking.  These are the consumers that are looking for products that provide some sort of social  or economic value back to a specific theme whether that be environmental or educational  
**[0:17:33-0:17:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:17:33):**  or water is a hot topic as well.  Where brands play a role and how we engage with brands in that process is bringing buyers  earlier to the discussion.  What that means is we're looking at these complex supply systems that brands are engaged  in in terms of the development of the products all the way through to the sale of their products.  
**[0:18:02-0:18:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:18:02):**  The way in which we're understanding this discussion is that by bringing brands in and  buyers into discussion earlier, there's an opportunity to engage in pre-purchase agreements  that allow to create some certainty for the farmers that we're working with in terms of  putting those trees in the landscape.  In the world of solar, this similar kind of framework of thinking was taking place through  
**[0:18:28-0:18:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:18:28):**  the concept of the power purchase agreement.  It was going to be my next question.  Can you walk us through that?  How would that agroforestry and solar seem to be...  They're both a solar business as trees use their leaves, obviously, but maybe that's  
**[0:18:46-0:18:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:18:46):**  a bit far-fetched.  Can you walk us through the similarities and why it makes so much sense to go towards those  purchase agreements?  What can agroforestry learn from solar, which is a bit more ahead?  Yeah, absolutely.  
**[0:19:02-0:19:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:19:02):**  A few things in the model as a whole, the kind of model off of solar.  First and foremost being in the landscape, a farmer or a landowner can own their own  system and pay in that system over time, or they can lease their land to some sort of  installation company that's selling into a utility.  A lot of what gave the certainty for bigger financial institutions to come in and start  
**[0:19:27-0:19:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:19:27):**  lending into these markets is because utility companies were taking commitments through  things like power purchase agreement.  As a result, you have a certain buyer, you have a certain market that at a very base  price that energy is going to be sold in.  And that provides a little bit more certainty for investors to actually put their money  
**[0:19:47-0:19:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:19:47):**  in place.  And how we kind of learn from that in agroforestry, trees like solar are long-term assets that  provide year-over-year income generation.  And though we have a lag time in production, which is really the biggest barrier for us,  we can utilize pre-purchase agreements to build certainty such that three to five years  
**[0:20:11-0:20:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:20:11):**  before the trees start producing, we have commitments in place to build certainty in  the market.  And that allows us to say, if we plant 100,000 trees next year, those trees have buyers in  place, or at least a percentage of them do set in at a certain price.  And there's a whole slew of kind of nuances to what makes a good pre-purchase agreement  
**[0:20:34-0:20:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:20:34):**  and how that builds better certainty for investors.  But the way in which the general concepts are very closely modeled to the solar industry.  And to add a piece to that, one of the fun pieces about this and why trees offer so much  excitement is on the side of as brands are engaging in this process, there's certainly  the economic value that can be driven.  
**[0:20:59-0:21:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:20:59):**  And as those trees are growing, there's an extraordinary amount of ecosystem services  that take place.  And from the perspective of some of these companies that are looking to engage in either  a more transparent supply chain, or as we'd like to call it, a supply web, or are looking  to increase their engagement with sustainability and have aggressive strategies around how  
**[0:21:21-0:21:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:21:21):**  they might go and do this in terms of reducing carbon emissions and whatnot.  A piece of this is in the earlier stages as we're looking at that economic lag time with  which these are taking place, so effective of engaging with the passion points of consumers.  The systems that we're looking at offer a nice touch point both on the engagement with  the consumer side and on the economic value side, and it kind of covers a full range of  
**[0:21:55-0:22:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:21:55):**  valuable assets, both tangible and intangible assets that can be utilized from the perspective  of a brand that's engaging in this type of work.  And in terms of concrete brands, because you're a relatively young company, can you share  a bit of maybe some names even, but if that's not possible, obviously not, of brands you  are, type of brands you are working with that are engaged with you to see how they can get  
**[0:22:23-0:22:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:22:23):**  many more trees in the ground?  Sure, absolutely.  And this is a constantly moving process.  One of the brands that we're excited to be working with is a brand based out of Quebec,  a brand in Monaco, they're a personal care brand, and they're looking at the value of  
**[0:22:42-0:22:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:22:42):**  apple cider vinegar for shampoo and conditioner products.  One of the ways that we're working with them through this is producing apples on a farm  in southern Quebec, that those apples will go direct into their supply for the creation  of these apple cider vinegar based products.  Now there's an extraordinary amount of carbon offset, or what we like to consider a carbon  
**[0:23:10-0:23:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:23:10):**  inset, meaning those offsets that are taking place, the reduction or the carbon sequestration  that's happening there, it is built directly into the productive trees that are going direct  into their supply web.  So this is a brand that we're working with, and we're really testing out the model and  working very closely with these folks on how this works.  
**[0:23:38-0:23:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:23:38):**  And there's a few other examples of brands, some in the hard cider space that are also  apples direct to hard cider creation and then selling that product.  So there's a lot that's taking place, an opportunity for different brands to get engaged, and we're  increasing opportunities for brands of larger magnitude to engage in this type of work.  And in this case, the brand in Quebec, how does it work?  
**[0:24:05-0:24:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:24:05):**  Are these apple trees are already in the ground or these are extra trees that are planted  because you're working with the farmers and the company on the other side and basically  connecting them and making sure these trees go into the ground?  How does it work in practice?  Or will it work?  
**[0:24:22-0:24:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:24:22):**  Maybe I don't know how far you are.  Oh, yeah, no worries.  So that family farm currently runs not an organic apple orchard, but a conventional  orchard, and what they want to do is add an organic system into pasture land.  So where we are right now with them is in the orchard design process and not just the  
**[0:24:41-0:24:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:24:41):**  physical design of the orchard and what that looks like in terms of soil prep and planting  and the overall implementation, but modeling the installation costs, the management costs  and the harvest costs put together with the expected revenues such that they can understand  the present value of the system and what that's going to look like over time.  So these will be apple trees, sorry, apple trees into a range land basically that currently  
**[0:25:16-0:25:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:25:16):**  doesn't have any trees in it.  This will be a mixed livestock and apple system.  Yeah.  There aren't livestock there right now, although there could be in the future.  It's a forested biome, southern Quebec.  
**[0:25:27-0:25:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:25:27):**  So it's not like Saskatchewan or Alberta, which is mainly grassland.  So it's a pasture that will be adding apple trees to not create a forest once again, but  create an anthropogenic forest, which is usually just called an orchard.  And what's the reason for the current non-organic apple orchard to not convert?  Yeah, so it's actually really difficult to convert a conventional apple orchard to an  
**[0:25:58-0:25:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:25:58):**  organic system.  It takes between eight and ten years to do that.  And that lag time generally renders the process to be not profitable at all.  You basically have to start from scratch.  Yeah, it's easier to start from scratch.  
**[0:26:14-0:26:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:26:14):**  Especially during alcohol prohibition, at least in the United States, the government  had all of the old heirloom cider orchards cut down and replaced all of that apple orchard  with conventional production of a few select varieties that most consumers are familiar  with.  But that was the beginning of the era of 100 percent conventional production when organic  
**[0:26:41-0:26:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:26:41):**  wasn't even a known term.  So we've largely also forgotten how to grow organic apples.  And rebuilding that industry is a challenge in the Northeast, but it's also an opportunity.  And just for some reference on that, organic apples in the U.S., as an example, have been  growing pretty fast over the last ten years, upwards of 13 percent over the course of the  
**[0:27:11-0:27:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:27:11):**  last ten years.  There's a fun history on a lot of the lineages of how this all works.  And we can definitely geek out on the details of what the history and the historic value  of some of these different crop types in the United States are, from apples to chestnuts  and beyond.  
**[0:27:32-0:27:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:27:32):**  One of the things I do want to recognize on that project with Oneka is we've had the chance  to partner with two other great organizations, Regeneration Canada and Docteur, who are working  on the soil side and the carbon offset side of that project to kind of bring it to a public  audience of what a project can do.  They've been great partners in that process as well.  
**[0:27:57-0:27:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:27:57):**  And how many trees are we talking about?  Just to have an idea.  And how much shampoo is that?  Yeah.  So it starts.  
**[0:28:04-0:28:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:28:04):**  So we're starting with two acres, and then each year we're going to be adding additional  acres there.  That's anywhere from 60 to 100 trees to 140 trees per acre, depending on the size of the  tree, because apple trees vary in size from anywhere from eight feet tall to 20 feet tall.  We're actually not shampoo producers, so we're not sure how much shampoo that will produce,  
**[0:28:33-0:28:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:28:33):**  but it will be more than enough vinegar to satisfy Oneka's needs for now, we anticipate.  And the apples that will turn into vinegar will likely end up being the B and C grade  apples.  So the highest quality apples can actually be sold just as dessert apples to eat fresh  out of hand.  
**[0:28:55-0:28:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:28:55):**  Wow.  So it's a really multifunctional.  And it's worth mentioning that there's kind of multiple...  Right now what we're seeing is a lot of the smaller brands wanting to play around in the  space.  
**[0:29:08-0:29:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:29:08):**  Brands who are growing pretty fast, but have a really strong team ethic around soil regeneration.  And the big players tend to move a little slower, but the conversation is really starting  to shift into larger and larger brands over time.  For example, Patagonia and who else was part of their regenerative organic standard and  Dr. Bronner's.  
**[0:29:32-0:29:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:29:32):**  Dr. Bronner's.  Yeah, I interviewed Les a few months ago on regenerative agriculture and why they're moving  so aggressively in a good way into that space.  It was very interesting.  And one of the big leverage points that they have is by bringing their purchasing power  
**[0:29:51-0:29:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:29:51):**  to the table.  There's a lot of fun that can be had in the way this all operates and who's at the table.  The way that we really think about it is this discussion that's being had around regenerative  agriculture all the way from where brands are engaging, where the finance community  can engage, to where the farming community is engaged.  
**[0:30:12-0:30:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:30:12):**  In order to get it done at the scale that we think is possible, it's really about bringing  all the stakeholders together and seeing the value of everyone at the table and really  listening to one another and understanding what those leverage points are.  As we work together with our different organizations, there's an opportunity to really bring this  movement forward in a way that serves our businesses, that serves our livelihoods and  
**[0:30:41-0:30:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:30:41):**  that serves the planet.  That sounds great.  And I want to come back to the chestnuts later as I keep hearing them in regenerative agriculture  circles.  But I want to focus a bit now on the company itself.  
**[0:30:52-0:30:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:30:52):**  So you've mentioned you're relatively young but at the same time are having all these  extremely interesting discussions with larger and smaller brands and a lot of farmers and  are planning to plant quite some trees this and next year.  So if you look one year ago into your company but also the larger regenerative agriculture  space, what has changed since February 2017 and February 2018 as we're talking now?  
**[0:31:17-0:31:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:31:17):**  Oh wow, that's a big question.  I guess when we look back a year to a year ago and where the industry was, we were looking  at an industry that was in a lot of ways still just beginning to organize around what was  occurring.  And there's different industry leaders trying to forge the conversation forward.  
**[0:31:44-0:31:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:31:44):**  And it was still pretty young about a year ago but things have seemingly rapidly moved  over the past year, at least from what we've seen.  As a company internally, about a year ago we were looking at a broad spectrum of different  solutions that may be leverage points for where we can bridge investment dollars in  the space.  
**[0:32:04-0:32:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:32:04):**  And a year to today we've landed on what we think is a really good deployable solution  for investors.  And we think a lot of the industry is starting to mature in that way, finding some standard  operating procedures and standard operating metrics for what would make a successful industry  around regenerative agriculture.  
**[0:32:24-0:32:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:32:24):**  So we're pretty optimistic with the growth that we've seen in the last year.  If we would take it one year further, so February 2019, what would you like to have achieved  in terms of Propagate Ventures?  This isn't a perfect world, right?  Yeah, you can dream, you can dream.  
**[0:32:44-0:32:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:32:44):**  I think that there's a few things.  I think that right now there's a lot of scared, or I'm not sure if it's the wrong word, a  lot of patient money waiting for solutions that help mitigate risk and increase liquidity  into this market, into this new emerging kind of set of assets that help steward regeneration.  I think in the next year we're going to really see some kind of us being, we think, a leader  
**[0:33:16-0:33:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:33:16):**  in this, kind of some of these companies that have proved out their models and can bring  investors a little bit more certainty to the table such that a little bit more of a wellspring  occurs where investors start to feel this is a more certain market for them to put their  money into, especially in the long term, because a lot of what we're talking about is 10 to  20 year investment cycles on some of these assets.  
**[0:33:43-0:33:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:33:43):**  So generally speaking, a year from now, what we think is going to be seen is a lot more  investor readiness to come to the table and help scale some of these solutions that we're  talking about.  To add there, and then where we think we sit and where we see our value in the industry  is kind of to relate back to solar a bit.  
**[0:34:02-0:34:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:34:02):**  In the early days of solar, there was a lot of conversation around solar emerging as a  new asset class.  Now we're pretty confident that the same can happen in regenerative agriculture and where  it sits of where we are as a company is focused on agroforestry as an asset class within this  wider context of regeneration.  
**[0:34:25-0:34:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:34:25):**  And being one of the folks that can help bring that forward is something that we pride ourselves  on and definitely probably keeps us up at night, but also keeps us smiling during the  day.  So how would it work as agroforestry, because it's a bit more focused on regenerative agriculture,  as an asset class, if we look now we go way forward 10 years from now, how would it look  
**[0:34:49-0:34:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:34:49):**  like as an asset class if I am an impact investor and I would like to have it in my portfolio  or maybe all the way throughout my portfolio?  Yeah.  So the way in which we're kind of building this out in our company is as a fund model  where deployments can be done across a multiple set, multiple sets of different asset types  
**[0:35:13-0:35:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:35:13):**  and crop types, some that are shorter term, faster term, and that provide not as big of  a return or a different type of return profile depending on the tree types that we're planting.  And depending on the vehicle, whether they're focused on the debt side or the equity side  to provide a little bit more diversity into what they might be able to choose their risk  allocation is.  
**[0:35:39-0:35:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:35:39):**  For us as an organization, really what that looks like is being able to raise a fund that  has pretty large scale for deployment because we're talking about managing trees over their  lifespan and giving investors the ability to have stable returns at a competitive rate,  whether that be something between 5 to 10% on their investment.  So that way they can come in and have a little bit more confidence.  
**[0:36:12-0:36:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:36:12):**  The goal is to be able to do deployments in a more stable way so that we undercut a lot  of that risk through engaging a lot of stakeholders because we have the capital requirements to  make those deployments possible.  And that's bringing in brands and buyers at larger and larger levels across the supply  by building subgroups like co-ops that will help with some of the buying infrastructure  
**[0:36:38-0:36:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:36:38):**  in the middle at the ground level of production.  So there's a whole slew of different structures that are built around the base structure of  a deployment model similar to solar.  And what would that mean in terms of, because you have so many different tree types and  so many different products also coming out of that, would it all be mixed into the fund  
**[0:37:04-0:37:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:37:04):**  to create that diversity and to create the maybe slightly earlier payouts, medium payouts  and later payouts because trees have obviously a different lifespan.  Is that an idea to put that together and create a more stable thing for investors or you're  going to split it up because I'm very interested in chestnuts and you are very interested in  apples and you're of interest in timber, for instance?  
**[0:37:26-0:37:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:37:26):**  Yes, so the way in which we're starting currently, so kind of build you up to where we think  we're going to go.  Currently we're looking at direct investment opportunities in specific projects.  So a project comes up and you're suggesting that to investors.  Right, exactly.  
**[0:37:42-0:37:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:37:42):**  And we're building kind of direct investing vehicles that provide different variable terms  depending on what we're putting in the ground.  That's kind of the initial stage that proves out how we're doing deployments.  And how are investors responding to that?  Yeah, they're looking at it as a long-term investment.  
**[0:38:02-0:38:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:38:02):**  I think the current stage that we're at, a lot of investors are pushing towards fruit  production because it provides shorter returns, time horizons and higher return rates.  But they're interested in it as a concept currently and are willing to play at a lower  scale to prove it out.  So we've got a lot of positive perception on that front.  
**[0:38:25-0:38:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:38:25):**  The long-term goal as we build out those portfolios is to be able to provide a fund layer that  works across both sides.  And the reason why we think that makes a lot more sense currently than separating out the  different assets, whether it be different crop types or the debt or equity vehicles,  is because it helps stabilize the risk and it helps the pool be a little bit more flexible.  
**[0:38:53-0:38:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:38:53):**  So that way we can deploy relative to the pipeline of projects that are coming in in  a more stable manner.  We've found that real asset funds are more interested in the bundle and having that as  kind of an entirely managed portfolio than they are in separating it out and choosing.  The size and scope that we're talking about, we think makes more sense with that combined.  
**[0:39:21-0:39:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:39:21):**  When we start to break it down to the project level, it becomes a little bit more risky  and we have to manage a lot more conversations.  And the piece of this that we're finding is actually quite attractive is all the way on  to the farm level, we're looking at diversification in terms of the farm system and then all the  way through to the investment piece, it's diversify your portfolio.  
**[0:39:47-0:39:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:39:47):**  So it's a lot of the similar thinking that takes play and it's a very virtuous cycle  that we think there's opportunity in.  The end goal, say 10 to 20 years from now, there may arise opportunity for us to separate  those vehicles out to give exposure across different tree types.  But that is yet to emerge as a viable option at this stage.  
**[0:40:13-0:40:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:40:13):**  It depends on scale.  Of course.  Yeah.  Each crop type has different skills, different levels of certainty.  So we want to be able to provide broad spectrum at first before we start diving into one.  
**[0:40:25-0:40:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:40:25):**  In terms of giving investors the access to one specific vertical.  And in terms of investors, because I know there's many of the farmland focused funds  are looking at retail investors, they might want to go public at some point or they want  to bring in smaller scale investments, go to the crowdfunding or the crowd investing  route.  
**[0:40:48-0:40:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:40:48):**  Is that something that you are thinking of and taking into account to keep this movement  or to make sure this regenerative agriculture movement is more democratized than maybe some  of the solar movement or especially the wind movement has been?  Yeah, it's a great question.  So we actually, if we go back to the genesis of the organization, one of the primary goals  
**[0:41:12-0:41:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:41:12):**  was to lower the barrier to entry to being able to invest in this as an asset class.  There's a great company that we like called Wonder Capital in solar that has done this  pretty well.  And we like it a little bit.  We like the way in which they've approached this, which is there's still a minimum investment  
**[0:41:33-0:41:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:41:33):**  quantity that a person can put in.  But it's small enough that it's accessible to investors that are not necessarily large  scale.  And we kind of have a similar thinking.  We view this as a viable option for that model and crowdfunding it within that framework.  
**[0:41:56-0:42:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:41:56):**  I think we're being a little bit cautious to make sure we're not over promising and  under delivering across this.  Because the last thing we want to do is start selling to smaller level retail investors  before we've proven out that it works at a scale that's investable.  Of course, you don't want to run that risk, especially as it's so early in the regenerative  
**[0:42:21-0:42:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:42:21):**  agriculture space, or at least in the vehicles that are investing in regenerative agriculture  space.  Is that one of the main barriers you see, that the barrier to entry for investors is  relatively high?  What I've heard in some of these interviews is the minimum is relatively high, which means  
**[0:42:38-0:42:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:42:38):**  you're by definition speaking to a very small group and that limits the amount of people  that get enthusiastic, obviously.  Yeah, I think you're totally right on that.  And the cost of acquiring the capital is also very high.  So you're going to have a little bit of a problem in the early stage where you have  
**[0:43:01-0:43:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:43:01):**  to kind of...  Everyone that's trying to get money from a very small group of investors who are interested  in catalyzing this movement are all in some ways competing for those dollars.  We like to think that in a lot of ways, what we're doing is an ancillary benefit to a lot  of existing infrastructure that's being put in place as a bolt-on.  
**[0:43:23-0:43:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/jeremy-kaufman-harry-greene-ethan-steinberg/#t=0:43:23):**  The thing that's also worth saying is we think that there is a huge amount of consumer interest  at the smaller levels of retail investment in this as a model.  And we've seen that from different investors that we've talked to, different smaller scale  wealth that we've talked to.  They want a little...  