### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2018-08-22)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  You're going to listen to an interview with Thomas Rippel where we covered some of the  biggest issues of modern farming in Europe, land prices and land access for young, regenerative  
**[0:00:22-0:00:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:00:22):**  farmers.  Thomas is working on a blockchain-based solution and shares his story how he raised over 1  million euros for a community-based agriculture project in Germany to secure their land.  Enjoy!  Welcome to another episode of investing in regenerative agriculture, investing as if  
**[0:00:39-0:00:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:00:39):**  the planet mattered.  A podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  
**[0:00:57-0:01:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:00:57):**  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small and consumers, start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  Before we get started, I've been recording these interviews next to my day job and I  
**[0:01:17-0:01:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:01:17):**  will definitely continue to do so and release about an episode a month.  But at the same time I would love to take this further, share more interviews.  There are many more stories to share on investing in regenerative food and agriculture.  More depth, improve the quality, maybe even doing some video series.  So I started a Patreon community which makes it easy to support creators like myself.  
**[0:01:38-0:01:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:01:38):**  If these podcasts have been of value to you and if you have the means, I invite you to  support me and make this happen.  For more information, please find the link to my Patreon account in the description below.  And now, without further ado, the interview.  Enjoy!  
**[0:01:54-0:01:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:01:54):**  Welcome to investing in regenerative agriculture, investing as if the planet mattered.  I'm Koon Vossien, your host.  Today I'm talking to Thomas Rippel, a biodynamic farmer passionate about combining his knowledge  on agriculture, sustainable business and community building to reconnect city people to farming  again.  
**[0:02:10-0:02:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:02:10):**  We have much to cover, so let's get started.  Welcome Thomas.  Yeah, hi.  Thanks for inviting me to your podcast.  I'm really excited to be here.  
**[0:02:18-0:02:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:02:18):**  I've listened to quite a few of your podcasts and you've really had some of the most fantastic  people working in regenerative agriculture in the investing space on here.  So I'm really honored to be a part of it.  Thank you so much for making the time this morning.  And I want to start with the usual question that I always do.  
**[0:02:36-0:02:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:02:36):**  Why are you in this space and why are you building soil and doing what you're doing?  Well, I think as with most people that you've interviewed, it's a very personal story.  My background is not in farming.  I didn't grow up on the farm.  I originally studied international business and Chinese.  
**[0:02:56-0:03:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:02:56):**  I lived in China for three years and it was during that time that I became disillusioned  with my degree and I was looking for maybe a deeper meaning of or a perspective of where  I'm actually going.  And so I had this kind of crisis and I was not sure really which direction I'm going  with my degree and where that's going to lead.  
**[0:03:33-0:03:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:03:33):**  And so I decided to take a time out and through friends of the family, I was able to spend  that time out on an organic farm in Switzerland.  And so I completely disconnected.  Not a bad place to be.  Absolutely.  
**[0:03:53-0:03:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:03:53):**  Yeah, it was really a transformative experience for me.  I really dived in.  I disconnected from everything, turned off my phone and disconnected from the Internet.  And I was just working on that farm every day and working with the soil and planting  and growing and harvesting.  
**[0:04:16-0:04:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:04:16):**  It was a new experience for me and it was a really beautiful experience.  And so I decided I want to work in farming.  And so that was my start about seven years ago or eight years ago now.  And since then, that's what I've been doing.  And after a couple of years working on several projects, I co-initiated several agricultural  
**[0:04:48-0:04:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:04:48):**  projects.  One of them was a new funded project.  I realized that what I'm longing for is actually to work in farming with my own hands and not  to kind of do agricultural projects on a management level.  And so I decided to do a vocational training in Switzerland to become a farmer.  
**[0:05:14-0:05:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:05:14):**  And in Switzerland, they take this actually quite seriously.  Vocational training to become a farmer usually takes at least three years.  I did the biodynamic education, which actually goes for four and a half years full time working  on different farms.  And the way vocational trainings are set up is that 80% of the time you work on the job  
**[0:05:40-0:05:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:05:40):**  and 20% of the time you go to school.  And so for me, it was three weeks per month working on the farm and one week per month  going to school.  And it was in that education that I was kind of envisioning that at some point in the future  I will have my own farm where I will have some cows and grow vegetables and grains and  
**[0:06:14-0:06:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:06:14):**  also have kind of agro-tourism.  I had this whole vision for this beautiful farm in my head.  And then when I actually started looking into buying a farm, looking for a farm that I could  buy, it dawned on me that I'm not going to be able to afford that.  It's really expensive to buy a farm.  
**[0:06:38-0:06:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:06:38):**  And if you want to fund that through external loans from a bank and you have to pay market  interest rates, there's no way you can earn that kind of money from agriculture.  And you were looking in one of the most expensive real estate economies in the world, obviously.  But this is a problem that I've heard many times on this podcast.  So it seems to be a problem or a huge challenge for people that want to get into farming around  
**[0:07:06-0:07:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:07:06):**  the world.  Yeah, I think this is a problem, not just in Switzerland.  I know it's a problem in Germany.  I know it's a problem in the US.  I'm less familiar with other countries, but I'm sure that this is a huge barrier.  
**[0:07:23-0:07:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:07:23):**  And part of the reason is that a lot of speculative cash has moved into buying agricultural land  and thus driving up the price of land.  And we have seen in the past 10, 20 years a real decoupling of the actual productive  value of the land from the market price.  So as a farmer, to buy land and usually you finance any purchase like that through an  
**[0:08:00-0:08:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:08:00):**  external loan.  So if you would want to buy land, then you just grow crops normally and you would want  to pay the interest on the loan.  The math just doesn't add up.  So right now, most of the land purchases happening in Europe are being done by financial institutions  
**[0:08:18-0:08:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:08:18):**  who are speculatively buying land and farmers are now only able to afford to lease land.  So buying land is really out of the question for most farmers.  And so this is really an unhealthy development.  Why is it unhealthy?  I mean, I can imagine but it's great to hear from somebody that's in that space.  
**[0:08:38-0:08:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:08:38):**  Why is it not good for a bank to buy some land and lease it for instance, to you as  a young sustainable farming farmer?  Well, these asset managers, or these funds, they only have one criteria and that is the  financial and so they are looking to maximize their profits.  And so they're leasing out the lands to whoever pays the highest lease.  
**[0:09:09-0:09:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:09:09):**  And right now, because the externalities of production are simply not taken into consideration,  right now, the person or the farmer or the company that farms in the least sustainable  way is able to pay the highest lease because they're exploiting the soil.  And specifically here in the region where I'm at, it's actually asparagus farmers that  are really intensively working the soil and using excessive amounts of fertilizers.  
**[0:09:46-0:09:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:09:46):**  They're able to pay the highest lease and that is the least healthy use of the land.  Whereas an organic farmer that has a healthy crop rotation, he's a good steward of the  land but he's not able to pay the highest lease.  So obviously, the asparagus farmer gets the land for lease.  And so this question of ownership and according to what criteria the land is leased out really  
**[0:10:19-0:10:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:10:19):**  determines the kind of farming that we're seeing.  And it's one of the big, big drivers behind the industrialization of agriculture.  And so when you notice that and experience it because you just simply couldn't afford  the land you wanted, maybe you could afford some piece extremely far away or extremely  uncomfortable as a piece of land, but the piece of land where you could farm sustainably  
**[0:10:41-0:10:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:10:41):**  and profitably just wasn't there.  What was your next step?  What led to what you're doing now in your exciting project?  Right.  So at first it was frustrating.  
**[0:10:54-0:11:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:10:54):**  It took me a year to kind of digest that, that I'm not going to be able to afford a  farm.  How many pieces of land did you see or how many times did you try and did you do that  calculation?  Just out of curiosity.  
**[0:11:06-0:11:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:11:06):**  I don't want to open that wound again.  I specifically looked at three different farms and I mean really concretely really looking  at what's possible there.  But I kept my eyes open and read about many, many different opportunities where it was  clear from the beginning that's not an option.  
**[0:11:28-0:11:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:11:28):**  Then it was through a friend of mine that my eyes were opened to other possibilities  and that being community supported agriculture where you don't necessarily need to yourself  buy land and run this farm.  But as a group together you can do it.  And my friend, he started a community supported farm in Germany six years ago which is now  
**[0:12:00-0:12:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:12:00):**  a community of 12 to 15 people about my age between 25 and 35 running this farm.  And at first they were actually leasing the land and then two years into their project  starting this community supported agriculture the owner of the farm died and the heirs they  didn't want to continue leasing the farm out.  They just went to sell it to the highest bidder.  
**[0:12:31-0:12:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:12:31):**  And the people who were here including my friends they couldn't afford it.  They wouldn't have been able to afford this.  So it was really through coincidence and the initiative of the people here that a cooperative  was founded that would buy the land a nonprofit cooperative and a very wealthy generous person  funded the purchase of the land here through a loan and said OK well we'll secure the land  
**[0:13:12-0:13:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:13:12):**  in this cooperative and I fund it.  But long term you guys will need to get other people involved and invested so that land  is funded.  So a kind of community ownership.  And yes so my friend then he knew that I was looking for a farm for a place to be and he  
**[0:13:40-0:13:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:13:40):**  asked me if I want to join them.  And first I was hesitant because I've been in Switzerland for a very long time and I  wasn't really looking at Germany.  You know it's a different country.  But I came here and I really fell in love with the people here the community just so  
**[0:14:01-0:14:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:14:01):**  vibrant and so full of energy and such a good spirit.  So I took a chance not that I had so many other options for farms and I came here and  then.  Yes what they were hoping what my friend was hoping is that I could help them to do some  fundraising for the farm.  
**[0:14:26-0:14:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:14:26):**  So some fundraising because the wealthy person that made the loan wasn't enough to complete  the farm you needed other types of funding to get it up and running.  I'm speculating.  Yeah.  So let me explain that.  
**[0:14:45-0:14:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:14:45):**  That wealthy person she funded the whole farm but she didn't she didn't want to do that  in perpetuity.  It was an interest free loan really just so that this project can continue.  So the land wasn't sold to the highest bidder and people would grow asparagus or whatever  the best lease price would be.  
**[0:15:05-0:15:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:15:05):**  Absolutely and this hope this wonderful project here this community supported farm woods would  have disappeared.  But that person that gave that loan made it very clear that it's only for a certain period  of time which was 10 years she said she's happy to put that money in for 10 years which  was it was eight hundred eighty thousand euros.  
**[0:15:27-0:15:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:15:27):**  It's not a small sum and you know without interest.  So it's very very generous but not in perpetuity.  The idea was that the cooperative that now own the land should find investors shareholders  people who want to become part of this community of this farm and the people running this farm  they obviously they're not professional fundraisers and you know they're running the farm and  
**[0:15:55-0:15:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:15:55):**  that's a lot of work it's a 12 hour day job.  So after three years they they managed to find a few investors but really not much.  And so the idea was my idea coming in here was that we run a crowd investing campaign  and do like a very big publicity campaign.  And so I looked into that looked at providers of crowd funding or crowd investing platforms  
**[0:16:30-0:16:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:16:30):**  and they were asking for very high commissions seven to ten percent.  Yeah I know.  Right so if you're raising you know we're looking at raising eight hundred eighty thousand  euros here and if they are asking for seven to ten percent then that's a commission of  something like seventy thousand eighty thousand euros.  
**[0:16:51-0:16:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:16:51):**  It's a good business model for the platform.  It's a good business model and I think for maybe some other campaigns you know that's  fair enough to ask those kinds of commissions but for a farm that's really not feasible  to pay that kind of commission.  No the margins aren't there.  
**[0:17:08-0:17:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:17:08):**  It's yeah it's really not there even you know even if you work really hard you can't you  can't afford that.  So we decided OK instead of paying eighty thousand in commission we'll we'll put up  some money and actually I went to a nonprofit foundation.  I told them I want to run this crowd investing campaign and we want to set up our own platform  
**[0:17:32-0:17:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:17:32):**  and we need some initial funding whether they would be willing to support that and we got  a very generous donation of thirty thousand euros to fund this campaign and with that  money we set up our own crowd investing platform.  Me and a colleague of mine who is a programmer and I hired some awesome people who made a  very cool video and we organized a whole bunch of events and it was a half year preparation  
**[0:18:03-0:18:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:18:03):**  time and then we ran the campaign you know as usual thirty day crowd funding campaign  and we exceeded really all expectations and raised more than one million euros.  Wow and just to dive into that a bit I mean of course there's this I see the crowd investing  world exploding but I didn't see it happening yet on a farm level or let alone on the regenerative  agriculture level.  
**[0:18:29-0:18:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:18:29):**  What kind of investment is this?  What am I as a crowd investor in this farm?  What am I getting or buying or what would be my role in the future?  Right so this is I think what will maybe shock some people.  So the investment is a share in the cooperative that owns the land.  
**[0:18:49-0:18:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:18:49):**  This cooperative was started three years ago when this farm was in a situation where the  farm was being sold and by now this cooperative has also bought land for other farms that  are in a similar situation.  So the whole purpose of this cooperative is to buy land and keep it in a stewardship role  and lease it out to the farmers long term and to charge very very low leases to the  
**[0:19:16-0:19:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:19:16):**  farmers so that regenerative agriculture can be practiced.  And as an investor you buy shares in the cooperative and the shares they give no dividends and  there's no other financial reward.  So basically the money that you put in is the money that you get out at some point.  But actually you invest in you pay a 5% management fee.  
**[0:19:48-0:19:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:19:48):**  So let's say you invest 10,000 euros you actually only get back 9,500 with no interest and you  can only take the money out after five years.  And if you want to take out your money you have a period of notice of usually one year.  So let's say not ideal investing terms if you're looking for the highest return.  Right super unattractive.  
**[0:20:13-0:20:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:20:13):**  And yet you raised over a million.  Right.  So we saw that people are really willing to invest in something if they feel like it has  an impact in that you know we this farm has existed for six years so really they have  a track record and people can see what's going on and that this small farm which is 30 hectares  
**[0:20:38-0:20:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:20:38):**  about 100 acres that usually does not provide enough income in conventional agriculture  terms that would not provide enough income for one family to live on.  This farm because it's so diverse produces 100 different kinds of vegetables has 16 milk  cows produces its own cheese 20 different kinds of cheese produces grains produces honey  and raised pigs.  
**[0:21:05-0:21:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:21:05):**  So the diversity of it provides an income living for five families.  So you're saying it's more productive.  I mean productive is a very difficult term here but it provides a living for five families  and in conventional chemical agriculture it wouldn't even be considered a farm because  one family cannot live of it.  
**[0:21:25-0:21:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:21:25):**  Yes it will only be considered a part time kind of farm.  A hobby.  Yeah.  So you would have to have an external income you know to be able to.  Like most farmers in Europe or at least in the Netherlands where in a situation with  
**[0:21:40-0:21:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:21:40):**  better have I mean most of the time their partner is working outside the farm just to  make ends meet and they have a much bigger farm usually than the 30 hectares.  Right.  So that's that's a really sad situation to be in that you know you're producing food  for hundreds of people really and you yourself can't make a living on that.  
**[0:22:01-0:22:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:22:01):**  So yeah so this community supported farm really you know normally you would sell the milk  in conventional agriculture for 30 cents a litre.  And here because we make the cheese ourselves on the milk we have this enormous value creation  where in the end our revenue of one litre of milk is about two euro seventy to three  euros per litre.  
**[0:22:29-0:22:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:22:29):**  So we increased the value creation tenfold through creating products directly on the  farm.  Now this I think you know we tried to communicate this and show this in the video and showed  the way we treat the animals in the soil and that we're composting.  This really touched a lot of people and they put their money where their heart is and invested  
**[0:22:52-0:22:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:22:52):**  in this.  So out of this the idea was born.  To raise one million every week.  Where's the limit in that?  Right.  
**[0:23:01-0:23:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:23:01):**  So yeah where's the limit?  So the idea was born that we we make a better crowd investing platform and that we make  that open source available to the whole world that other people can kind of replicate this  campaign that we did here that we showed you know it's possible.  Because there are many more of these super diverse relatively small at least idea farms  
**[0:23:22-0:23:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:23:22):**  there are many also actually active but of course many others that have the knowledge  to do it but don't have the land.  So they might be able to get this type of investment donation to actually buy land and  do it.  Is that what you mean?  
**[0:23:36-0:23:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:23:36):**  There's there's but then the question is how far how many donations or this type of very  unattractive investments are there to to buy the land or is there some at some point the  point that it actually becomes a commercial investment?  Right so we try to figure out the numbers on that and we thought that you know maybe  10 percent 20 percent of people are willing or I think you know a lot of people they they  
**[0:24:05-0:24:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:24:05):**  they're looking for a place to put their money that they feel that it has an impact.  So we thought maybe 20 percent of people in Germany are willing to take money into their  hands and invest it in something like this and maybe those people would be willing to  take 20 10 10 percent of their liquid assets.  So if we kind of make this really rough calculation then there is several billion euros in capital  
**[0:24:32-0:24:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:24:32):**  available that we could potentially tap into.  So we thought yeah this this really does have potential and right now we're we actually  started working on a really professional crowd investing platform specifically for regenerative  farms more specifically for community supported farms which are ideally suited for this kind  of crowd investing campaign because they already have a community.  
**[0:25:03-0:25:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:25:03):**  The community supported farms they're already producing for usually between 100 200 or even  300 households.  So there if they run a campaign then they already have this established network that  can propagate it.  And they would run a campaign to to grow or to extend or maybe to buy the land that's  
**[0:25:21-0:25:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:25:21):**  underneath them.  Exactly to to really buy the land and then secure it long term because a lot of farms  they lease land.  So that's that's a pretty insecure situation even though leases you know they might run  for 10 years.  
**[0:25:35-0:25:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:25:35):**  Yeah but still you're building soil especially if you farm in this way and you're you're  I'm saying between brackets you're giving it away after 10 years it's a huge value creation  plus you have to restart again somewhere else.  Exactly so we think there's huge potential here and also having done the biodynamic education  as a farmer myself I saw from my peers that 80 percent of them who invested four and a  
**[0:26:02-0:26:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:26:02):**  half years of their life to learn farming 80 percent didn't find a farm you know.  So we have this young generation of farmers who are willing to really dedicate their life  to sustainable farming and are you know put their whole hearts and souls into it are super  passionate about it but then end up working in some other fields because they don't have  the capital to take over farm or set up a farm.  
**[0:26:30-0:26:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:26:30):**  You know so that's really as a background for now what turned out to be the next bigger  project which is running parallel to the crowd investing platform which is a blockchain land  trust framework.  Yeah you do have to explain it a bit because people use blockchain everywhere but it's  often not super relevant or way too vague and in this case it's absolutely not so it  
**[0:27:02-0:27:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:27:02):**  would be great to to dive into that and why that could be so important why it could be  part of a solution against the speculation and give young sustainable farmers or not  young sustainable farmers but sustainable farmers in general access to the land they  might deserve.  Right so I have known many people who have dealt with blockchain the past few years either  
**[0:27:30-0:27:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:27:30):**  working on startups or they have invested and so I knew a little bit about the technology  but I was actually quite skeptical just of Bitcoin specifically knowing of not knowing  about the energy consumption that's involved with running the system I thought like that's  really not something sustainable it's not something I want to be involved with.  So it was only late last year that when I was in the middle of running this crowd investing  
**[0:28:04-0:28:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:28:04):**  campaign and setting up this platform that these dots started to connect where I actually  saw a real use case for blockchain that made sense to me and that is that we instead of  you know issuing the shares what I explained before we were issuing shares in the cooperative  that is a super attractive investment and quite cumbersome you know with each investor  you have to sign contracts and you have to you know really issue these shares and send  
**[0:28:38-0:28:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:28:38):**  them to them and so on.  And we live in 2018 so that should be there should be a better way.  Right I mean we were really using kind of tools that were out of the 19th century here.  So I thought that's why you know we're having you know these people who are investing literally  billions of dollars in cryptocurrencies.  
**[0:29:06-0:29:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:29:06):**  Well why don't we create a cryptocurrency and issue this cryptocurrency and then raise  funds with that and invest that money into land and then the cryptocurrency is actually  backed in value by something real namely agricultural land.  So it just so happened that in the same time frame the Swiss financial regulatory market  authority issued its guidelines dealing or issued its guidelines on how to how it's dealing  
**[0:29:41-0:29:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:29:41):**  with these new cryptocurrencies and classifying them and really giving legal security to investors.  And so I thought there's a real opportunity here to really basically digitize the whole  process of issuing shares and raising funds.  And what I think is really attractive here especially for cryptocurrency investors is  a lot of that there's a huge amount of volatility in the markets.  
**[0:30:13-0:30:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:30:13):**  Bitcoin is going up 20 percent one day and down 20 percent the next.  There's fluctuations of 10 15 percent within minutes.  And so this is really you can't use this as a means of payment when you know from one  minute to the next the value of this cryptocurrency varies so much.  And so there have been several initiatives in the in the cryptocurrency space to create  
**[0:30:41-0:30:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:30:41):**  a stable value cryptocurrency.  The most well known or the one with the highest market capitalization is Tether which is supposedly  backed one to one by U.S. dollars.  So people buy this cryptocurrency called Tether and they take the money that is invested and  they put it in bank accounts and supposedly every dollar of Tether cryptocurrency is backed  
**[0:31:11-0:31:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:31:11):**  by one dollar of one U.S. dollar that is in a safe bank account.  Now there are several issues with Tether.  They haven't had any transparent auditing.  Now I would argue for the listeners to Google it and see what comes up because for sure  when I when this is published there will be another round of controversy around them.  
**[0:31:34-0:31:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:31:34):**  Right so it's quite controversial.  There's this little transparency.  And so the thought was that you know we can if we want to set this up as a nonprofit initiative  where this terra fina we called it this terra fina framework is owned by a nonprofit that  issues the tokens and raises the capital and then takes that money and invests it in farmland  
**[0:32:06-0:32:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:32:06):**  stewardship organizations.  So just one step back so invested in farmland stewardship organizations or as you also call  them FSOs.  Yes.  So does that mean you're buying you're buying the land for these high prices and basically  
**[0:32:20-0:32:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:32:20):**  helping the speculation or what does investing in this case mean.  How do you get access to the land if you don't want to fuel the engine of speculation.  Well I'm glad you mentioned that because that is a real point of contention.  But the fact is that you know we we can you know the only way we can secure the land for  sustainable use is to buy it.  
**[0:32:48-0:32:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:32:48):**  You know we can't disown people right.  We're not living in a communist state.  So the only tool we have available is to compete on the market and and and buy the land.  What we have seen with this cooperative that has bought the land for the farm where I'm  at and has now bought land for 10 other farms and there's several other organizations like  
**[0:33:13-0:33:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:33:13):**  this operational in Germany and in France Belgium.  We have seen that people are willing to sell the land for a fairer price if they know if  they know that the land is then going to be used in a sustainable way.  So that's very interesting.  So you can actually get a discount because you're operating or you're going to operate  
**[0:33:38-0:33:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:33:38):**  of course they have seen it you operate in other places sustainably.  Which means that which is a huge thing if you think about it.  I mean it's the same level as Dhanno now.  I mean the news I think broke a few weeks ago that they will pay less on their huge  line of credit with a number of banks.  
**[0:33:53-0:33:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:33:53):**  They will pay less if they're ESG and their sustainability measures if they score high  on that.  So actually a cost of capital is less if they are more sustainable.  In this case you're saying that in some cases you've seen that the cost of land access are  less if you can operate it sustainably.  
**[0:34:08-0:34:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:34:08):**  That's very interesting.  Yes.  I think that's very encouraging and necessary.  Well necessary to some extent.  In the end you know it is a fact that land prices have gone up substantially in the last  
**[0:34:25-0:34:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:34:25):**  especially in the last 20 years.  In Germany well I can give you specific numbers for the last 10 years.  So in the past 10 years land prices in Germany have gone up 150 percent.  In neighboring Poland prices have gone up 700 percent.  In Romania they've gone up 800 percent.  
**[0:34:45-0:34:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:34:45):**  So it's really really dramatic quite dramatic.  And there's you know nothing a farmland stewardship organization can do about these market dynamics.  The only thing we can do is to make sure that we buy the land and then it's secured for  the long term.  Yeah because that's the crux right.  
**[0:35:08-0:35:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:35:08):**  That's the long term part because of course if you buy it you cannot hold on to it and  you're forced to sell at some point again when the organization has a cash flow problem  or one of the harvests fails you're still in the same in the same issues.  Well you're not facing the same kind of financial pressure.  If you are not promising investors a return.  
**[0:35:29-0:35:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:35:29):**  As Kulturland knows Jeff the cooperative that has bought the land here.  They are not under the pressure that they have to produce a certain percentage in return.  They can finance their operational costs through the low leases that they charge to farmers  and really an organization like that doesn't have a huge overhead.  You know they just you know they have to manage legal stuff.  
**[0:35:54-0:35:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:35:54):**  They have to purchase the land.  It has to be administered and the leases have to be signed and so on.  But other than that it's not such a huge admin expense.  And if you don't have investors that are then expecting returns then really the land.  You have time.  
**[0:36:16-0:36:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:36:16):**  Right.  So you're not taking up bank loans.  You have investors in there who put their money in and are not expecting a return.  But as we discussed earlier there are some limitations to that and actually one of the  critical limitations is that well let's say that at one point in the future all of the  
**[0:36:38-0:36:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:36:38):**  shareholders would say OK the value of the land has increased several times a few hundred  percent.  We all vote to sell the land now.  And because you know that's the democratic structure of such an organization there's  really nothing you could do.  
**[0:37:01-0:37:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:37:01):**  So it's really not 100 percent secure.  You know you're really counting on the goodwill and the idealism of the people who are part  of it.  Which at the beginning probably everybody is aligned but of course things change.  And if somebody comes in and offers a lot of money for the land for whatever reason  
**[0:37:18-0:37:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:37:18):**  to either grow asparagus or make it a golf course.  It could be interesting for more than half of the cooperative owners to at some point  take some money off the table.  Right and that usually is what happens with farms in the second or third generation.  You know the people who were running the farm and I am thinking of the people who invest  
**[0:37:40-0:37:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:37:40):**  it you know they're so idealistic they would never do that.  But let's think one generation down the line.  They inherit these shares you know they have no personal connection to this anymore.  And then then you're really facing danger.  How do you get around them.  
**[0:37:54-0:38:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:37:54):**  Well there's a very interesting model also in Germany by a syndicate that has found a  legal way to get around this in that.  So they're doing this for real estate for housing.  And there's OK.  How can I put this really simply.  
**[0:38:15-0:38:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:38:15):**  Or if it's not simple I will ask a question.  Right so OK.  There's this central nonprofit entity and that entity holds a golden share in all other  legal entities which in this case would be the cooperative.  And with that golden share it has a veto right a very specified veto right that gives it  
**[0:38:40-0:38:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:38:40):**  the veto right on the sale of properties.  So even if you know the organization the cooperative would want to sell land the central nonprofit  entity whose sole purpose is to hold these shares these veto shares can you know then  say no we veto that and then you know you can't sell the land again for speculative  purposes.  
**[0:39:06-0:39:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:39:06):**  So this organization could theoretically hold a hundred thousand veto shares of a hundred  thousand different projects.  And the sole purpose is to the only thing they can veto just to be clear is when there  is a potential sale they cannot veto and anything else on the daily operation the cooperatives  completely manage that as soon as somebody comes with a huge bag of money puts it on  
**[0:39:29-0:39:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:39:29):**  the table then this veto right could be used to basically block that sale of land because  in the initial it was meant to be a long term project and long term means not selling.  Exactly that is exactly what it is.  So this you know veto it sounds kind of scary but really this veto is only to ensure that  the original idea ideals of the projects which in that case the mead toys are syndicates  
**[0:40:01-0:40:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:40:01):**  those are housing projects which follow the co-living housing and things like that like  a bit more like the new type of cooperatives owning social housing etc.  Exactly what kind of yes not fancy penthouses I mentioned.  No not at all so they're all kind of co-living kind of projects and there's currently 140  of these housing projects in Germany which are part of this network where the central  
**[0:40:36-0:40:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:40:36):**  entity the mead toys are syndicates holds a veto share and all but one project so far  has been a success.  It's been going on for 30 years now one of them has filed for bankruptcy and the case  where you have a bankruptcy that is actually the only time when a property would be sold.  So if a project cannot fund its operational expenses anymore it goes bankrupt then you  
**[0:41:03-0:41:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:41:03):**  still actually have the underlying asset which is the property and so investors are still  at least to some extent protected depending on what state the real estate is in it is  sold on the market and then investors are paid out proportionally and in such a case  of course the central entity the mead toys syndicate allows for the sale.  And I would even see that actually because of this me as an idealistic investor at the  
**[0:41:32-0:41:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:41:32):**  beginning are more likely to do it because I know that maybe when I am no longer there  my shares are maybe owed by my children or grandchildren etc at least it's always protected  the reason why I did this.  Exactly right that's the whole idea of it you know so that it is protected over many  many generations.  
**[0:41:54-0:41:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:41:54):**  So how do you put this to work in land and what does the blockchain have to do with that?  Because they have been doing it for 30 years in real estate meaning that it is also possible  on paper but I can imagine it is difficult.  Right it is possible but it's been very cumbersome I would say to raise the funds for each individual  project and the way we want to implement it in terms of the legal framework we want to  
**[0:42:23-0:42:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:42:23):**  adopt that that's a framework that has been proven by time and it works and you know so  we want to build on something that works.  The blockchain comes in that it allows for much larger amounts of capital to be raised  and that the foundation.  Why is that?  
**[0:42:50-0:42:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:42:50):**  Why would it be much larger?  Because there's so much money going around tokens at the moment or in general?  Right because there is on the one hand well it's much easier to invest in a cryptocurrency  than to go and sign contracts and to buy shares right that's a very cumbersome process whereas  investing in tokens you can very easily just basically go online and pay by credit card.  
**[0:43:17-0:43:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:43:17):**  So anybody could do it basically?  Everyone can do it so that's kind of speaking to the existing crowds that is investing in  these kinds of projects so it's basically just a much easier way to enable that but  at the same time cryptocurrency investors and there's literally hundreds of billions  of dollars in assets in cryptocurrencies out there because there's this huge volatility  
**[0:43:44-0:43:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:43:44):**  in the cryptocurrency market we can offer a value backed stable cryptocurrency as portfolio  diversification for these cryptocurrency investors so they can take you know some of the money  that they hold in Bitcoin and ether and in other cryptocurrencies and put it into our  terra fina coins and be sure that it's backed in value because it's invested in land and  we think that it's a much more attractive proposition than for example tether where  
**[0:44:23-0:44:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:44:23):**  the money is put in a bank and for tether specifically their bank is in Taiwan and Taiwan  actually doesn't have a legal framework that protects investors for cryptocurrencies whereas  Switzerland actually has now clear legal boundaries legal guidelines that protect cryptocurrency  investors when the cryptocurrency is asset backed then it's treated as a security just  like a share of a company and so we have to adhere to all of the very very strict auditing  
**[0:45:06-0:45:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:45:06):**  and legal regulations in place in Switzerland and thus investors can be sure that the money  that they put in there is secure so we can tap into this huge pool of money and use that  to really do something good instead of you know just having that money lying on some  bank account for some people who who knows what they're doing with it right now I can  imagine what they're doing with it for sure not buying hectares of land and leasing it  
**[0:45:39-0:45:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:45:39):**  out to sustainable farmers right so where would you be buying so I'm buying these tokens  and we're not going to go into all the technical details I will definitely post a link to the  project in the description but so I'm buying the tokens where would terra fina buy the  land is that Switzerland and bound because you're there or is it much more freely like  it could also be Germany or France or even further further abroad yeah so we are really  
**[0:46:07-0:46:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:46:07):**  looking at first at Germany and France because there's these very well established farmland  stewardship organizations that have the three that I'm looking at terra de lien in France  that has existed for 10 years and been implementing this model of buying land and through and  raising money through issued shares that offer no return so you would be partnering with  with the with already established farmland stewardship organizations and helping them  
**[0:46:41-0:46:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:46:41):**  basically to to grow right exactly so we would raise the capital through the issued tokens  and then invest in those existing organizations that have a very very solid track record and  those three organizations I'm looking at the B.O.  Bodengen Ostershaft in Germany Kulturland Genschlaff in Germany Kulturland Genschlaff  that I have a very close relationship with and the board of directors has approved to  
**[0:47:07-0:47:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:47:07):**  be to be part of this from the beginning so I already have one organization that is partnering  and terra de lien in France they together they have invested more than a hundred million  euros in land so we would invest in those organizations we would the money that we raise  we invest directly in those organizations and through this legal framework of veto right  on the sale of land and a right of first refusal if land would under some circumstances in  
**[0:47:39-0:47:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:47:39):**  the case of bankruptcy have to be sold we would ask these organizations to give us as  a non-profit organization a right of first refusal to purchase the land so that even  if an organization would go bankrupt it's still protected you still get the chance to  buy it and make sure it stays in the sustained and all the soil you've built is lost if they've  built is lost right and and and that the asset actually still stays within the framework  
**[0:48:05-0:48:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:48:05):**  and is still backing the cryptocurrency in its value right so so we would just invest  in those organizations rather than by land ourselves which we think would be an unhealthy  concentration of power you know if one organization would raise billions and billions and we would  we would manage all this land then you know we don't we don't necessarily have the know-how  of you know the local underground know-how who you know should who are the actors that  
**[0:48:40-0:48:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:48:40):**  would be able to manage the land sustainably and so on and and there are literally hundreds  of these farmland stewardship organizations in the world in many many countries in Australia  and Belgium in the US there's many so we can work with them and really play the role of  raising the capital and then investing it very locally in many many many different organizations  and thus make sure that they locally know who to who the farmers are who they want to  
**[0:49:16-0:49:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:49:16):**  work with who's and really able to manage the land in a way that is really sustainable  long term and as a token investor can I choose where my money goes and and what do I get  in return as far as you know now I mean this project started in December it's it's all  much in process and fluid but what's your what are your thoughts at this moment 30th  of March 2018 yeah yeah as you say it's it's early on but we do have ideas of what we want  
**[0:49:51-0:49:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:49:51):**  to implement in the future some of it is not technically feasible at this point so in the  beginning as an investor the money is managed by terra fina and we then invest money in  in the different farm and stewardship organizations but the idea is that in the future we would  be able to put in place smart contracts where as an investor you could dedicate funds and  say that money that you invest should be specifically dedicated to this or that organization or  
**[0:50:28-0:50:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:50:28):**  farm that is one line of thought and the other vision is that we in the future will establish  our own blockchain and we will establish an ICO platform specifically for these farmland  stewardship organizations that they can also issue tokens themselves now that only makes  sense at a certain size of the organization because it does cost a certain amount of money  cost about a hundred thousand dollars to be listed on on the token exchange and to issue  
**[0:51:06-0:51:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:51:06):**  tokens as a security you have to fulfill strict requirements you have to issue a prospectus  and so on and that all costs a lot of money but at a certain size of an organization it  would make sense that they can issue their own tokens so then we will provide the infrastructure  for them to do that and then people could invest directly in those organizations and  we would invest in those organizations through tokens instead of classical shares the way  
**[0:51:40-0:51:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:51:40):**  we would be doing in the beginning now as an investor what you get is a stable value  cryptocurrency now that might not sound super attractive we we're not envisioning well we  have been thinking about returns you know do we want to offer investors a return and  we which would potentially make the market you're you're fishing in much bigger as many  people are currently getting maybe zero on their savings accounts or even in some parts  
**[0:52:15-0:52:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:52:15):**  of Switzerland minus so it there's even if you do one or two percent it already becomes  it becomes an investment instead of looking for a stable stable currency but of course  it brings a whole different suite of problems with it yeah and this really is an ideological  debate to some extent in that you know the only way we could offer these returns is if  we take into account the increase in market value of the land but really the whole idea  
**[0:52:46-0:52:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:52:46):**  of this framework is to decommoditize land to take the land off the market for good forever  you know we don't want to sell it again so the money is to be made on the land not with  the land right but yeah so so so that's that's in it's it's a bit of a conflict of ideas  to think about offering a return on the increase in the value so we're tending towards saying  we we do not want to incorporate or we do not want to pass on the increase in the value  
**[0:53:25-0:53:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:53:25):**  of the lands to the investors because we want to be clear you know we don't want to sell  the land again so any any profits so to say that would arise from the increase in the  value wouldn't be realized right because the land wouldn't be sold so it's really it would  be a contradiction to do that but we think that looking at other stable value cryptocurrencies  like tethers they have in the past 12 months raised more than 2 billion US dollars because  
**[0:53:57-0:54:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:53:57):**  the price of a stable currency could rise because there's a bigger need of a stable  currency not necessarily because the value of the dollar in this case of the tetra or  the the hectare of land is increasing but just the fact that there is a stable currency  could become more attractive and more people want it that that's what you're saying but  we we don't want to we want to keep it stable in the sense that we want to peg it to us  
**[0:54:20-0:54:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:54:20):**  dollar or euro so if the demand is great you know we we get a lot of capital inflow but  we won't let the currency go up you know we just keep issuing new tokens okay yeah you  were able to raise a million on very unattractive terms so there's there's definitely money  in the market especially if it becomes a stable coin to to I mean it's part of a portfolio  now it could be that you know if we're looking really long term let's say 20 30 50 60 years  
**[0:54:48-0:54:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:54:48):**  and let's say the terra fina tokens they become a mainstream everyday currency you know you're  you're walking down the street in bookie nafaso and and you're seeing you know your love of  bread in terra fina tokens right then then then we could actually you know use the tokens  to buy land directly you know then then you're not kind of going through you know this peg  anymore peg to the euro whatever you know who knows what happens to the euro in 20 years  
**[0:55:19-0:55:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:55:19):**  or even in 10 years or if we were in a situation where we would have hyperinflation for example  let's say the euro completely loses its value you know we still have our land right so the  value is still there so then we could readjust the value that it keeps its value you know  what I mean right now the the inflation rate is like maybe one to two percent so nobody  is thinking along these lines but if you have an inflation of 20 percent or even hyperinflation  
**[0:55:56-0:56:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:55:56):**  like they have in Venezuela all of this could could happen you know we've seen it historically  happen many times then at least our cryptocurrency is backed by a real asset and then we could  account for inflation and and and price that into the token and and and pass that on to  the investors and and we still have to eat so at the end of the day where would you like  your money or your value be be stored or be behold and where would be where would value  
**[0:56:29-0:56:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:56:29):**  be created which probably comes out of the land right probably piece of the sea right  at the end of the day you know the land is the ultimate scarce resource it's it's better  than the gold standard right I mean they're currently backed by land that's the safest  thing you could think of if you can find people that can can work the land in a in a proper  way absolutely yeah so that's that's really the grand vision and maybe one other aspect  
**[0:56:59-0:57:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:56:59):**  that I haven't mentioned so far is that we also want to set up a global blockchain land  registry so of course right now every country has their own land registry so we would set  that up parallel to the nation state land registries and import all of the information  on land ownership and lease rights and so on into the global blockchain land registry  so that we have absolute transparency on the ownership and the assets and and the land  
**[0:57:38-0:57:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:57:38):**  use rights and so on so that's there can be real trust in this framework and just to also  be conscious of your time I want to ask and end with one final question we have much more  to cover I think we could do another hour on just this one you just mentioned but I  think that we'll keep that for another podcast sure let's imagine there's a theater full  of smart impact investors listening to this podcast and they're they're on board they're  
**[0:58:05-0:58:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:58:05):**  thinking I need to get into regenerative agriculture I need to be able to support this farmland  stewardship organizations I I want to either buy land or make land accessible or invest  in infrastructure or invest in machinery what would your advice be for smart investors smart  impact investors to to get into regenerative agriculture where to start what would be your  first steps if they don't want to do a four and a half year biodynamic farmer training  
**[0:58:35-0:58:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:58:35):**  right well I think there is quite a few of these farmland stewardship organizations all  over the world I know of many in Europe I know in the US in Australia so those are actually  not so difficult to find there is I forget what the network is called in the US they  have network of 500 of these organizations so I think everyone can can find one that  is geographically close to them or pursues goals that is really aligning specifically  
**[0:59:13-0:59:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:59:13):**  with with their values so I think that is a fantastic investment or community supported  farming is really taking off and has has been taking off in the US for 20 years and in Europe  the past 10 years there's more than 10,000 community supported farms in the US there's  some 2000 in France and then some 300 in Germany and most of those farms they rely on on loans  to funds there to to pay for tractors and and operations right so you you could probably  
**[0:59:49-0:59:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=0:59:49):**  find one of these community supported farms in your region and go to them and say look  okay you've got a bank loan you paying three percent whatever I'm not getting a good return  on the money I have on the bank let's how about I lend you the money directly and we  we you know we cut it in the middle and I take one and a half percent something like  that and they would be happy and and you would know that your money is financing something  
**[1:00:15-1:00:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=1:00:15):**  positive and yeah I think that's that would have a huge impact.  And one I always say final question and then I have another 10 in this case only one in  with these CSAs that have been popping up everywhere and you're actually involved in  one and do you see that it's now getting to a scale and by scale I don't mean that they  need to manage 300,000 hectares etc but to a scale and also to a price point that it  
**[1:00:42-1:00:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=1:00:42):**  starts to be accessible for not just the happy few like does it get to a level where accessibility  of food becomes because it's a huge issue obviously if you cannot afford it you end  up in the cheaper aisle in the supermarket and probably not the most nutritious and healthiest  especially for the soil and you do you see that there's a change going on that it's coming  out of the niche and hopefully slowly to to slightly more more accessible and masses or  
**[1:01:14-1:01:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=1:01:14):**  we still need to go to another generation to get there.  Right well I think this is would be a whole nother podcast on justice but I would say  let's do that I would sum up to say that I think generally food is unrealistically cheap  the way the way we it's priced in the supermarket because a lot of the external costs are not  taken account for and these the CSAs specifically the ones I know okay they are on average more  
**[1:01:51-1:02:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=1:01:51):**  expensive than the supermarkets food but if you were to not be able to afford it like  for example the the CSA where I'm at we leave it up to our members to decide how much they  want to pay so we know you know on average we get a certain amount which is a higher  price in the supermarket but some members they pay considerably less and some some pay  more so there is a solidarity amongst this community and this is what I've observed on  
**[1:02:28-1:02:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=1:02:28):**  many of these CSAs and some of the members they really can't afford it and they help  out on the farm we have some members they come once or twice a week and they help out  with with their labor and pay for the food through that so really I think nobody is excluded  on economic terms.  No that's the important thing and let's dive into that in another podcast Thomas I want  
**[1:02:57-1:03:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=1:02:57):**  to thank you so much this is probably the longest podcast I've ever recorded and definitely  let's check in let's dive deep into a few of the other topics and also let's keep checking  in on terra fina.  Thomas thank you so much for taking the time and yeah keep keep it up with your fantastic  work looking forward to hearing more of your podcast.  
**[1:03:19-1:03:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=1:03:19):**  Thank you so much have a great day.  Thank you for listening all the way to the end of this very long podcast probably the  longest I did so far.  I really enjoyed diving deeper into land prices and access and hope to explore some of the  things we've raised here in future podcasts.  
**[1:03:34-1:03:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=1:03:34):**  If you found the investing in regenerative agriculture and food podcast valuable there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few seconds.  Number two share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  
**[1:03:53-1:03:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=1:03:53):**  Number three if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means please join  my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or in the description  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  
**[1:04:21-1:04:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=1:04:21):**  Dear friends of the podcast I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food.  How to put money to work in regenerating soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while  doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  
**[1:04:35-1:04:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=1:04:35):**  After a hundred interviews and more than a hundred hours of audio asking the question  how to put money to work in regenerating soils and I've been following the space since 2011  and recording these podcasts since 2016 we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework?  
**[1:04:54-1:04:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=1:04:54):**  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees and what questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  
**[1:05:04-1:05:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=1:05:04):**  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  You the soil builders and investors in the space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  
**[1:05:17-1:05:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=1:05:17):**  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management consultants, etc. etc.  People that are building soil at scale and the investors who are putting their own money  to work through their family office or as private individuals or people who are putting  other people's money to work through foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies,  
**[1:05:41-1:05:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=1:05:41):**  etc.  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  
**[1:05:51-1:05:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=1:05:51):**  that among the listeners of this podcast we have people with very different means.  So I'm inviting you if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  
**[1:06:06-1:06:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=1:06:06):**  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to ride along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  
**[1:06:29-1:06:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=1:06:29):**  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  
**[1:06:46-1:06:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=1:06:46):**  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  
**[1:07:01-1:07:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/04/21/thomas-rippel/#t=1:07:01):**  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking, click on  the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  