### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2018-42-21)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com slash course or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  You're going to listen to a conversation with Peter Donovan.  And this episode is completely about soil, soil health, carbon, water cycles and much  
**[0:00:21-0:00:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:00:21):**  more.  Enjoy.  Welcome to another episode of investing in regenerative agriculture.  Investing as if the planet mattered.  Podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  
**[0:00:35-0:00:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:00:35):**  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  
**[0:00:54-0:00:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:00:54):**  And it's time that we as investors, big and small and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  Before we get started, I've been recording these interviews next to my day job and I  will definitely continue to do so and release about an episode a month.  But at the same time, I would love to take this further, share more interviews.  
**[0:01:15-0:01:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:01:15):**  There are many more stories to share on investing in regenerative food and agriculture.  More depth, improve the quality, maybe even doing some video series.  So I started a Patreon community, which makes it easy to support creators like myself.  If these podcasts have been of value to you and if you have the means, I invite you to  support me and make this happen.  
**[0:01:36-0:01:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:01:36):**  For more information, please find the link to my Patreon account in the description below.  And now without further ado, the interview.  Enjoy.  Welcome to investing in regenerative agriculture, investing as if the planet mattered.  I'm Koon Fasein, your host.  
**[0:01:51-0:01:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:01:51):**  Today I'm talking to Peter Donovan.  Peter has hands on experience with land and stock management, holistic management, community  development and consensus building, and much more.  He completed his holistic management educator course in 1997, but chose not to pursue certification.  He lives in Eastern Oregon, USA, and Peter just published a few days ago on his website,  
**[0:02:11-0:02:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:02:11):**  recognizing the soil carbon spawns.  Plus he's a good friend of Judy T. Schwartz who I interviewed last year.  So we have a lot to discuss.  So let's start and dive in.  Welcome Peter.  
**[0:02:20-0:02:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:02:20):**  Thank you.  To start with a personal question I always love to ask.  What brings you to the space and when also because you have a long career already in  the space and why soil and why soil carbon and sponge?  In the 1970s I spent a lot of time herding livestock, cattle and sheep.  
**[0:02:37-0:02:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:02:37):**  And when I first met Alan Savory, I was very struck by his approach to decision making.  And this would have been in the early 1990s.  And that change, that encounter changed my life in a lot of ways.  I went through the educator course with Alan Savory for holistic management.  And what he was concentrating on then as he still does is the decision framework, looking  
**[0:03:11-0:03:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:03:11):**  at holes rather than trying to manage or manage parts or treat symptoms.  And this seems to me very radically different from the sort of traditional decision making  that we've probably had for thousands of years.  That's either toward an objective or problem solving or in opposition to existing problem  solving strategies.  
**[0:03:38-0:03:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:03:38):**  For example the environmental movement as it's currently mostly practiced is also a  parts strategy I believe.  And in my holistic management training I became extremely interested in the way the ecosystem  functioned or how we understood that.  And I became very interested in particularly the carbon cycle.  
**[0:04:03-0:04:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:04:03):**  And this was about the time that the climate issue was coming to the forefront and in the  early 2000s.  In 2007 with a friend I started the Soil Carbon Coalition which was a nonprofit and the first  major project was figuring out how to measure change in soil carbon.  And this was not as the conversation then was and perhaps still is.  
**[0:04:30-0:04:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:04:30):**  It's not about offsets or carbon credits but it was about to see what was possible and  to try to connect agency, our ability to influence things, the land owners ability to influence  things with their intention regarding the carbon cycle and in particular the value of  soil carbon in holding water and promoting soil life and resilience and all those sorts  of things.  
**[0:04:59-0:05:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:04:59):**  So my passion has been the carbon cycle which has a tremendous influence on water cycling.  And a lot of people think that because our coalition has the word carbon in it we're  about carbon offsets or carbon trading and that's not true.  Carbon is a placeholder if you will for solar energy flow into biological systems.  And even though the energy flow into the actual carbon cycle is pretty minuscule, less than  
**[0:05:31-0:05:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:05:31):**  a quarter watt per square meter, it has a tremendous influence on water cycling which  is about 80 watts per square meter on average.  So hundreds of times larger force but carbon cycling because it's chemical is transformational.  So when you started you mentioned measurement as one of the first entry points.  Did that mean that there wasn't too much being done in that space or it was very difficult  
**[0:06:01-0:06:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:06:01):**  for the ranchers like you or others you were working with to actually measure that?  I think we're still in that discussion like also for the combination people but also for  all the agriculture people that want to see that as a key point in all of their systems.  Is it still difficult?  Was it very difficult then?  
**[0:06:20-0:06:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:06:20):**  What has been your work on that?  Well measurement of carbon is a complex, measurement of soil carbon is a complex subject because  there's many different purposes that people bring to that.  And I think it's important to distinguish those and to be aware of them.  One of the purposes in the early 2000s and with the Chicago Climate Exchange for example  
**[0:06:43-0:06:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:06:43):**  in the US and my perspective is mainly North America.  I should emphasize that.  The perspective was we can measure carbon and then trade offsets and that's a difficult  proposition because there's so much variability in space and time and soils for example.  And early on when we started the Soil Carbon Coalition in 2007 I focused on measuring change  
**[0:07:14-0:07:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:07:14):**  over time and that is again a difficult proposition at a landscape scale but at a point scale  it's not too bad.  And most of the academic research and measurements were one time only.  It's routine in institutional research to substitute space for time often because of  the limited timeline of grant funding.  
**[0:07:43-0:07:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:07:43):**  So a researcher will go to Brazil for example and measure carbon in a rainforest and then  across in the same soil type perhaps a place that was cleared 10 years ago and maybe a  place that was cleared 40 years ago and make what is known as a chrono sequence or what  I call a sort of a fence line comparison.  And I focused very early on creating baseline sampling locations that could be accurately  
**[0:08:16-0:08:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:08:16):**  and repeatably re-measured over time.  Because that's the key to repeat it and see what changed and what influence you might  or your practices might have had if I understand correctly.  Correct.  So that can be done at a point scale but to get a statistically valid measurement of 1000  
**[0:08:39-0:08:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:08:39):**  hectares in a variable landscape is a tough one.  And that's why the carbon offset conversation went from measurement to modeling pretty quickly.  Yeah because it's extremely difficult to prove that and to keep it there.  And if we then, so you're starting to measure, if we move to management, I mean I've discussed  soil carbon many many times in this podcast but still I think for many it's relatively  
**[0:09:07-0:09:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:09:07):**  new the fact that soil actually holds carbon.  Could you give a very brief but clear introduction to the ones that are thinking soil and carbon?  That's a new concept.  How that works and why it's so important the connection with water and not necessarily  the compensation discussion that many are having at the moment?  
**[0:09:28-0:09:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:09:28):**  Well as Selman Waksman, the microbiologist who won the Nobel Prize for discovering Streptomycin  in 1952, he wrote a book called Humus in 1936.  So this is not exactly new information.  He said that humus and a lot of people, that's a high carbon bunch of compounds, is the principal  powerhouse of solar energy on the surface of the earth.  
**[0:09:56-0:10:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:09:56):**  And I define soil carbon pretty loosely as the living, the dead, and the very dead.  And living organisms, biomass, tissue, is generally around half carbon by dry weight  and carbon compounds are all of our carbohydrates, our proteins, everything that makes up a lot  of living creatures has a tremendous fraction of carbon in it.  It's one of the key molecules because of its, key atoms because of its ability to bond in  
**[0:10:34-0:10:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:10:34):**  lots of different ways and to create.  It's the skeleton of, the chemical skeleton if you will, of life.  Of life as we know it.  Yeah and the mineral particles of soil, sand, silt, and clay can be bound together with  sticky glues and cements and these are high carbon molecules usually.  
**[0:11:00-0:11:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:11:00):**  And all kingdoms of life produce sticky slimes and glues and plants exude sugars, carbohydrates  through their roots and various microbes take up this food and process it into incredible  number of compounds and some of them are sticky slimes and films that stick together these  mineral particles.  And that creates pore space, a porous matrix if you will, that in turn provides enormous  
**[0:11:32-0:11:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:11:32):**  habitats for very tiny microbes and bacteria and fungi, provides extraordinary ability  for plant roots to penetrate and it increases nutrient availability when you have a porous  soil and it allows for oxygen, carbon dioxide, the various soil gases to exist and in other  words it's a living environment.  The plants photosynthesizing create living soil and without that pore structure, without  
**[0:12:11-0:12:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:12:11):**  those slimes and glues that hold the soil aggregates together, our water cycling would  wash whatever soils we had into the bottom of the sea in a blink of geologic time.  Which is what's happening now, right?  With every flood, you see this dark water basically flushing soil away.  Well yes, but soil is also continuously being formed by plants and microbes and Hutton discovered  
**[0:12:43-0:12:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:12:43):**  this in the late 1700s.  He said that both soil and rocks are part of a cycle, they're continually being destroyed  and continually being created and of course the differential rates are pretty important  for human civilization because the porous soil aggregate, water holding, fertility enhancing  is the fundamental infrastructure that protects our infrastructure of steel, asphalt and concrete,  
**[0:13:14-0:13:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:13:14):**  our economies, our civilizations without the soil aggregate we're totally lost.  We can't feed ourselves, we can't protect ourselves.  And what's the current state of the soil?  Very broadly, let's look at US, sorry, let's focus a little bit more.  What would you say, are we in deep problems or is there a way out or are we okay in terms  
**[0:13:39-0:13:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:13:39):**  of soil management?  Well I think there are deep problems, there's also a lot of opportunity.  This is a troublesome area to report data and numbers because much depends on your methods  and measurement and not all soils are being measured of course and the estimates of soil  loss are pretty high for the US especially our Midwest and some other areas.  
**[0:14:13-0:14:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:14:13):**  And I do think there's ways out but I think the important focus is to, if we can figure  out a way to shift from managing against what we don't want to taking the opportunity of  managing for what we need and that's deep water holding topsoil.  And what would be an example on what you've seen and how to get there?  What is one of those opportunities to create this rich, full of life soil that can hold  
**[0:14:51-0:14:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:14:51):**  so much more water than the neighboring soil that's flushing away?  I've measured several cases of very rapid soil carbon gain on grazing lands, on pastures  that are being well managed with planned holistic grazing I would say.  In other words, fairly high stock density for a limited time and good recovery periods  for the plants and the grasses that grow there and these are perennial systems, they're not  
**[0:15:25-0:15:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:15:25):**  annual systems.  I've not been able to record as high a gain in annual systems such as cropland or grasses  but I haven't done a lot of work in annual systems.  There are quite a few other reports of change in perennial systems and some annual systems  and I think the potential is good.  
**[0:15:57-0:16:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:15:57):**  The practices probably vary quite a bit and how they're applied.  I would love for people to get away from the idea that practices can be clearly defined  and categorized because I don't believe they can and that's one of the reasons we have  tended to focus on results even with things like infiltration or soil carbon rather than  practices because as it turns out everybody does them differently and to get a definition  
**[0:16:36-0:16:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:16:36):**  of no till for example is pretty difficult that applies to a broad enough sector.  So you're looking more at measuring infiltration rates and soil carbon as a set regardless  of the management so you can actually compare them because it's very difficult to find 10  or 20 farmers that are doing exactly the same system in different places.  Exactly and the measurements I do are by invitation and they're pretty much always by people who  
**[0:17:10-0:17:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:17:10):**  intend to increase their soil health and productivity and so it's not a random sample if you will.  It's about possibility and intent and people who think they have the agency, the ability  to influence that and obviously take some courage too because this is a space when failure  is possible.  You can say well I intend to increase soil carbon and I fail or at least I did during  
**[0:17:43-0:17:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:17:43):**  this particular time period.  Or it didn't come out as I hoped or expected or seen at other places etc.  Exactly.  So going from measurement what are you working on right now?  What is the main focus of your current work?  
**[0:18:05-0:18:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:18:05):**  Well I've had to retire somewhat from the direct measurement because of need to care  for some family members but I'm working right now on and I have been for the last couple  of years on platforms and systems that will enable more people to participate in measuring  and mapping what I call the most powerful planetary force which is the carbon cycle  the circle of life and its intersection with the water cycle.  
**[0:18:38-0:18:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:18:38):**  And we have a web app now that's about to we're about to start using it a lot more.  I've used it a lot.  It's a web app called Atlas of Biological Work or AtlasBioWork.com for short and still  working on it but it works fairly well for data entry right now and it's a very flexible  system unlike a lot of institutional research which is always an insider game.  
**[0:19:09-0:19:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:19:09):**  It tends to have highly structured data and even data that's not visible or transparent  or open.  And so the design here is quite different because we're wanting to be more participatory.  I can't cover the whole world by myself obviously and so the focus here is making it possible  for others to recognize the power and the possibility of the circle of life of the soil  
**[0:19:48-0:19:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:19:48):**  carbon sponge and in general institutional research is not doing this.  Consultants are not doing this.  Agencies are not doing this.  And I think if we're going to learn as landowners, as conservation districts, as a society how  to manage carbon and water cycling we need feedback.  
**[0:20:11-0:20:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:20:11):**  Yeah it all starts with measurements.  These are very complex systems.  I'm not pretending that the soil carbon is the only thing that you should measure or  the best thing that you should measure.  I've been to quite a few meetings where that's been the objective or the agenda.  
**[0:20:30-0:20:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:20:30):**  What's the best kind of measurement to take and my answer is usually something like the  best kind is one that's repeated and that reflects somehow on function.  And repeatability I think has four, at least four ingredients.  You need to be very careful about location.  You need to have practical and affordable methods and tools.  
**[0:20:53-0:21:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:20:53):**  You need to have open data and you need to have people able and willing to make the observations  and to record the data in an open and transparent way.  And those characteristics have guided the design of the platforms we're working on and  those also include some learning materials, inquiry based.  And I might describe again the thrust of this work as I think we can ask better questions  
**[0:21:29-0:21:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:21:29):**  and I also think we can enlist or engage more people in asking and in answering those questions.  It cannot be just an insider game.  We need as a society, as landowners, as conservation districts, as governments, municipal, local,  national, we need to understand what we're dealing with in terms of the circle of life.  We need to recognize it, not just species, not just practices, not just problems, but  
**[0:22:00-0:22:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:22:00):**  the opportunity of working with the most powerful planetary force.  And what would be a bad question or let's say a question that can be improved around  let's say a perennial system or a landowner that would like to switch to that.  What would be a bad question?  What would be a good question?  
**[0:22:20-0:22:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:22:20):**  To give an example.  Well, I can give several examples.  A good question would be how can I regenerate my soils?  A bad question would be, or an easier question, let's put it this way, would be what practices  are usually associated with regenerating soils in my area and which of them appeal to me?  
**[0:22:46-0:22:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:22:46):**  Or what species should I plant?  Or a good question would be how might I increase profitability and resilience on this hundred  acres of my farm?  A bad question might be, an easier question, how much nitrogen fertilizer should I order?  Or what species should I plant?  
**[0:23:16-0:23:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:23:16):**  Which sensor or drone to buy?  Right.  Or a good question might be, for example, how can we address climate change?  What I would consider a bad or a much easier question is how can we create a market for  carbon offsets?  
**[0:23:32-0:23:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:23:32):**  So, if we stay with that good question, it's a huge topic which we can probably fill another  complete podcast.  But reading the Carbon Sponge, what would be your advice to focus on if you would be  speaking in a theater full of investors that are impact investors that are ready to put  their money into soil?  
**[0:24:00-0:24:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:24:00):**  They've learned about it, they've heard about it, but they haven't done anything yet.  Looking at climate change, they all recognize that's one of the big topics.  Soil is a huge, really interesting thing.  Where to start, where to look at, if you would be able to give them some tools to start,  some directions?  
**[0:24:20-0:24:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:24:20):**  Well for investors, I think there's a lot of ideas that you should use the latest, greatest  regenerative practices, for example.  But I would start somewhat earlier and the first thing would be land tenure and commitment.  In other words, I don't think you can apply regenerative agriculture, whatever that exactly  might mean, programmatically.  
**[0:24:56-0:25:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:24:56):**  What would that mean, programmatically?  We're going to do it on 3,000 acres and we're going to do it in these steps.  And these are prepackaged tools or applications or management and we're just going to apply  them.  I don't think you can manage land well that way, but that's the way people who are farming  
**[0:25:25-0:25:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:25:25):**  sometimes 30,000 or 40,000 acres do, they have a recipe.  And I don't think that programmatic type of approach is, I think it's a contradiction  in terms almost.  We're really talking about something beyond practices and as an analogy, think of trying  to create a social program that would make people more creative, responsible and behave  
**[0:25:54-0:25:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:25:54):**  with greater integrity.  I think that's pretty much analogous to what we're trying to do when we talk about scaling  up regenerative agriculture or increasing the pace of it or something like that.  And those kinds of programs, I think, can quickly turn wrong and unprofitable.  I think the key part for investment is to look at tenure and commitment, look at organic  
**[0:26:24-0:26:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:26:24):**  growth and by that I mean not necessarily certified organic, but how can you learn to  do what you need to do as you go along and plan for succession.  This is a long, long horizon kind of business.  And then after all those things have been looked at, then look at the latest, greatest  regenerative practices.  
**[0:26:57-0:27:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:26:57):**  But they're not the first thing.  You need to get the conditions right first.  Yes.  Because what are your enabling conditions?  I've seen people plunge into, we want to do the latest, greatest practices, but there  
**[0:27:16-0:27:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:27:16):**  isn't the support for that, there isn't the organic growth, there isn't the tenure, there  isn't the commitment.  And I don't think you can necessarily do this with a one or two year lease.  Do you see that as one of the main issues as well, the focus on short term, either because  of the leases or because of the cash flows, but the focus on short term and by definition  
**[0:27:40-0:27:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:27:40):**  building living systems, in this case soil and water cycles, is a long term game.  So does it still clash almost by definition?  Yes, I think that's right.  And it's a long term gain and if you need a higher return on investment or you're not  very patient as an investor, these are of course issues.  
**[0:28:03-0:28:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:28:03):**  Yeah, don't even start.  And I would also point out, maybe this doesn't come under your definition of investment,  but people think a lot about policy and we talk a lot about policy and climate policy  and certifications and those kinds of things, but I think the low hanging fruit in policy  work is perhaps to remove the barriers and disincentives, which are pretty strong in  
**[0:28:33-0:28:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:28:33):**  a lot of places.  And in some cases I think this can be done with the right kind of easements or conservation  easements, but you have to be careful there because if the future of agriculture means  more people on the land, which I believe it does, prohibiting subdivisions or housing  might be counterproductive over the long term.  
**[0:28:58-0:29:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:28:58):**  But we have a lot of government programs, a lot of market pressures and a lot of social  pressures that are disincentives to the kind of agriculture that I think we'd like to see  more of.  And for example, local governments, there's a potential for doing the kinds of things  that Charlottesville, Virginia implemented some years ago where they assessed storm sewer  
**[0:29:28-0:29:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:29:28):**  fees based upon your square footage of impervious surfaces on your property in the city of Charlottesville.  And there's a combination of things that make this work.  One is that there's not a long distance between the city who's also building or upgrading  the storm sewer infrastructure and its property owners, its landholders.  In other words, it's not like a carbon trade where you have the signing ceremony in the  
**[0:30:04-0:30:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:30:04):**  Hague for some farmers in Kenya.  It's a close relationship and the technology is pretty good for measuring impervious surfaces  with aerial photography.  And there's flexibility, you can get an allotment or an allowance for replacing an asphalt driveway  with porous paving stones, for example.  
**[0:30:30-0:30:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:30:30):**  There's not a lot of sensitivity to the variation in the infiltration rates of various lawns  or landscaping.  But anyway, the idea I think is sound, that you have this close relationship.  The benefits are in fact measurable and that's simply not the case with so much of our atmospheric  CO2 fixation.  
**[0:30:55-0:31:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:30:55):**  For example, carbon credits, there's no measurable benefit to the atmosphere when we increase  solar carbon.  And so that becomes a kind of a fantasy if you're trying to sell climate change reversal,  for example.  Does that mean that the thing we should be focusing on is water as it is much more easy  
**[0:31:20-0:31:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:31:20):**  to measure, in this case runoff or sewage runoffs.  But of course there are many other ways that soil carbon helps the soil but also helps  the water cycle.  Is that something that would be an easier entry point, do you think?  I think so.  
**[0:31:36-0:31:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:31:36):**  But it could be a combination of things.  And I think energy, transpiration, water are intrinsically better metrics than just soil  carbon.  We started measuring soil carbon because in a sense it's easier to measure than measuring  soil water because it doesn't vary quite as much over time.  
**[0:32:04-0:32:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:32:04):**  And it doesn't depend on the pressure, if you will, the kilopascals of pressure that  you measure soil water with.  But water can be complex but I think it's an inherently good thing to try to focus metrics  on because the benefits are local.  The benefits can be measured.  
**[0:32:33-0:32:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:32:33):**  One of the big costs of soil degradation is the externalized costs.  For example, if a farmer is plowing his fields up and down hill and has tremendous amounts  of erosion in heavy rains, some of the costs of that are typically borne by the local government  cleaning out ditches, repairing culverts, all those kinds of things and water treatment.  There's lots of ways those costs are externalized.  
**[0:33:07-0:33:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:33:07):**  And I think that's an incentive for continued erosion, if you will, and crop insurance subsidies  are in that same category.  We subsidize destruction of soil and those policies could be presumably revoked.  It might be easier because they're local.  Yes, and local governments can be more innovative by nature than large governments.  
**[0:33:40-0:34:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:33:40):**  Distance is a huge factor everywhere but also there.  What would be one or two things to watch out for or one or two things to look into further?  I would go back to my short list, tenure and commitment, an organic growth and succession  of management and then the soil health principles and the latest, greatest regenerative practices.  That would be, again, my advice to impact investors and it's not a simple step, I guess,  
**[0:34:42-0:34:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:34:42):**  but to know the landowners and the land managers that you may be working with.  Or if you're buying land, you must be prepared at some level to manage all of these things.  Yeah, definitely requires a commitment.  Yes.  And that, by definition, is long term.  
**[0:35:01-0:35:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:35:01):**  And what will you be working on allowing, obviously, for family matters?  Let's say this year, what will be your main focus?  Well, we're about to start working more on some remote sensing stuff.  Length of green season, I think, is a critical metric that can be measured approximately  with satellite observations that are now free.  
**[0:35:32-0:35:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:35:32):**  So that's what I consider sort of a low hanging fruit.  And so what does that mean?  Length of green season is the amount of time that you have green growing plants that in  turn are feeding the soil microbes and have the potential to be building or growing soil.  And I think one of the issues or the reasons that so much agriculture has been degrading  
**[0:36:05-0:36:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:36:05):**  soil is that it focuses on short season annual crops, often with nothing growing in between.  So that you have either plowed bare soil or blowing dust or not much photosynthesis happening  before the crop is planted and after it is harvested.  So that's not a good situation for mycorrhizal fungi, for example.  They depend on plants for their life and for their ability to scavenge phosphorus and build  
**[0:36:41-0:36:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:36:41):**  soil structure.  But the length of green season is, so it's a critical thing and it can be measured with  remote sensing satellites.  Is that what they've used in that paper, I'm blanking if it's in Montana or Iowa, to measure  if not letting the land bare basically affected the local climate?  
**[0:37:10-0:37:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:37:10):**  Right.  And that paper referenced some other studies, but according to some of the information that  came out of there, and I'm not exactly sure of the geography, but in the northern Great  Plains, the acreage of summer fallow, in other words, bare ground for the entire growing  season in the hopes of storing enough moisture to raise a crop the following year, the acreage  
**[0:37:31-0:37:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:37:31):**  of summer fallow decreased from 77 million acres to about 20 million, mainly from 1985  to the present when the basically no till became more widely practiced, in other words,  direct seeding rather than plowing up everything to prepare a seed bed.  So and in combination with an increase in summer cover, there's been a big change in  the northern Midwest, you know, I'm talking about western South Dakota, a lot of eastern  
**[0:38:04-0:38:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:38:04):**  Montana, in the switching from a growing a crop of wheat every other year, for example,  to growing crops continuous every year without disturbing the soil with deep plowing, in  other words, minimizing tillage.  And that appears to have affected the amount of convective precipitation, which has a cooling  effect and also is reflected in temperatures.  
**[0:38:38-0:38:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:38:38):**  So the no-till movement, as far as we see the first data, and we have to be very careful  there obviously, had actually an effect on, of course, local temperature as on the land  because bare land compared to something growing on it is a huge difference.  But actually, if you look at the full, in this case watershed or ecosystem, it had an  effect on much more than that.  
**[0:39:04-0:39:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:39:04):**  Yes.  And similar reports have been coming out of other places where there's a lot of summer  fallow in Oklahoma, meteorologists have noticed a heating and drying effect.  That's huge news, or am I overestimating this?  I mean, we've known it, but now we can see it.  
**[0:39:24-0:39:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:39:24):**  Yeah, and it's, people have been reporting these for actually centuries, but we have  so many filters on what we know and what we allow into our heads.  And we have so many incentives, you know, vested interests, specialized knowledge that  keep these things from coming in.  So I think it's very hard for us to see the opportunities in this sometimes.  
**[0:39:49-0:39:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:39:49):**  But now with free satellite data, you maybe be able to see it in more places, is that  what you're thinking?  Yes, I think the length of green season is a better question than, you know, how many  weeds do we have or something like that.  And how is it maybe changing over time, including large areas.  
**[0:40:17-0:40:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:40:17):**  Now the satellite data we have is increasing in quality, it doesn't go all that far back.  And so going forward, I think we'll have some very good data on change.  And I think that's important for landowners, conservation districts, local governments  to see what's possible.  And therefore to take responsibility.  
**[0:40:42-0:40:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:40:42):**  It's like learning a skill.  You have to know that it's possible, that it's practical, and it's important to me,  and you'll learn it.  And in this case, it's possible because we see it, it's practical, and it's important  to me because it reduces the incredible heat waves we're having and also brings a lot more  
**[0:41:01-0:41:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:41:01):**  moist to when the plants need it most.  Yes, our yields can be better, our resilience to droughts can be much better.  That's going to be very interesting to figure out what is, which completely depends on,  as I'm asking this question, I see it completely depends on the space, on the place, but what  is, at what scale it starts to influence and what, so what, where do you need to get and  
**[0:41:25-0:41:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:41:25):**  which places are even more, almost like acupuncture, more important to make sure they're green  constantly compared to other places in the watershed that maybe are of less importance  because of their, their, their location, et cetera.  Yes.  And that's, that's obviously local knowledge too.  
**[0:41:41-0:41:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:41:41):**  And just another example, I know of a farm in the central valley of California that in  2015, 2016, they, they, they're raising lots of tomatoes, tomatoes every year, tomatoes,  processing tomatoes and fresh tomatoes.  And in the winter of 2015, 2016, they started planting a cover crop of mustard and a few  other things in the winter, and it's a winter rainfall regime, and they got a good growth  
**[0:42:07-0:42:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:42:07):**  in the winter and their length of green season really increased and they roll this cover  crop down before they plant their, and they plant their tomatoes right into the residue.  And that system has basically saved them about a third of their water use, which is huge  in the central valley of California, and it's reduced their fertilizer use by half.  And these are both huge economic gains.  
**[0:42:42-0:42:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:42:42):**  Yeah, then the next question is to ask is how many do you need of their neighbors to,  to start not, I wouldn't say playing with the weather because it would be bad, but to  influence it and to bring down these peaks that, that cause so much harm?  Yeah, I, I don't know.  No, no, that's what we're going to find out.  
**[0:43:03-0:43:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:43:03):**  That's the interesting part.  Yeah.  And so I would, I guess, I guess my advice to investors is the same that I'm giving to  everyone else is ask better questions and engage more people in answering and asking  them.  
**[0:43:19-0:43:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:43:19):**  I think that's, that's great advice.  I want to thank you so much for your time.  And because we're on top of the hour as well, I would like to thank you for sharing and  taking us a bit deeper into, into the soil water cycles and carbon cycle.  And hopefully we'll step away from this and ask better questions.  
**[0:43:39-0:43:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:43:39):**  Okay.  Well, thanks, Colin.  Thank you so much, Peter.  You just listened to a conversation with Peter Donovan.  I hope you appreciate soil more than you did before and start asking better questions because  
**[0:43:49-0:43:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:43:49):**  of it.  Thank you for making the time to listen to this podcast and making it all the way till  the end.  I hope you enjoyed it as much as I did.  If you found the investing in regenerative agriculture and food podcast valuable, there  
**[0:44:00-0:44:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:44:00):**  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast.  And it only takes a few seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  
**[0:44:16-0:44:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:44:16):**  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you, and if you have the means, please  join my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture, or in the  description below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  
**[0:44:44-0:44:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:44:44):**  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to put money  
**[0:45:02-0:45:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:45:02):**  to work in regenerating soils, and I've been following the space since 2011.  And recording this podcast since 2016.  We thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework?  
**[0:45:17-0:45:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:45:17):**  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  And what questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  
**[0:45:25-0:45:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:45:25):**  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course you, the soil builders and investors in this space, the soil builders,  people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers, vehicle builders,  
**[0:45:40-0:45:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:45:40):**  crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food companies, permaculture,  key line designers, holistic management, consultants, etc, etc.  People that are building soil at scale, and the investors who are putting their own money  to work through their family office or as private individuals, or people who are putting  other people's money to work through foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies,  
**[0:46:04-0:46:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:46:04):**  etc.  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you.  
**[0:46:13-0:46:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:46:13):**  And I'm very aware that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very  different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you.  And if you have the means to consider paying what you think it's worth, thank you.  So what is this course?  
**[0:46:29-0:46:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:46:29):**  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes, plus PDF slides,  so you don't have to ride along.  We're gonna look into why investing regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find, or what kind of investors you could  
**[0:46:52-0:46:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:46:52):**  find if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're gonna look at nutrient density, landscape design, and a lot more.  So what is it not?  
**[0:47:08-0:47:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:47:08):**  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately, that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  
**[0:47:24-0:47:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/05/21/peter-donovan/#t=0:47:24):**  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea, or whatever you're drinking, click on  the link below, sign up, and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  