### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2018-36-18)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  You're going to listen to an interview with Eric Jackson of Pipeline Foods, where we are  discussing large scale conversion of land to organic farming.  
**[0:00:22-0:00:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:00:22):**  What holds farmers back while the demand is growing so rapidly?  Eric could have retired but decided to dive into regenerative agriculture and get as many  acres as possible on the journey to be a positive force instead of a negative one.  Learn how he built an organization of over 50 people in 18 months, projected to do 150  million in sales this year.  
**[0:00:44-0:00:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:00:44):**  Enjoy!  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture.  Investing as if the planet mattered.  Podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  
**[0:01:00-0:01:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:01:00):**  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much more  
**[0:01:18-0:01:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:01:18):**  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  Before we get started, I've been recording these interviews next to my day job and I  will definitely continue to do so and release about an episode a month.  But at the same time I would love to take this further.  Share more interviews, there are many more stories to share on investing in regenerative  
**[0:01:37-0:01:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:01:37):**  food and agriculture.  More depth, improve the quality, maybe even doing some video series.  So I started a Patreon community which makes it easy to support creators like myself.  If these podcasts have been of value to you and if you have the means, I invite you to  support me and make this happen.  
**[0:01:55-0:02:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:01:55):**  For more information please find the link to my Patreon account in the description below.  And now, without further ado, the interview.  Enjoy!  So welcome to investing in regenerative agriculture, investing as if the planet mattered.  I'm Koen Van Zeyer, your host, and today I'm talking to Erik Jackson, the CEO of Pipeline  
**[0:02:12-0:02:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:02:12):**  Foods, working to accelerate the availability of organic, non-GMO, regenerative grown food  to the market by working together with the whole value chain.  I have a lot of questions around how they put farmers first and what regenerative agriculture  means to them.  So let's not lose time and dive straight in.  
**[0:02:28-0:02:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:02:28):**  Welcome Erik!  Hi, very nice to be here.  So to start with a personal question which I always love.  What brings you to building soil, regenerative agriculture and using agriculture as a force  for good?  
**[0:02:42-0:02:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:02:42):**  Very, very big question I know.  Yeah, well, like many folks my age who've been in agriculture for a career, when we  started in the business, in my case 35 years ago, we were never given any information and  that really wasn't the topic of conversation about how agriculture and sustainability could  work together.  
**[0:03:06-0:03:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:03:06):**  In fact, sustainability had yet to be sort of raised as a business proposition or as  a mandate by consumers.  So you go through your career in the conventional space and in my case I had the opportunity  to retire in 2007 and I took that opportunity to move out of the direct involvement in the  agricultural trading business and get into the carbon sequestration business through  
**[0:03:34-0:03:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:03:34):**  the Chicago Climate Exchange and the programs around cover cropping and grasslands, minimum  tillage programs.  And it was really through that two years or so that I was doing that business that I started  to connect some dots that I didn't really even think about prior to that.  So this would be now almost 12 years ago.  
**[0:04:01-0:04:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:04:01):**  When we started taking a look at carbon sequestration and the possibilities for using agriculture  as a carbon sink, you know, the forest projects had been already been used for quite a while  but agriculture, particularly production agriculture as a carbon sink was something that was relatively  new even across the sustainability community at that point in time.  And I've got a commercial mindset.  
**[0:04:27-0:04:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:04:27):**  I'm not really a scientific person but I do have a set of personal values that I found  that were in alignment with this idea of creating food in a way that also had these secondary  and tertiary environmental benefits primarily.  There are some social benefits as well but I really got hooked on this notion of linking  environmental outcomes to food production.  
**[0:04:53-0:04:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:04:53):**  And do you remember when if there was a light bulb moment or a farmer you visited when with  your traditional agriculture background you suddenly saw like, wait a minute, it could  not just be less bad but actually it could be more positive effects as well.  Was there a specific moment or was it more like those two years like you mentioned before?  Yeah, it was mostly a slow process but there were times when I was out in fields, enormous  
**[0:05:23-0:05:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:05:23):**  fields out in the northern part of the US.  You know, I grew up in Illinois where everything was black dirt and the farmers prided themselves  on how clean their fields were before they planted them, how clean their fields were  during the season through the use of pesticides and herbicides.  And it seemed natural to me of course.  
**[0:05:45-0:05:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:05:45):**  A clean system is a, you know, a clean looking system must be a better system.  And then I went to these projects in North Dakota and Montana and Wyoming and I started  seeing a different type of agriculture.  Very messy one.  Yeah, much more messy.  
**[0:06:02-0:06:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:06:02):**  This was actually not organic that I was looking at at that point in time but it was this idea  of using nature as part of the cycle instead of fighting nature in between the times when  we want to use the land to grow a crop and, you know, the balance of the year.  So you have the fallow period post harvest and using cover cropping during that post  harvest period.  
**[0:06:30-0:06:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:06:30):**  The dirt was healthier, you know, and this was the description of the growers telling  me that they noticed that their dirt was getting better as they were using cover crops.  The idea of using minimum tillage in concert with nature as opposed to fighting nature  every step of the way during the growing season was producing every bit as much yield for  these guys as conventional and their cost structure was much lower because they weren't  
**[0:07:01-0:07:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:07:01):**  using, they weren't having to buy all these inputs.  So that was sort of an aha moment for me because I was a believer at that point in time that  you had to fertilize and you had to hammer the earth with things to keep it in check  so that we could do what we wanted to do during the growing season at least in the northern  hemisphere.  
**[0:07:24-0:07:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:07:24):**  But I would say mostly it was an accretive process.  You know, it was learning mostly through stories by listening to growers talk about what they  were doing and changes that they saw.  Multi-generational farms, you know, that would do something for a long period of time the  same year after year and then they recognized that some of the things that their grandfather  
**[0:07:45-0:07:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:07:45):**  used to do was actually better.  But, you know, they had to go through a change in the mindset.  They, farmers as a rule I would say have to learn by doing and they have to be taught  through lessons on their own land.  But it was really more of an accumulated process of listening to these growers as they went  
**[0:08:07-0:08:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:08:07):**  through different changes, tried different things, very experimental to try to, you know,  at the very least earn environmental credits for what they were doing.  But then they noticed something good was really happening so it became more than a monetary  endeavor and became, you know, more of a missional type endeavor for many of these growers.  So I really learned from the farmers the benefits, the much broader set of benefits of doing  
**[0:08:35-0:08:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:08:35):**  things I would say in the non-conventional way.  And then when you, when basically the market of compensation didn't really take off in  the US or North America, what made you, I mean that sort of forced you to switch but  you could still retire, what made you found and start Pipeline Foods?  Well there's actually a chapter in between.  
**[0:08:59-0:09:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:08:59):**  So from 07 to 09, 2007 to 2009 I was involved in the carbon sequestration projects and then  I took another sort of detour and I got involved in the software business.  And the idea was to build a business software platform for large scale farmers, part of  which was to give them better control over their, over the economics of their business  and part of it was to give them more visibility into how sustainability practices impacted  
**[0:09:32-0:09:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:09:32):**  their bottom line.  And then to give them the opportunity through the use of data to be able to participate  in sustainability programs whether they were driven by their buyers or whether they were  driven by governmental or NGO initiatives, either regulatory or non-regulatory.  So the thing I was connecting in my head at that point was the data was critical to respond  
**[0:10:01-0:10:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:10:01):**  to market forces, some of which would be regulatory in nature, mostly around water quality and  some of them would be market based in nature mostly around addressing interest coming  from the consumer side in terms of knowing where your food came from and the practices  used to raise that.  So I spent 8 years in the software industry building that platform which is called Conservice  
**[0:10:26-0:10:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:10:26):**  and that is still a going business.  And that was quite exciting because I learned something new again that I didn't know really  much about technology before I got into that business and I was the agricultural expert  in on the team and I started to learn a lot about how technology could play a positive  role through the use of data management in terms of exposing best practices as well as  
**[0:10:52-0:10:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:10:52):**  connecting farmers to market opportunities and or giving them a response to a regulatory  pressure from their environment.  So that was a long intermediate chapter of 8 years and it was really through that process  then again I spent virtually all of that 8 years mostly out in the field with growers  and started seeing a whole wide variety of different types of growing schemes and started  
**[0:11:20-0:11:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:11:20):**  bumping in more and more to folks that were at least diversified into organic row crop  production and so my education of production agriculture, different types of production  agriculture continued during those software years.  So then I got bored again.  There's a common theme here, when I get bored I get dangerous.  
**[0:11:43-0:11:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:11:43):**  I didn't want to say it.  So in late 2015 I started sort of dreaming about maybe how to get more deeply involved  in specifically in the organic space which I would say, we will talk about this a little  bit more later, but organic is one of the ways in which regenerative agriculture might  be expressed.  
**[0:12:06-0:12:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:12:06):**  I was looking at the marketplace and watching the growth in the industry, double digit growth  year over year for many, many years and again with my commercial hat on I was wondering  what had been, what was being done in terms of the infrastructure.  And the supply.  So the midstream between the farmer and the consumer, there's a lot of steps that happen  
**[0:12:29-0:12:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:12:29):**  and I was fascinated to try to figure out and see if that infrastructure had been keeping  up with the whole marketplace and I found out that it was really an under invested space.  I'm talking about grain elevators, grain processing, feed manufacturing, grain processing for various  types of foodstuffs, food ingredients and really that's a critical link because neither  the demand side or the supply side can function without that midstream.  
**[0:13:04-0:13:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:13:04):**  And so I thought okay well maybe my contribution to this effort is to develop the midstream  so that both sides of this, of the pipeline, there's a name, that's where it came from,  both sides of the pipe can benefit if the pipe is built in such a way that it honors  the desires on the demand side and honors the desires on the supply side.  So this notion of building a pipe, the most efficient means by which to get product from  
**[0:13:32-0:13:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:13:32):**  A to B started coming into view and I started putting a team together in early 16 to explore  this a little bit more and we spent about six months doing some research and developing  the thesis more clearly and then I stepped out into the capital markets to raise money  because the midstream business is very asset heavy and it takes a lot of capital to put  the pieces together.  
**[0:14:00-0:14:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:14:00):**  So that's sort of the condensed version.  I could go on for hours about other aspects of it but that's sort of the condensed version  of how I came to form a pipeline as a company.  And now you have, I counted on the website, over 50 people working with you and can you  give the condensed version of what pipeline foods, obviously changing constantly, but  
**[0:14:24-0:14:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:14:24):**  what it is today, what you focus on, what's your theory of change?  Yeah, so again consistent with the initial thesis that somebody or somebodies had to  take out their checkbook and start investing in the midstream so that the product from  the farm can reach the consumer.  And if you don't have that midstream in place then neither side gets to do as well as they  
**[0:14:51-0:14:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:14:51):**  could.  So today after not quite 18 months in business we have headquarters here in Minneapolis,  we have a team in Canada that manages our Canadian program, we have a team in Buenos  Aires that manages our South American program and we've created a partnership with a like  minded group out of Europe that gives us a global program in terms of being able to work  
**[0:15:17-0:15:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:15:17):**  directly with growers today in about 20 countries to be able to number one get them the best  price possible for the products they're producing and then on the other side working with consumer  groups, consumer companies, people that put branded product on the food shelf to take  their sustainability programs and be able to express those back to the farmers so that  those farmers who choose to participate in those programs sort of have a translator to  
**[0:15:51-0:15:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:15:51):**  get them there because the food companies have a challenge in terms of their sustainability  programs and how the promises they've made to their stakeholders and to their customers.  Most food companies don't directly touch the farm and most midstream groups that are sitting  in the same position in the universe as pipeline don't have an interest in making that connection.  They operate in a black box model where actually their stock in trade is not…  
**[0:16:22-0:16:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:16:22):**  The less you know the more I can exploit you.  No information shared so we took the exact opposite approach and said well that's not  what the consumer wants, we know that there are some farmers that would like to participate  downstream and understand what the consumer wants while the consumers want to participate  upstream and understand how their food is grown.  
**[0:16:43-0:16:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:16:43):**  So we said let's be completely transparent and create sort of a two-way telescope consistent  with the thesis of a pipe I guess and give both visibility to each other and strengthen  the food system in a way that hasn't really been done at least at a commercial scale before.  So again today like you said we have somewhere in the neighborhood of just over 50 people.  We have four grain elevators, two in Saskatchewan and two in North Dakota.  
**[0:17:18-0:17:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:17:18):**  We have a small oil seed crushing operation in Missouri.  We are exploring more elevators, exploring feed milling for animal feed for the organic  dairy sector in particular.  We're looking at elevators and grain processing facilities in Argentina and we again through  our European partnership we've got projects in Kazakhstan, Uganda, Malaysia and various  
**[0:17:48-0:17:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:17:48):**  other areas around the world.  All follow the same trajectory where we say we have boots on the ground.  So we are not simply buying and selling product but we are actually actively working with  the growers to try to help them improve their opportunity as well as to give our customers  assurance that the products that they receive are in fact from this particular farm or this  
**[0:18:15-0:18:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:18:15):**  particular region of farms.  So it's a very intensive business.  It does take more labor, more arms and legs than your traditional business but so far  the market signals are telling us that we're doing the right thing.  And in terms of a concrete example let's say I'm a grain farmer and maybe I'm already organic  
**[0:18:35-0:18:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:18:35):**  or maybe I'm thinking about and I knock on the door of pipeline food.  What would be our journey?  Yeah, so in the case let's say that you do not have any organic production but you've  been dreaming about it.  The three challenges…  
**[0:18:53-0:18:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:18:53):**  I've seen my neighbors doing it and I wanted to.  I would like my children to come back to the farm and they didn't want to at the moment.  Yeah, exactly.  That is very much about the next generation in many cases.  But there are three primary challenges for embarking on the journey and we've consistently  
**[0:19:12-0:19:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:19:12):**  uncovered these to the point that we're convinced these are the three sort of hurdles that have  to be overcome.  One is economic uncertainty.  There's a three-year period.  For the US organic program there's a three-year transition period.  
**[0:19:27-0:19:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:19:27):**  So you have to do…  I think it's exactly the same here.  So you have to do three times 365 days of agriculture that includes no prohibited applications  of materials.  So during that period of time there aren't very many market opportunities to get a better  
**[0:19:49-0:19:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:19:49):**  price for your products.  You're essentially still selling into the conventional market but you're doing everything  different on your farm as a farmer.  And so normally during that transition period you have some yield drag as you're learning  the new system and you don't have a better economic opportunity.  
**[0:20:09-0:20:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:20:09):**  So the first challenge is the economic peace and out of that then your traditional lenders  may or may not be willing to support that.  So we put together a toolkit of third-party partners from the banking side.  We continue to discover more and more bankers that are interested and willing to sponsor  if you will this transitional period.  
**[0:20:37-0:20:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:20:37):**  To finance I guess, right?  Exactly, transition finance.  We also have put together and continue to add to a portfolio agronomic support tools.  We ourselves are not agronomists.  We do not pretend to be but we do have one agroecologist on the team whose primary job  
**[0:20:58-0:21:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:20:58):**  is to identify agronomic support organizations or individuals in various places that can  be brought to bear in support of the grower who's embarking on this journey.  And then the third piece is a long-term view of the market because it's one thing to get  through the transition but then there's still the question of where am I going to sell my  organic product and what sort of prices am I going to get for it.  
**[0:21:27-0:21:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:21:27):**  So this is primary to our business.  We are able to put together a framework that supports the post-transition world.  Now that you are organic and now that you are producing organic, then we can provide  the market access through our day-to-day business model.  So putting all that together into a package that we can sit down and talk to an aspiring  
**[0:21:53-0:22:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:21:53):**  organic farmer, that would be the journey that we would embark on with you.  Now if you're existing organic, a little different approach, the thing that we look for with  the existing organic growers in addition to doing business with them here and now is to  explore whether they're interested in expanding their opportunity, their acreage.  And oftentimes the answer is yes, but I don't want to or I can't buy more land.  
**[0:22:27-0:22:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:22:27):**  So we are matching landowners with farmers who want to expand and essentially helping  them put together long-term arrangements, normally seven to ten year arrangements that  are sympathetic to the organic thesis in terms of the lease structure.  And again, we stand there as the market maker for the product so that the landowner has  confidence that the farmer will have the means by which to pay them.  
**[0:23:01-0:23:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:23:01):**  There are landowners increasingly that are more and more concerned about how their land  is managed and so this is sympathetic to their view as well.  So with existing organic growers, we look to help them expand by connecting them to  landowners that have an interest in the organic regenerative sustainability thesis overall.  But it's a lot of education on both sides because a lot of people know the words but  
**[0:23:32-0:23:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:23:32):**  they don't really necessarily completely understand the meaning.  So we're teachers, every day we're teachers out in the marketplace.  And just to unpack that a bit because you provide long-term agreements etc. for me that  when I'm through that journey because I'm going to be organic to basically make sure  I have off-take agreements etc.  
**[0:23:57-0:24:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:23:57):**  I read somewhere you're buying the whole rotation because as an organic farmer I'm going to  rotate probably quite a bit.  Does it mean also livestock or is it basically the grain and seeds etc. rotation that I'm  going to grow from year now but from year four or five etc. are officially organic?  It's the grains.  
**[0:24:16-0:24:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:24:16):**  So the livestock side is a very interesting, can be a very interesting piece.  We do have some of our farmers that are using livestock really as the transitional crop.  Yeah I see a lot of people experimenting with it.  Yeah it's a very interesting concept.  We ourselves do not get directly involved in the trade of meat, milk or eggs.  
**[0:24:43-0:24:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:24:43):**  So our concentration is really on those crops that are, I mean nothing is completely non-perishable.  That's the market that we try to stay with.  There are things that can be stored for a long time.  They may require some special handling and care but they are not, we do not deal with  meat, milk, eggs, produce, fruit or any of the fresh to table products.  
**[0:25:08-0:25:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:25:08):**  And on the already organic farmers that want to expand and you help them basically getting  proper lease agreements on other land, how does that work?  Do they get any, do they capture at all the value they create by regenerating that land  probably going to organic or going beyond organic?  Because I see a lot of opportunity there and a lot of tension at the same time because  
**[0:25:35-0:25:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:25:35):**  you are basically helping somebody else's asset grow.  And what do you see in terms of developments on that side?  A great question.  So we talk to people across the value chain in agriculture and everybody, well unless  you are against organic, there are still plenty of people that are fundamentally against organic,  
**[0:25:59-0:26:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:25:59):**  you know from an academic perspective, from an intellectual perspective understand of  course that you are building soil health and you are increasing pollinator habitat and  biodiversity and improving water quality.  But the valorization of that, all those good things is still very, very immature.  And what I mean by that is that the idea that land would trade for a higher value once it  
**[0:26:27-0:26:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:26:27):**  has been converted to organic should be supported by the economics associated with being an  organic farmer which is, at least in our part of the world or the parts of the world that  we operate in, our farmers make a lot more money per acre than their conventional neighbors.  And that should be what drives land value, but there hasn't been enough organic, organically  certified land change hands to positively prove that thesis.  
**[0:27:01-0:27:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:27:01):**  Maybe everybody likes to hold on it.  Well quite frankly the flip side of the same discussion is there is concern about, okay  if you are not doing traditional weed control and if you are not doing traditional fertilization,  maybe you are actually mining my soil and you are going to give me back a weedy patch.  So there is still some tension in that whole proposition about being able to monetize,  
**[0:27:33-0:27:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:27:33):**  valorize the actual improvement in the soil itself.  It's again, intellectually everybody understands it, but we are just too young in the practice  yet to be able to positively affirm the marketplace has not come, for the land anyway, has not  come along as quickly as the marketplace for the product.  And actually you touched upon a very interesting point as well when you mentioned the three  
**[0:28:03-0:28:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:28:03):**  pieces of the toolbox basically you are using.  I think you highlighted somewhere in one of the documentations a fourth as well which  comes back to this point and I am quoting here, perhaps one of the hardest parts of  this journey is to walk into a local coffee shop and getting a cold shoulder for doing  something different.  
**[0:28:20-0:28:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:28:20):**  How do you work on that psychology piece that I am going to be the weird one in the village  and the community because I am going organic and I am going to have a very messy field?  That's the hardest part for us to address directly.  We're not running a social agency here and we're not running a psychological agency.  One of the things that we are starting to do, again being a young company we had to  
**[0:28:50-0:28:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:28:50):**  do things in a particular order, but one of the things that we are starting to do is to  create a community and connecting various farmers to each other, giving them the opportunity  to understand that although they may be odd in the local coffee shop, in the global coffee  shop they are not that odd.  Having those connections to other farmers who have been through this journey and have  
**[0:29:15-0:29:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:29:15):**  come out the other side and are successful, that level of support obviously we can't force  it on people but we are creating those connections both to help the new farmer from a transitional  standpoint, sometimes the best mentor for them as an existing organic farmer, but also  to give them a community that they can interact with either over the phone or through events.  We have a lot of field days for example during the summer, we're very actively involved in  
**[0:29:48-0:29:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:29:48):**  that right now where we convene communities of growers that some of them know each other  but some of them don't and giving them a chance to form a peer group if you will between themselves  in order to establish the fact that they aren't maybe quite as odd as some of the local folks  might treat them.  It is very interesting when you find somebody who broke ranks a number of years ago and  
**[0:30:17-0:30:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:30:17):**  went organic a number of years ago and now they are successful, all of a sudden they  are not the odd one anymore but they are the one that is sought after.  There is a period of time, maybe three to five years where you may have this feeling  of isolation but if you are successful, particularly in the farming community, then you become  admired.  
**[0:30:41-0:30:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:30:41):**  You have to sort of go through the valley of death.  The yield drag is also your reputation drag.  Yes, right.  That's what the coffee shop is all about.  Everybody tells a story about the fishing trip in the form of yields, how big things  
**[0:30:59-0:31:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:30:59):**  are and how much they sold it for and blah, blah, blah.  Never on the input side of things.  Yes, right.  But you are right, that is a very complicated piece of this and quite frankly probably the  least discussed but probably the most real barrier when a grower starts thinking about  
**[0:31:23-0:31:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:31:23):**  going in this direction and he starts socializing the idea with his neighbors and his neighbors  all react negatively.  Oftentimes, then the grower just goes back to what they were doing before and it is easier.  We can't conquer the world.  We have to find those bright spots where we can be successful.  
**[0:31:43-0:31:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:31:43):**  I see a lot of parallels with the impact investing space which is clearly booming but in many  countries there are only a few that actually see their portfolio and their investments  and their family office as a potential to actually be a force for good and actually  invest, get return and be able to sleep at night and not having to worry that your money  is invested in certain pipelines that aren't so sustainable.  
**[0:32:10-0:32:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:32:10):**  If you are the only one or the first one to start there, mainly your family is very worried  they are going to lose a lot of return.  Your friends probably say why don't you buy a boat and go sailing and so it is a very  lonely field until you discover peer groups which luckily start to happen in a lot of  places because the tools are there to transition the journey to clean up your portfolio to  
**[0:32:30-0:32:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:32:30):**  actually invest it in very deep impact or lighter impact, etc.  That is all there.  The main question is are you able to do that journey which might take like an organic 3,  5 or 10 could take quite a long time but you need that support group because it is not  easy being the only one walking to the right when everybody is walking to the left.  
**[0:32:51-0:32:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:32:51):**  That is a very good parallel example.  I fully agree.  At a personal level we made the transition several years ago to first start taking things  out of our portfolio.  That is kind of the first step.  
**[0:33:09-0:33:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:33:09):**  First step I would say is looking at what is in it because most people actually don't  know to the full detail level if you have outsourced part of it.  First for us at a personal level is finding an advisor.  Finding an advisor that knew the journey and that could help us think through and demonstrate  to us, help us figure out what it is we really cared about and what we really wanted to accomplish  
**[0:33:32-0:33:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:33:32):**  over what period of time and with what risk return profile and etc.  To a certain degree we kind of play that advisory role in the business that we are in.  I don't want to overemphasize that point.  We speak with impact investors all the time.  I have been contacted by a long stream of folks that are somewhere on the continuum.  
**[0:33:58-0:34:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:33:58):**  I would say that even our first investor, our initial investor, although they weren't  well organized around ESG theme, their LPs, this is a private equity group, their LPs  were increasingly asking them to analyze their portfolio of investments as a GP and start  grading their investment portfolio along certain ESG frameworks.  We have actually been helping our primary financial sponsor understand what this means  
**[0:34:31-0:34:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:34:31):**  at an operating company level and have helped them create their ESG policy and now they  have hired at least one person full time for that endeavor internally.  They themselves are in transition between what I would consider to be a conventional  investment shop and a more ESG driven investment shop.  But there are some much more pure impact investment groups.  
**[0:35:01-0:35:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:35:01):**  Many times they are in the form of a family office who have come to us specifically along  those lines and they understand that we are not ourselves the agricultural producer but  once they understand the critical link that we are providing that makes it possible for  these agricultural practices to find a commercial return and they connect those dots we become  a very interesting opportunity.  
**[0:35:28-0:35:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:35:28):**  So I have those conversations all the time.  That's an important part of what we think our future is.  Yeah, because let's dive into that a bit.  You have only been around with this company, you have been around a lot more, about 18  months.  
**[0:35:44-0:35:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:35:44):**  What about the rest of, it's now June 2018, what does the rest of 2018 look like?  What are the main exciting projects you can share obviously?  Yeah, well it's actually relatively simple.  So we are in the northern hemisphere anyway, we are already done planting essentially.  So the work that we did prior to planting was to organize as many farm based contracts  
**[0:36:11-0:36:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:36:11):**  as we could and to go through a planning process with the organic farmers to help them understand  what the opportunities were for the various crops that could be grown in their area.  To your earlier point about rotation, rotation is a much more important part of the organic  framework than it is the conventional framework.  So you have sort of two different decision horizons.  
**[0:36:36-0:36:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:36:36):**  One is an agronomic horizon, i.e. what should I be doing agronomically in order to optimize  not just this year but the next several years in my system.  And then right alongside that is the economic piece.  Okay what will it cost me or how much can I make?  So it's a matrix type decision approach and we get to sit with the growers and do that.  
**[0:37:00-0:37:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:37:00):**  So that's all done now in the northern hemisphere.  We're embarking on that in our South American operations right now for the winter season  down there.  So now a bit of it is sit and wait because the crops are growing.  We're working with customers primarily right now to help arrange their supply chains for  
**[0:37:24-0:37:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:37:24):**  the upcoming harvest.  And because of the assets that we purchased we're still doing some basic capital projects  work to improve those assets and make them a little bit better than they were necessarily  when we bought them.  And we're always talking to people across the value chain about additional acquisitions.  
**[0:37:48-0:37:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:37:48):**  Today so far that has not meant additional companies that we are buying that have strictly  been assets but we are certainly in the market for acquisition opportunities.  Being as young as we are we're still struggling a bit with just some basic internal infrastructure  with accounting systems and things like that.  So still getting that sharpened up is important.  
**[0:38:10-0:38:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:38:10):**  Our fiscal year ends at the end of June.  So taking stock of what milestones we met or exceeded or missed and doing the planning  for the upcoming year.  But when you're in agriculture you – if you're in agriculture in a single hemisphere  you really have one cycle a year.  
**[0:38:34-0:38:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:38:34):**  So agriculture is maddeningly slow in the sense that it's not a factory where you can  run down and turn a knob every five minutes and make adjustments.  You have one time a year to get things done and you have to accept that cadence as a fact.  It's a little bit different because we have operations in the north and south hemisphere  so we get to do this twice a year.  
**[0:38:57-0:39:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:38:57):**  But nonetheless there are certain realities that you simply can't change.  So you have to – you get into this cadence of plan, plant, grow, harvest, handle, ship,  wash, rinse and repeat.  That's just the nature of the business.  So there's no real big exciting projects this year.  
**[0:39:21-0:39:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:39:21):**  We've got a couple of assets that we're looking at to expand our footprint.  But our program development work particularly on the farm – what we call our Farm Profit  Program which is our farm facing program goes on year round because once we get into post  planting then we start having these field day events and community building events and  things like that.  
**[0:39:44-0:39:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:39:44):**  So that's – it's not mundane by any means but it's not – it's incrementally improving  what we've already started.  I guess that's the best way to describe it.  It's a good rhythm and in terms of what means regenerative agriculture for pipeline  foods and what are your plans in that?  
**[0:40:04-0:40:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:40:04):**  You've mentioned organic is a way to express that.  Can you expand on that a bit?  So the term regenerative in the commercial sense is really very new.  Now if you go back to Rodale Institute many, many years ago the term was being used but  it wasn't being used as a commercial label.  
**[0:40:28-0:40:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:40:28):**  And really the power of a market to make change is when you can connect the demand side to  the supply side because the primary exchange is money.  And without money the universe of participants shrinks to only those who are mission driven  which is important but in my mind not sufficient.  So we're trying to figure out how the signals are going to get sent if you will.  
**[0:41:00-0:41:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:41:00):**  And regenerative is a relatively new signal in the commercial world.  We have a regenerative organic certificate now that some food companies are considering  adopting which is sort of organic plus.  The organic community itself is fracturing a little bit from those who think that the  current regulatory environment is sufficient and those who think that it falls short of  
**[0:41:27-0:41:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:41:27):**  meeting their own personal aspirations to be more environmentally friendly, more socially  responsible, and have a higher degree of governance over their business.  But this conversation about regenerative as a commercial communication tool upstream and  downstream on the value chain is still new.  Our approach at this point is a little bit of a wait and see not because individually  
**[0:41:57-0:42:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:41:57):**  as people we aren't sympathetic to many of the ideals expressed in regenerative conversation.  But again if the market signal does not turn into a commercial opportunity we believe that  the outcome is going to be too small to be measured.  So the commercial signal can come in many different ways.  Consumers are certainly the preferred mode but it can also come through the investment  
**[0:42:29-0:42:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:42:29):**  community because the investment community has the opportunity to use money again to  incentivize certain behaviors and you do not even need to have somebody who is mission  oriented to stare at a monetary opportunity.  I tell my team at some level we shouldn't care about motivation as long as the outcomes  are aligned with our business philosophy and our ethos.  
**[0:42:59-0:43:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:42:59):**  So if a person, if a grower for example is solely motivated by money and that's the way  that we can get that grower to behave in a different way that creates an economic opportunity  for the grower and an abundance of additional environmental outcomes, we shouldn't care.  We shouldn't be so altruistic that we need for the growers to stand up and salute some  sort of flag or some sort of icon.  
**[0:43:29-0:43:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:43:29):**  We should really care about the outcomes of the endeavor.  And so that's sort of where we are in the regenerative journey because it's still a  very new concept commercially even while we feel, I would say most of us anyway who work  here feel very strongly personally that the notion of regenerative certainly makes sense  and if the marketplace can at least align with that concept and certainly not penalize  
**[0:44:00-0:44:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:44:00):**  but if there's a reward system associated with it then we stand ready to use that as  another way to create good outcomes at the farm level.  But it's a tricky, regenerative is tricky right now because it is so new.  And do you see, I imagine that within your group of farmers you have an enormous spectrum  that some folks have been doing it for a long time and are maybe pushing the boundaries  
**[0:44:33-0:44:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:44:33):**  or are really going beyond organic quite a while ago.  Do you see them going into even more complex rotations, adding, I mean we've discussed  livestock a bit but tree cropping into it etc. also doing things that are not part of  your ecosystem and do you see them going beyond organic?  You know in the North American and South American commercial agricultural areas the answer is  
**[0:45:00-0:45:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:45:00):**  no.  We do see some of that in areas that we don't necessarily practice in at this point.  So at the small holder level where oftentimes there may be a corporate entity involved that  is deeply concerned for example about their raw material supply of cocoa or chocolate  or something more exotic that's typically not grown in a well-developed area, those  
**[0:45:28-0:45:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:45:28):**  types of schemes are I would say are more advanced than they are in Midwest US or Buenos  Aires province and Argentina for example.  So we haven't gotten that far yet at least at scale.  There's always projects, interspersed cropping, either multi-species cropping or using permaculture  as part of the rotation, experimenting with different water management systems.  
**[0:46:01-0:46:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:46:01):**  That's all pretty small scale stuff at the commercial level anyway.  That doesn't mean that it won't come.  Again, assuming that the market continues to ask for, the food market continues to ask  for a higher and higher value proposition and the market is willing to pay for that  value proposition or at least support, incentivize conversions or extensions then they'll take  
**[0:46:33-0:46:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:46:33):**  hold as they take hold.  Then the challenge in agriculture, the good news, bad news is the inertia that's built  into the one-year cycle means that sometimes you have to go through an entire generation  to see real change and it just simply takes time.  And with your history of carbon sequestration, etc., do you measure that level of detail  
**[0:47:02-0:47:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:47:02):**  also with the farms you work with now?  I mean, do you do the soil carbon tests, etc. to see, I mean, I don't know if there's a  market now in the US for those kind of ecosystem services, but is that a level of measurement  and transparency you also want to provide to your customers that end up buying the products?  Just in the last 24 months, just prior to us getting started as a company and continuing  
**[0:47:29-0:47:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:47:29):**  on now with a little bit more velocity, the whole soil health discussion has really, particularly  in the US, I mean, I'm impressed with how much that term is used because it really wasn't  being used outside of sort of the NGO activist world until just a couple of years ago.  So soil health, and that means a lot of different things, one of which is certainly organic  matter, which is often expressed as carbon, microbial activity is another marker.  
**[0:48:05-0:48:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:48:05):**  There are a number of chemical analysis that can be done.  And so with soil health being really the topic that's driving that conversation now getting  commercialized by major food companies and major participants in the value chain, out  of that conversation now the drive for measurements has started to take hold.  So before it was really about soil health as a promoter of crop yield.  
**[0:48:42-0:48:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:48:42):**  So the tests that were being done was to see primarily how's my organic matter moving from  year to year.  There was a number of micronutrient tests and a number of, in some cases around carbon,  but not so much.  But now that it's moved more, the soil health concept has moved more mainstream, the measurements  
**[0:49:05-0:49:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:49:05):**  associated with what soil health, how do you measure soil health is becoming more of a  commercial aspect of the business.  We still do not have, as far as I know, we still do not have a major food company that  has any sort of specifications that they've come out with.  But the indications are that we're moving in a direction in which, again, somewhat on  
**[0:49:32-0:49:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:49:32):**  a consumer-driven basis, that soil health, which includes the carbon component, is going  to be something that is, those attributes are going to be more sought after in conjunction  with the physical supply chain than they have been in the past.  Doing those tests is not, you're not breaking any new ground by doing those tests.  Those tests, we know how to do those tests.  
**[0:49:59-0:50:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:49:59):**  It costs money.  The question is what is the motivation for doing those tests?  And up until now, it's been mostly around understanding how the practices are affecting  yields.  But now increasingly it's becoming how are the practices affecting these other environmental  
**[0:50:19-0:50:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:50:19):**  outcomes.  So if we would have this conversation again in a year from now, chances are there would  be at least a few major companies that have made some statements around soil and hopefully  actually also translated those statements into concrete questions and asks from their  suppliers.  
**[0:50:39-0:50:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:50:39):**  Yeah, absolutely.  Year over year over year, this will become more, I hesitate to use the term mandate,  but conceptually more of a mandate in the supply chain.  So this is where we start talking about, okay, which technologies are we going to use?  How important is blockchain in this whole world?  
**[0:51:01-0:51:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:51:01):**  But before you go into the technology of how you're going to-  Somebody needs to ask it, yeah.  Somebody needs to ask it, right?  You have to have a, what I learned in my software days is you better be able to put it on paper  before you start coding it, right?  
**[0:51:15-0:51:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:51:15):**  So we're still in that putting it on paper phase in this market.  This will not, ultimately this will not be a technology problem.  Technologies exist already to do a good job of capturing and expressing the data, but  what is the motivation?  And the craft question always comes up, who's going to pay for it?  
**[0:51:39-0:51:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:51:39):**  Yeah, no, it's an interesting question.  I have discussions here with farmers in Europe and some forward thinking companies are starting  to ask those questions.  Like we've seen carbon sequestration, what does it cost per ton to put it down in an  old gas field?  
**[0:51:58-0:52:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:51:58):**  And they start to slowly ask some forward thinking farmers, what would it cost to store  it in your soil?  And the same discussion is starting to happen around water, because it's a huge issue in  the Netherlands, the amount of rain, and especially the intensity, and there's simply not enough  space or not enough money to make the rivers a bit wider.  
**[0:52:19-0:52:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:52:19):**  And also the public authorities that are taking care of that system, which obviously is hugely  important because otherwise it would be underwater, are starting to pay attention.  Maybe we can use the water storage capacity of healthy soils and what would that look  like?  Very very early on discussions, about a year from now, there will probably be some pilot  
**[0:52:41-0:52:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:52:41):**  somewhere and somebody starts to figure out some of those things.  So both water quantity management in excess and in drought.  Yeah, drought is not so much.  In summer it is actually.  Both of them, plus quality which you mentioned before obviously, are all three around water  
**[0:52:59-0:53:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:52:59):**  and then your biodiversity is another one which tends to touch upon consumers a bit  more.  But yeah, water on all sides is a huge opportunity and a huge risk.  Correct.  In the US, one of the things that has become apparent, more apparent now to the rural communities  
**[0:53:21-0:53:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:53:21):**  is that they're groundwater.  So in addition, take away the surface water discussion and go to groundwater.  Many of the rural community wells that would be supplying a small town are impaired in  terms of water quality.  There's no secret about what the source of that impairment is, it's clearly agricultural  
**[0:53:44-0:53:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:53:44):**  leaching and it doesn't matter until it matters.  And all of a sudden, we have towns even here in Minnesota where their community source  of water is undrinkable from a safety standpoint.  And this is not due to diseases and pathogens, this is simply due to chemical pollution.  So once that starts to actually impact you and you have relatives in town even though  
**[0:54:15-0:54:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:54:15):**  you may still be out on the farm, you realize that some of what you've been told about these  systems being benign and not being risky for the environment may not be quite so true.  So there's a whole other level of conversation that I think will be the ultimate accelerator  of conversion.  Now if I could snap my fingers and turn the entire world organic overnight, I do not believe  
**[0:54:47-0:54:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:54:47):**  at this point, I wouldn't have said this a few years ago, but I do not believe at this  point that you would see any decrease in production.  And in fact, I would argue that over the long term, this is the only way that things can  work over the long term.  But you'd see an immediate impact in terms of environmental outcomes and I think people  
**[0:55:06-0:55:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:55:06):**  would be astounded and understand that they've been fed a bunch of stories that aren't necessarily  true about the need for using synthetic production methods to be able to feed the world.  This whole feed the world concept is a red herring.  It's driving me nuts.  And I think the healthcare aspect on the water, the general ecosystem around us, plus the  
**[0:55:32-0:55:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:55:32):**  nutrients in your food, the more comes out of that and the more I see some research early  on from healthy soil to healthy produce, healthy gut systems and thus healthy people.  There's a very clear link there, which we always knew, but slowly comes back and we  have some scientific research to prove it, which is a huge, I mean that drives many of  of course you have to do organic in a proper way.  
**[0:55:56-0:56:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:55:56):**  And we are going to see some examples of it not done in a proper way as a sort of a pushback  from the industry to like, look, look, you can never feed the world because he lost 20%  of his yield.  But there are always exceptions like that.  I think that healthcare and the ecosystem part in general, as we now slowly see, I mean,  
**[0:56:13-0:56:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:56:13):**  there's a paper out from Montana on the fallow, the summer fallow practice and what actually  impact, if you only do cover crops, what's the impact on the local climate?  And I should see a drop in temperature in the summer and more moisture in the air, which  are two of the main dangers of climate change to high temperatures and not enough moisture  and thus drought.  
**[0:56:36-0:56:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:56:36):**  So you start to hopefully see also like if I actually change enough farms to organic  and beyond organic, we could somehow stabilize or reverse some of the huge challenges that  this climate craziness brings with it.  Well, and that's one of the reasons why we're interested primarily in row crops, because  it's only through the broad acre system that you're going to, you know, and this is another  
**[0:57:01-0:57:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:57:01):**  interesting point of tension is because you've got what I'll call the legacy organic crowd  who are typically farming smaller acreage and very intensive, you know, maybe 40 different  crops on an acre, right?  But it's mostly designed for local use and fruits and vegetables.  And that's great.  
**[0:57:28-0:57:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:57:28):**  And not grain.  But it's great.  I mean, that's the food I want to eat.  And I'm glad that those programs are up and going.  But that is not going to make a systemic change on a local, regional or certainly global level.  
**[0:57:45-0:57:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:57:45):**  You have to get the broad acre involved.  So you know, to us, the only way we get paid ultimately is through our handling and processing  and transportation of broad acre crops.  But it's also the only way that we think that that you can actually put a dent in the current  trajectory is through broad acre schemes.  
**[0:58:06-0:58:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:58:06):**  So it's not the sexy side of agriculture, but it's we think the most important in terms  of making these transformations.  We'll make it sexy.  I will keep repeating it.  And just in terms of pipeline foods, whatever you want to share, obviously, but what size  
**[0:58:24-0:58:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:58:24):**  I mean, you're 50 plus people.  Just to give an imagination, how many hectares are you working with or how many tons or if  you want, how much money have you raised just to give a bit of an understanding what kind  of size you're dealing with?  Yeah, so I mean, so these some of these figures are estimates.  
**[0:58:44-0:58:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:58:44):**  But in our most recent review of the acreage that we are currently working with, North  America, I believe it's 1.4, give or take 1.4 million acres.  In Argentina, it's about 150,000 acres.  Best of world through our European partnership, which we take credit for each other because  that's the way that we've structured our deal.  
**[0:59:18-0:59:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:59:18):**  That's a much harder number to get our head around.  We know that, for example, we've got a Sesame project in Uganda that is 60,000, give or  take small holders.  Each one of those small holders has give or take a half a hectare.  That's just a single project.  
**[0:59:40-0:59:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=0:59:40):**  But measuring these things are tough, I would say.  No, no, obviously, but just to have a grasp of more or less the size and not asking the  half a hectare or acre dimension.  In terms of sales for our fiscal year 19, which starts on the 1st of July coming up,  we are anticipating sales of product in the range of $150 million to $175 million.  
**[1:00:16-1:00:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:00:16):**  I cannot share with you precisely how much money has been invested in the organization,  but there's a lot more to go.  When you start with private equity, you understand that there's a clock ticking.  The group that we chose, I think we did a very nice job of determining who to work with.  Because when you take on investors, now you've taken on more than just money.  
**[1:00:42-1:00:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:00:42):**  You've taken on a relationship.  There were many investors that were interested in writing checks for our thesis at the beginning,  but I realized that the upward management that I would have to deal with to work with  these folks.  It's key, yeah.  
**[1:01:01-1:01:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:01:01):**  It's key to time consuming.  But even our group, they're in the business of growing businesses and then moving on.  Yeah, because I was going to ask your timeframe as you are in agriculture and regenerative  and sustainable agriculture takes time.  Is this a 10 year?  
**[1:01:21-1:01:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:01:21):**  What kind of long term mission focused?  How do you lock into that if you take on even a patient private equity party?  Yeah, so we're already now discussing, we've got some very specific investments that are  appealing to very specific pools of capital with a mission orientation, an impact orientation.  I would guess that within the next 12 months, we will already start accepting limited investments  
**[1:01:51-1:01:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:01:51):**  from those groups.  Already starting to build a path towards what I'd call the next-  I mean like specific vehicles, et cetera, to put money to work.  So, there's already this sense of, look at ultimately the ownership of this business  from a financial standpoint should be in the hands of those who have an evergreen view  
**[1:02:16-1:02:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:02:16):**  and want to perpetuate and are interested in the very long term.  But many of those are risk adverse.  I mean as you know in the impact space, the challenge of the quality of the investment  opportunity or the maturity of the investment opportunity are two of the key issues in the  impact space.  
**[1:02:39-1:02:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:02:39):**  And it's no different in agriculture than it is in other components.  But now that we have a little bit of time under our belt and we can demonstrate that  we are making progress towards some of the milestones that we set out and initially advertised,  some of the initial conversations we had with impact investors weren't necessarily as financially  sophisticated but are much more sophisticated in other means and therefore need a little  
**[1:03:09-1:03:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:03:09):**  bit more maturity of the platform into which they're investing.  We are now reconvening with those folks and I do expect within the next 12 months that  we will have additional investment into this organization from impact investment institutions  whether it's again family office or in some cases we're talking to some foundations.  With a specific long term view and then might at some point the private equity group needs  
**[1:03:39-1:03:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:03:39):**  to move on and that's then possible.  And I see that a lot.  I mean you really need to stage it and find the right capital for the right moment but  then how do you structure it in a way that the mission is locked in but you can still  raise capital.  
**[1:03:52-1:03:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:03:52):**  I mean those are a few juggling balls to play with.  Just to finalize because I want to be conscious of your time as well.  If you would be, I mean imagine there's a room full of very smart impact investors listening  to this podcast who are ready to move into soil.  They've read the books.  
**[1:04:08-1:04:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:04:08):**  They've been to Rodeo.  They're ready.  What would be your, without giving investment advice, what would be your path?  Your advice to look out for and to orientate and basically to get started?  That's a tough one to come up with a spot answer.  
**[1:04:29-1:04:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:04:29):**  So I obviously have a bias.  I think that one of the things that sounds like I'm pitching pipeline but one of the  things I think is that...  You went through that process and started pipeline.  So there's a very, I mean that's what you obviously thought after you could have retired.  
**[1:04:50-1:04:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:04:50):**  It's very hard for any investment community to participate in agriculture in the space  in which we're in.  I don't mean even the sustainability space.  I'm talking about the midstream asset based commodity space because most of the large  scale projects, if your mandate is that you can't do it, you can't write a check for under  
**[1:05:13-1:05:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:05:13):**  $20 million let's say just as a number.  It's very, very hard for you to find something to invest in assets in agriculture.  You can buy businesses.  You can certainly buy land.  But the midstream piece is very tough to get access to because there's a whole bunch of  
**[1:05:35-1:05:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:05:35):**  really, really tiny projects that would be too small and then all the big stuff is owned  by the big guys and they don't need your money.  So Cargill is not looking for impact investors or any investors frankly to come along.  They have a bank.  So we represent, and I had to learn this during the fundraising process, I learned how to  
**[1:05:58-1:06:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:05:58):**  present ourselves as an aggregating platform of a bunch of relatively small individual  components that in total represent the opportunity to take a relatively large check and put it  to work and we deal with all the paper cuts associated with the smallness of the individual  pieces.  So in the impact space where a lot of things are still being tried and may not be proven  
**[1:06:26-1:06:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:06:26):**  to be commercially successful, what you're looking for clearly, this is true everywhere  is you're looking for a strong management team, but the ability to pivot during the  inevitable curves in the road, particularly in the early years of an organization, is  critical in the impact investment space and even more so the diversity of the management  team in terms of their backgrounds so that they can think about things in a more holistic  
**[1:06:58-1:07:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:06:58):**  sense is critical.  We have people from the airline industry.  We have people from the processing industry.  We have people from traditional agriculture.  We have people from the financial industry.  
**[1:07:08-1:07:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:07:08):**  We've got this wonderful melange of skill sets so our conversations can really span  pretty much across the spectrum of what you might not usually think about in business  but can be much more important when you're dealing with trying to create a new paradigm.  And I know that that sounds all very wonderful, quite ambiguous.  That's why I don't give investment advice.  
**[1:07:37-1:07:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:07:37):**  But I think at the end of the day, the quality of the management team and their experience  in some aspect of execution prior to whatever it is you're considering investing in is critical.  I think it's an excellent point to look at.  From our conversation before, looking at scale, what do you want to achieve?  Impact is great, but if you're looking at small scale organic farms of a few acres but  
**[1:08:06-1:08:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:08:06):**  you want to actually change local climate, you need to look at many, many, many.  And then looking at an experienced management team to actually change, to get a new paradigm.  And probably, I mean, I would add long term view because this is a generation and generations  work.  So unless you're in it for the long run, probably agriculture in general is not a good idea.  
**[1:08:30-1:08:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:08:30):**  I would absolutely agree with that.  One of the things, I mean, again, selfishly, what we would love to see is we would love  to see a pool of capital that has somehow been formed that is expressly intended to  be used to help the conversion process.  And I would suggest that it can be an evergreen pool that regenerates itself.  
**[1:08:54-1:08:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:08:54):**  So another form of regenerative, so it's not a one time capital.  And the way that it regenerates itself is it participates in those out years in terms  of the profitability.  I toyed with a concept that's essentially a green bond concept until I realized that  to put money together in a green bond at scale, then I have to put the money to work right  
**[1:09:18-1:09:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:09:18):**  away and we're not quite there yet.  They are coming.  They're coming.  I'm talking to some people.  I hope to have an interview up for a climate bond actually in India that's taking, I have  
**[1:09:31-1:09:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:09:31):**  to say the numbers right, I think about 8 million smallholder farmers to beyond organic  as they call it, natural budget farming.  And there's a region that takes on that challenge and they are probably going to raise 2.3 billion  through BNP Peribas for that climate bond.  Of course, it's a state government doing it, etc, etc.  
**[1:09:51-1:09:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:09:51):**  But it shows that we're moving in a direction where serious capital, hopefully if that one  is successful, still takes probably a year.  But we're moving into the direction of serious capital, which is quite exciting.  Yeah, no, I fully agree.  And I'm envious that that can be put together in a place like India.  
**[1:10:11-1:10:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:10:11):**  And yet we seem to struggle to put that together, to put even a small scale version of that  together in some place like the USA.  Investment in soil health, you can create a whole wheel of fortune, if you will, with  lots of slivers of benefits all coming from essentially the same thing.  And so if you can pool capital and that capital can be put to work to help sponsor the initiation,  
**[1:10:44-1:10:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:10:44):**  because our biggest problem in the US is we do not have enough acres that are organic  to support our domestic demands.  So we're importing, now granted, we're always going to import things we can't grow here,  but we import 75% of our organic corn and soybeans.  And let alone whether those imports are truly organic or not.  
**[1:11:05-1:11:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:11:05):**  That's a whole different discussion.  But the point is we are the king of soybeans and corn, and yet we're importing organic  soybeans and organic corn because we don't grow enough here.  So one of the ways to accelerate that conversion is to have sympathetic capital available that's  not looking to make a one-time investment for a one-time return, but is looking to perpetually  
**[1:11:27-1:11:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:11:27):**  spin that wheel.  Transition finance.  Transition financing.  And so we've had several people, and they're still investigating this, putting together  essentially a soil health bond or organic conversion bond.  
**[1:11:41-1:11:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:11:41):**  So at some level the name may or may not be important, but the whole concept is.  No, the name is important because it signals a lot of things.  Yeah.  Yeah.  So I'll hold up my hand and say we'd be more than willing to work with investors who are  
**[1:12:00-1:12:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:12:00):**  interested in that.  And our job in that would be to get the acres up and going.  Our job in that would be to commercialize the product.  Our job in that would be to bring other support systems to bear to ensure success, to identify  the farmers that are most likely to succeed.  
**[1:12:19-1:12:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:12:19):**  If I had a, again, starting with a small pool of capital, I think we could make this engine  race a lot faster.  That's very exciting.  We need another hour to discuss fund vehicles and investment machines and programs, et cetera.  But I want to be conscious of your time, Eric, and I want to thank you for now.  
**[1:12:40-1:12:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:12:40):**  And thank you so much for taking the time to explain and share your journey and the  very exciting future that lies ahead.  Thank you, Kim.  I appreciate it.  You just listened to an interview with Eric Jackson.  
**[1:12:52-1:12:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:12:52):**  I hope you enjoyed it as much as I did.  Lots to cover, but so much more to dive into.  I definitely plan to check in with him again and see what happened to the regenerative  agriculture movement on big acres and row crops.  Thank you for making the time to listen to this podcast and making it all the way till  
**[1:13:07-1:13:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:13:07):**  the end.  I hope you enjoyed it as much as I did.  If you found the investing in regenerative agriculture and food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  
**[1:13:20-1:13:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:13:20):**  It's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast, and it only takes a few  seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  join my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  
**[1:13:39-1:13:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:13:39):**  You can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or in the description  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  
**[1:14:07-1:14:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:14:07):**  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After a hundred interviews and more than a hundred hours of audio asking the question  how to put money to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011  and recording these podcasts since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  
**[1:14:26-1:14:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:14:26):**  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision-making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  What questions should you ask?  
**[1:14:37-1:14:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:14:37):**  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  
**[1:14:45-1:14:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:14:45):**  For whom is this course?  You, the soil builders and investors in this space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management consultants, etc. etc.  
**[1:15:04-1:15:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:15:04):**  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  
**[1:15:20-1:15:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:15:20):**  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  that among the listeners of this podcast we have people with very different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  
**[1:15:38-1:15:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:15:38):**  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to ride along.  
**[1:15:51-1:15:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:15:51):**  We're gonna look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  
**[1:16:13-1:16:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:16:13):**  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're gonna look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  
**[1:16:27-1:16:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/07/18/eric-jackson/#t=1:16:27):**  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  