### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2018-18-03)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  Welcome to another episode of investing in regenerative agriculture, investing as if  the planet mattered.  
**[0:00:21-0:00:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:00:21):**  Podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  
**[0:00:42-0:00:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:00:42):**  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  Before we get started, I've been recording these interviews next to my day job and I  will definitely continue to do so and release about an episode a month.  
**[0:01:02-0:01:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:01:02):**  But at the same time I would love to take this further, share more interviews, there  are many more stories to share on investing in regenerative food and agriculture.  More depth, improve the quality, maybe even doing some video series.  So I started a Patreon community which makes it easy to support creators like myself.  If these podcasts have been of value to you and if you have the means, I invite you to  
**[0:01:24-0:01:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:01:24):**  support me and make this happen.  For more information please find the link to my Patreon account in the description below.  And now, without further ado, the interview.  Enjoy!  Welcome to Investing in Regenerative Agriculture, Investing as if the Planet Mattered.  
**[0:01:40-0:01:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:01:40):**  In these interviews I'm talking to people who are scaling up the regenerative agriculture  sector either by increasing the inflow of investment capital or by scaling up the enterprises  on and in the ground.  And by doing so exploring what it means to be an impact investor in regenerative agriculture.  Why am I focused on regenerative agriculture?  
**[0:01:59-0:02:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:01:59):**  Because the roots of so many of the issues we're facing in the world today can be found  in agriculture.  From droughts, migrant flows, obesities, social issues, water wars, climate change, hunger,  they all have a connection to how we treat the land, grow food and what we eat.  I hope you will enjoy this interview as much as I did making it.  
**[0:02:17-0:02:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:02:17):**  If you have any comments please share them on Soundcloud or Twitter and if you think  this content is relevant or interesting for someone else please feel free to share the  interview.  You're going to listen to an interview with Martijn Blom, an entrepreneur turned impact  investor who now focuses most of his attention on food companies in Southern Africa.  
**[0:02:35-0:02:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:02:35):**  We discuss his journey, the fight against maize monocultures in Malawi and Zimbabwe,  fancy tea companies and his newfound passion for soil.  Enjoy!  Welcome to investing in regenerative agriculture, investing as if the planet mattered.  I'm Koen van Zijen, your host.  
**[0:02:49-0:02:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:02:49):**  Today I'm talking to Martijn Blom, senior manager investor relationships at Hevos Impact  Investment, the impact investment arm of a large Dutch NGO.  Their Hevos food and lifestyle fund is focused on making investments into food companies  in Southern Africa.  Welcome Martijn!  
**[0:03:03-0:03:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:03:03):**  Thank you Koen!  So to start with a personal question, how does an entrepreneur end up in making investments  into food companies in Southern Africa?  I started up years ago as an entrepreneur and while doing that I, you could say, fell  in love with the power of entrepreneurship to create things and not just to create economical  
**[0:03:27-0:03:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:03:27):**  value but also to create impact value and after I was able to sell my company I started  to get involved into investment.  In the first instance just in any startup that I thought could be, that I could add  value to, that I could help scale but growing more and more into impact investments because  some of the companies we had were selling water filters to the bottom of the pyramid  
**[0:03:56-0:04:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:03:56):**  or even supporting musical artists in Africa to record good records and actually these  companies were doing better and were giving me more satisfaction than companies that were  just creating an app in the Netherlands.  And yeah, by that way I got involved into impact investment and even more understood  about how you could change society, change the environment for the better, also for the  
**[0:04:29-0:04:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:04:29):**  worse but in the case of the companies I invested in for the better and that way actually gradually  rolled into investing in food entrepreneurs and understanding more about the problems  in the food sector and the things that could be changed there and together with Hevos that  has a long lasting reputation on supporting food entrepreneurs and whole food ecosystems  started to invest in food entrepreneurs.  
**[0:05:00-0:05:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:05:00):**  And can you describe a bit what's your role at Hevos Impact Investments, how did that  start because you actually helped them set it up and what the food and lifestyle fund  is focused on?  Yes of course, Hevos back in the days was looking out for getting involved into impact  investment, they wanted to innovate and find new ways on how they could reach their goals  
**[0:05:27-0:05:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:05:27):**  and impact investment was one of the DIDs that they were exploring and I got into touch  with Hevos at about the same moment that I realized that investing directly into companies  in the developing world was what I liked and what I did best and what I had most passion  for but also having trouble to actually coach the entrepreneurs on such a distance and wanting  to make a bigger impact, wanting to create a bigger portfolio than I was able to make  
**[0:06:00-0:06:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:06:00):**  by myself together with my business partner at the time.  So when I decided I wanted to get involved in investment in more a fund type structure,  Hevos was coming with me and they were saying yeah we are looking into impact investment,  how could we and should we and those two moments kind of came together at a certain moment  as it happens.  
**[0:06:20-0:06:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:06:20):**  So we helped Hevos, we advised them on how they could set up an impact fund and then  we implemented that and when I helped design and build the house I wanted to live in it  as well.  So now together with Jaap Spreeuwenberg, part of the main team of Hevos Impact Investments,  Jaap is our CEO, he is mostly related to all the reporting towards Hevos the foundation  
**[0:06:47-0:06:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:06:47):**  as well as monitoring and managing the investment process.  My role is more on the investor side because of my background in the Investors Club network  of Business Angels in the Netherlands and wider in the whole network of impact investors  and that's how we together are building this organization right now.  And some, because you set up two different funds, one of them is the Food and Lifestyle  
**[0:07:16-0:07:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:07:16):**  Fund, what's the theory of change with the investment thesis of that fund?  We want to invest in early stage companies, post revenue, pre scale, exactly that level  of companies that we've invested in, that I've invested in before when I was active  more as a business angel.  In the food sector where we aim for four types of impact, the obvious one when you're investing  
**[0:07:45-0:07:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:07:45):**  in countries like South Africa and Zimbabwe is that we want to create more and better  and more diverse jobs, work floors.  So we both look to the growth of the type of jobs, we both look to the growth of the  number of jobs, we look to the quality of the types of jobs, we look to the people that  are employed and we look to the diversity of the people that we employ.  
**[0:08:12-0:08:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:08:12):**  And the other three are more on content and on food and we aim to resolve three problems  that are widespread in Africa, one is food loss.  So the second is more on bringing closer together the producers with the market, so making it  able for retailers to communicate with small holder farmers so that we have one app for  example that's called Greenfingers Mobile that really brings together the retailers  
**[0:08:43-0:08:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:08:43):**  in the bigger markets in South Africa with small holder farmers in for example Malawi  and Mozambique to source, to make it easier for the retailers to source their products  from the hinterland and actually getting better prices for the small holders in the backland.  But you could also think tracking devices or stuff like that.  The other two things that we, the two ways that we look to make impact are more geared  
**[0:09:12-0:09:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:09:12):**  towards regenerative I guess, which is soils, we want to help create better soils, so on  the one hand preventing soils to degrade and the second thing is actually support soils  to get better by actually investing in companies that source product or sell product or bring  to market products that could help create better soils in the beginning of the chain.  And the second thing is that we want to create more healthier diets locally, so bring back  
**[0:09:45-0:09:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:09:45):**  authentic and local food and local grains and kind of fight the monocultures that are  more and more in case in these countries.  So what I heard for example is that in Malawi 80%, 80% of all the vegetables that are being  produced on the land is mice, 80%.  And this is while there are a wide number of varieties, local varieties of grain that  
**[0:10:17-0:10:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:10:17):**  are kind of got lost in the, over the years and by creating more awareness on healthy  foods and nutrients, but not just telling it in the NGO way, it's better you eat these  kind of grains, but actually create companies that make a brand that people want to go for  because they want to create a better and more healthy life for themselves.  In that way promoting and making local grain sorts cool again if you will.  
**[0:10:49-0:10:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:10:49):**  Which is a movement that seems to be happening all around the world.  How do you, I mean you alerted a bit, how do you create a company or how do you invest  in a company around that, for instance in Malawi on local cool grains or cool seeds?  I think if you're on the retail side of things, which we do, which is the one end of what  we look at, then you see those movements grow particularly in the cities.  
**[0:11:19-0:11:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:11:19):**  So the big cities in South Africa, Cape Town and Johannesburg, but also to a lesser extent  in Zambia and Lusaka or in Zimbabwe, in Harare.  You see these movements of more healthy, more biological, more organic food movements come  up as well.  You see the companies providing those vegetables as well.  
**[0:11:40-0:11:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:11:40):**  So it's on the retail side, it's investing in those companies that are managing to make  green food, organic food cool again and actually that way creating a market.  So it becomes more than just this is organic and healthy, it becomes it's organic and healthy  and cool.  That's the type of companies we want to support because we think and we believe it's our theory  
**[0:12:05-0:12:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:12:05):**  of change that these companies are the front runners of the change you want to see in these  urban societies.  You're not reaching everybody with this movement.  So what you see is that a lot of these companies are also talking to more government programs.  Definitely if you look at the more poor countries like Zimbabwe and Malawi to that extent, and  
**[0:12:31-0:12:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:12:31):**  it's about school feeding.  And if you can bring in little changes into the school feeding program, so these kids  get something else than mice in some schools at least, then you're making a change step  by step.  But it's a growing movement that we can scale on.  
**[0:12:49-0:12:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:12:49):**  And then the second thing is also because we're not only on the retail side of things,  but we also look to companies that can actually help farmers to produce these new type of  vegetables and actually all type of vegetables, but this new type compared to the compared  to the mice economy, if you will.  And that's actually by investing in companies that are providing stuff to the farms to make  
**[0:13:19-0:13:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:13:19):**  this possible.  So for example, we had a big event around seed companies, where there's a lot of local  seed companies from Malawi and Zimbabwe actually came together to discuss with each other how  they could bring more local seeds to the market and actually increase the demand for local  seeds.  
**[0:13:41-0:13:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:13:41):**  So you get these local grains back on the fields again, because that's where it starts.  And the good thing to see actually, because I had a chance to look a bit into their economics  in the past weeks, is that these companies are rather big.  They are in revenue, they are already a lot bigger than many of the startups and the innovative  companies that we have looked at.  
**[0:14:06-0:14:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:14:06):**  On the other hand, comes that you see that there is some lack of knowledge in some of  these companies in order how can they scale?  So they have a decent business on a certain level that is already quite respectable, but  they have been on that level for many years and if you ask questions on how they strategize  their growth to the future, which I think in this case is really important that these  
**[0:14:33-0:14:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:14:33):**  companies can scale because only then you can create, you can in Malawi for example,  say that that's not 20% that is grown by local vegetables or local grains, but you can make  that 30 or 40% and even go up.  For that to happen it needs the companies to scale, but if you ask questions about their  strategizing that there's still a lot of silence I would say.  
**[0:14:59-0:15:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:14:59):**  These people rather don't answer than say they don't know.  So there's a big challenge for us in that type of companies and investing in that type  of companies.  And a huge opportunity I imagine, because this event was organized by Hivo, so I think  it shows a nice cooperation or how a big NGO works together with in this case their investment  
**[0:15:19-0:15:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:15:19):**  arm.  But of course now the work starts as the investment team and the Impact Investment Fund is how  do you invest in these companies that don't have a perfect growth plan and a 40 slide  PowerPoint deck ready as some of the startups might have.  Now exactly that sums up our problems sometimes exactly.  
**[0:15:38-0:15:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:15:38):**  And I think you can only work in these countries if you have a large organization on the ground  in our case an NGO because they are there for a long time.  They have worked with these companies for a long time.  They've built a relationship with them.  So the trust already is more or less there.  
**[0:15:55-0:16:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:15:55):**  Although their working together was mostly into grants sometimes, programs very often,  knowledge sharing, these type of things, but never around investment.  So there's a lot of new developments that need to be discussed and this is really a  new way, us coming in as investors, really a new way of cooperating for these organizations  and will work for some and won't work for others.  
**[0:16:20-0:16:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:16:20):**  And the good things is so we have the long lasting relationship because of the Hivo Foundation.  We know them.  We are quite easy to get.  It's quite easy for us to get on the table and then we need to find out which one actually  have the ambition to scale and to bring this to a larger scale so we can really become  
**[0:16:39-0:16:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:16:39):**  the anti-Monsanto of Southern Africa and want to join us in that effort.  And that means that we need to work together and actually educate each other.  So we as investors educate them on what we are looking for and how that would work and  how they could scale together with us and how we could help them in that.  And on the other hand, they could educate us like how they've been working so far and  
**[0:17:11-0:17:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:17:11):**  if that new scaling is something they ambition and would fit into the local culture.  So that's quite an exciting engagement with each other that takes investing in these countries,  makes it a bit more difficult than investing anywhere else in the world or makes it more  difficult than invest in this part in the world in the more innovative companies, if  you will, or the more tech type companies that are already more aware of what investors  
**[0:17:39-0:17:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:17:39):**  are looking at.  But on the other hand, that's also where you can make a difference, where you can make  the change.  We haven't decided yet, that's the other thing, we haven't decided yet on how to approach  that exactly.  
**[0:17:51-0:17:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:17:51):**  So it might be that we are for now also discussing with the foundation like can we bring together  programs on getting investor ready and what it is about and what are the documents you  need to also provide a good investment case to RIC to actually make an investment possible  and having an investor in, what would that mean for them?  So they have a complete overview to be able to say if that would be the future step for  
**[0:18:19-0:18:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:18:19):**  them as well.  The second is we also might just make that first investment to get into a company to  get to know how they work and to get to know which product actually works and would help  us to bring things to scale together, which is a bit more risky, but being personal and  speaking outside of the Hefos box, I think that would be a way forward as well because  
**[0:18:47-0:18:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:18:47):**  sometimes you just need to start doing and if you do that with small amounts it's a calculated  risk I think you could and should take definitely while working with these companies.  And there's obviously a lot of learnings there.  And I would love to dive a bit deeper into the school feeding as well.  I think it's a very interesting angle not only because of the scale of the potential  
**[0:19:10-0:19:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:19:10):**  impact but also the scale of the amount of children in any given southern African country  that are eating every day at school.  What are your, have you made an investment there?  Are you looking at it?  What are your interactions at the moment there?  
**[0:19:25-0:19:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:19:25):**  What made you look into that?  If you look at companies that are making products that process products that come from grain  or maize or that type of corn based products, then school feeding programs are always one  of the big secure income.  So a lot of these companies when they start next to trying to get that product with a  
**[0:19:51-0:19:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:19:51):**  hip logo in the supermarket is that they also look into these programs because they can  provide for these companies in these countries a very stable long term income.  If you are looking into these more organic and more local grains and bringing those back,  if you can do that at the school level that would mean that people in a later stage also  when they are maybe less impact minded could keep on continue using that product because  
**[0:20:19-0:20:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:20:19):**  it's also about habits and what people learn to eat and what people like to eat.  So if you can bring in this new organic and local foods, if you want to make them more  common again for everybody to use then if you can reach children in an early stage they  might want to get back to these products when they grow up.  So it's also for reasons of increasing this market and fighting maize model culture.  
**[0:20:49-0:20:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:20:49):**  It's an interesting one.  The thing that we run into sometimes as well is that these school feeding programs are  heavily subsidized often UN based in some countries, sometimes government based.  So there are also some dependency issues that make it less interesting for the companies  to actually create better qualities because people are buying it anyway.  
**[0:21:21-0:21:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:21:21):**  To do the effort of actually launching the product in the supermarket for broader markets  because if you have the base income there is sometimes not a necessity to also bring  a product to the market which is actually what is interesting as well.  And because these companies get a more secure type of income it also leads that some companies  are just happy with the school feeding program income that they have and there's no ambition  
**[0:21:52-0:21:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:21:52):**  to scale that further or to bring it to the next level anymore.  So you really, the school feeding is an interesting thing for all companies working in the corn  and maize and industries in these countries.  So you should definitely look at that.  Also if you're looking to the more organic companies but then you need to have the right  
**[0:22:10-0:22:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:22:10):**  entrepreneur with the right skill set that actually knows how to leverage the secure  base of income to use that to scale also the other products.  But that's a bit my opinion.  So there's a lot of advantages to it and there's some disadvantages that come with it as well.  Like it's usually the case actually.  
**[0:22:29-0:22:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:22:29):**  Yes, that's always the case.  So actually to make a small jump because you did invest in a company not based on school  feeding programs etc. but based on tea.  Can you explain a bit on that side why did you make that investment and why it is an  interesting example of better processing of interesting companies you can find in southern  
**[0:22:52-0:22:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:22:52):**  Africa?  Yes, this is a lady in South Africa that actually originally came from media, decided to start  a company in the product that she loves which is tea.  She has the potential because she comes from media, she has a bit of potential to become  the South African Jamie Oliver of tea.  
**[0:23:15-0:23:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:23:15):**  So there's also a great media potential on what can be done.  But for us the reason to invest in this company really is that she's able to make a very,  very, very high end, high quality product from wild rooibos tea.  In that way because she knows how to source the best quality of rooibos tea, she can provide  better income to the corporations that create these organic rooibos.  
**[0:23:49-0:23:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:23:49):**  Rooibos is a wild plant, it's hard to cultivate.  You need to keep the landscape as it is, you need the landscape up.  If you cut the tea plants, it's hard to put them back.  It's an original and local plant.  So that's all the things that I love.  
**[0:24:11-0:24:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:24:11):**  What you see however is that much, the vast majority of rooibos and wildbos leaves the  country in South Africa as a commodity.  A commodity where there's more and more needs.  So people tend to pick too much or pick leaves that are too early.  So the quality is a typical commodity problem.  
**[0:24:33-0:24:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:24:33):**  The quality becomes less of a thing than the quantity.  And actually by creating this high quality tea locally, it's getting the best value for  the best of what the products can offer.  That's one thing.  And the second is actually processing it to all different kinds of plants with local herbs  
**[0:24:55-0:25:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:24:55):**  that create some very beautiful high end teas and actually adding the value locally in South  Africa.  So if it's exported, all the added value is created in South Africa itself, which generates  again employment, economic development, but on a very good product in the first place.  And actually helping this lady to scale her company has been quite an opportunity and  
**[0:25:28-0:25:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:25:28):**  quite a fun journey so far.  And to look at the journey of the fund and the journey of your work, if you look at one  year ago compared to now, what has changed both internally but also in the wider field  of where you're working?  Have you seen a big change both in the fund and also in let's say food and agriculture  
**[0:25:54-0:25:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:25:54):**  in Southern Africa?  The first question is quite easy to answer.  So I think we are more able to create better quality of deal flow than a year ago.  And on the second hand, also, we are better able to see, realize and also address the  problems of investing in some of these companies.  
**[0:26:24-0:26:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:26:24):**  So both identifying the opportunity and addressing the risks and investing in these companies  has gone a lot better.  So the whole program of supporting entrepreneurship by Heavos Foundation wasn't there to the extent  that it is now a year ago.  And now we already had a couple of these events bringing together on a certain team, so seeds  
**[0:26:49-0:26:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:26:49):**  and processing companies from the region where we invest together and actually discuss on  an open level also with them the opportunities of what we can bring as investors and what  they should be able to bring in for being able to invest.  So the conversation is ongoing and the ways best to address are something that we will  unravel in the next year.  
**[0:27:17-0:27:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:27:17):**  But yeah, we have a lot wider area and able to generate more high quality deal flow and  also see the opportunity sometimes beyond all the documents that we need.  For example, like I explained with the seed companies.  So that really changed within the fund, but also changed within the fund that we've been  able to address more investors.  
**[0:27:47-0:27:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:27:47):**  So that's nice.  That's also a challenge for the next year to actually being able to get the fund to  15 to 50 million where we targeted to be.  In the wider food system of South Africa, that's a bit more difficult.  What I've learned personally more and more and which for some of the listeners and definitely  
**[0:28:11-0:28:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:28:11):**  for you Coen is already something you've known for a long time, but it's actually the added  value I would say, I would almost call it the added value in impact on the phenomenon  of soil.  When I learned about soils, and we put it in as one of our impact because the people  at Tivon said soil is really important.  
**[0:28:35-0:28:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:28:35):**  I thought, yeah, the soil must be important because if you can't grow anything on poor  soils then how can you support agriculture?  This was a bit of the beginning, but talking to you and talking to other people that are  in the food movement, also talking to the people within the heath of spore and more,  makes me realize that soil next to water and clean energy is one of the big topics actually  
**[0:29:02-0:29:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:29:02):**  to fight climate change.  But also soil is one of the main providers of the actual nutrients and actually those  nutrients that make our food more healthy and more tasty.  So the importance of having good soils and keeping good soils and regenerating good soils  is something that has really changed in last year.  
**[0:29:34-0:29:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:29:34):**  There's really a knowledge that it's evolved in myself over the last year, which makes  me more eager to really find a company that more directly can address to this problem  over the next year.  It's something I hope to achieve in the next year.  It's very exciting and I definitely will check in.  
**[0:29:55-0:30:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:29:55):**  I think a lot of investors are looking for those type of companies in all different places.  How can you put money to work to build soils in a way that makes sense both for the soil,  the farmer, the company and the investor?  That puzzle is not an easy one as we've seen and heard many, many times in these podcasts,  but it's definitely a crucial one.  
**[0:30:18-0:30:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:30:18):**  It's very exciting to follow that.  And so to put your investor or also your entrepreneur head on actually, what do you see as the two  or even one of the most important barriers for investing in this space in regenerative  agriculture?  What would be needed to get this to a much broader scale and not just the in-crowd that  
**[0:30:39-0:30:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:30:39):**  we always talk to?  I think that's a difficult one because it's also about knowledge and habits and how people  look at food and look at nutrition.  If you see one grain from the other, you need to be an expert to know that one grain has  far more nutrients than the other.  
**[0:30:59-0:31:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:30:59):**  So it's really about educating on the one hand and I think about marketing on the other  hand as well.  If you can make it more cool, if you can actually build on the healthy movements that you see  around the world, that could be an interesting opportunity to bring this food sector to a  next level and also to find companies where you can invest in as an investor.  
**[0:31:27-0:31:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:31:27):**  I think on the other hand, what you see because you have this in-crowd of people as you call  it that is already working on these topics is that for an investor, you already have  quite a lot of different products with different revenue prospects with different possibilities  that you can build your portfolio around this topic already quite well.  Many of these investment organizations are early stage or starting as an investment opportunity,  
**[0:31:57-0:32:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:31:57):**  but there's quite a lot of different, more long term, more mezzanine based or more on  the end companies that actually sell it to the market like we do with Hivos.  But there are different stages and different possibilities to invest in soils and in regenerative  agriculture already.  I think if you want to.  
**[0:32:22-0:32:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:32:22):**  It's making it more popular or making it more common knowledge like the clean energy sector  that will be the barrier and the challenge because clean energy, everybody knows about  clean energy now and everybody also knows that the discussing about what is getting  you the best value for money is almost becoming a no brainer quicker and quicker.  That's because we learned and that's because the market developed and that's because the  
**[0:32:50-0:32:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:32:50):**  technology behind it developed.  And I think that knowledge and market needs to go through the same process and advocating  it will help getting also the knowledge about soil being one of the new big topics getting  out.  The whole thing that now I can't find his name.  
**[0:33:19-0:33:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:33:19):**  The American movie star that has made soil his main concerns that will definitely help  to make it more popular.  Leonardo DiCaprio.  Leonardo DiCaprio.  Of course.  
**[0:33:29-0:33:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:33:29):**  Of course.  Who else could it be?  So I completely agree.  I think the movement, although it's a much more technical thing, the renewable energy  movement, but offers great parallels to what needs to be done or what could happen in the  
**[0:33:45-0:33:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:33:45):**  next few decades around soil.  I mean, the first solar panels were a horrible investment.  They still working in many cases.  So actually they weren't that bad, but the payback times were interesting.  They went through a lot of booms and busts and the big money came in.  
**[0:34:01-0:34:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:34:01):**  But now I'm able to invest 25 euros or 50 euros or 100 or 200 into very different platforms,  products to put money to work in renewable energy.  So that market has come.  Although still, I mean, if you look at the percentages, we're here at the moment in the  Netherlands, I think we're at six or seven maximum of percentage of renewable energy  
**[0:34:23-0:34:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:34:23):**  on the total mix.  So there's a lot of work to be done, but at least for investors, as you said, that's not  completely the case in soil and regenerative agriculture.  But there are hundreds of options to put your money to work in different risk, return technology,  places and all of that.  
**[0:34:39-0:34:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:34:39):**  And in soil, it starts to come.  I see a lot of people starting up funds and vehicles.  I see a lot of people buying land.  I see a lot of people looking at organic micro-eats, additives that you can spray on your soil plants  that are completely regenerative and make them go up faster.  
**[0:34:59-0:35:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:34:59):**  I see food processing companies that try to make soil sexy and put it actually in supermarkets  and say soil matters.  And you think, OK, that's something weird.  We've never seen that before.  So there's this whole, but yeah, it's the same discussion.  
**[0:35:11-0:35:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:35:11):**  We're at 0.01 percent or something of the market and of the land.  But you can definitely plot a lot of these same moments that are that that were maybe  when we were at the beginning of the renewable energy, we thought we'll never get there.  And now we can see that theoretically we can get there and you see it speeding up.  You can see it.  
**[0:35:35-0:35:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:35:35):**  You can see it coming and you can you can see more more innovative ways of financing  these type of soil developments.  But you can also see more people that have that have a lot of that have a lot of land  in which and where they want to create better, better soils upon that they they get different  earning models as well.  
**[0:35:55-0:35:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:35:55):**  So there are some investments to be made.  It's not just the products that come from the land, but also the knowledge around it  can help governments.  I heard the story about actually in the Netherlands that the soils that are better, that have  more organic matter work better to kind of absorb water.  
**[0:36:14-0:36:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:36:14):**  So you can actually help create you can actually keep the the the the grounds and the and the  soils for agriculture while it would absorb more more water.  So you don't have to give back to nature.  You just can work the land in a more nature full way and that would also absorb more water.  So the government will also be paying to get these experiments to a next level.  
**[0:36:42-0:36:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:36:42):**  And if you can invest in those lands, that's almost like that's almost like a real estate  investor.  And the investment type don't even becomes new then.  They also have people like that are working with blockchain or with new ways of financing  or or intermediate ways of financing or more long term, the forestry investments that we  
**[0:37:03-0:37:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:37:03):**  have that we've heard of.  And if you put that together, you can see that you can build a very diverse asset class  already with type of things that can help you regenerate soil or to protect soil or  to be active in a very organic way of of agriculture that can actually make a difference and doesn't  necessarily have to is definitely more healthy and doesn't necessarily have to be less productive  
**[0:37:31-0:37:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:37:31):**  than than what's happening in the regular or should I say old fashioned chemical?  Yeah.  So actually, that's a perfect end question.  There's a there's a full room of smart impact investors that are that are on the journey  of understanding soil and the potential and potential and regenerative agriculture, et  
**[0:37:54-0:37:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:37:54):**  cetera.  What should they look out for?  Where would you not giving them investment advice, obviously, but where should they start  if they are listening to this?  And yeah, yeah, of course, I what's a what's a nice start of the journey?  
**[0:38:11-0:38:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:38:11):**  The boring question would be look at your own investment strategy and kind of look at  which products there that that fit that.  Because if you're a more long term patient investor, then definitely just invest in the  lands that are being regenerated.  Right.  
**[0:38:24-0:38:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:38:24):**  So that's that's kind of it's also kind of what what an investor really wants to as his  own strategy.  It's a bit of the boring answer.  But what I would say is that another part of that would be to clean up your portfolio  first and see where you're not regenerating soils for sure, like fossil fuels and none  
**[0:38:39-0:38:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:38:39):**  way work against it mining.  Yeah.  Where are you working against it?  Mining literally or mining in agriculture or some fossil fuel companies that probably  are part of it?  
**[0:38:49-0:38:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:38:49):**  Yes.  Not as an investment advice, of course, but divest from Monsanto a buyer, for example.  That might help.  Do two at the same moment.  That might help.  
**[0:38:59-0:39:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:38:59):**  Yeah, it's probably the same the same share right now.  So it makes it easy.  But yeah, there's of course, there's a lot to do.  But I think it's also the fun thing actually is if you want to kind of put your toe in  the water in regenerative agriculture.  
**[0:39:16-0:39:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:39:16):**  That's probably a lot of that's probably a product that fits the rest of your product.  So that fits what you're familiar with.  So so what we are we are doing at Heavis Impact investment is really to invest in early stage  companies.  That's because of my background as an entrepreneur and a business angel.  
**[0:39:31-0:39:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:39:31):**  And how can you regenerate soils if you are investing into these early stage companies  that need to scale and stuff like that?  That can only be done if you are if you are considering if you look at soils from from  a complete organic agricultural value chain from from from soil to soil to fork, if you  want to call it that way.  
**[0:39:55-0:39:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:39:55):**  And then and then you can invest in the companies that are actually providing the seeds, for  example, as we mentioned, or that are processing everything that comes from the land to a product  that makes it new and cool and good again to eat to eat this healthy, local, authentic  foods.  The baobab always remains remains like this big story, I think.  
**[0:40:20-0:40:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:40:20):**  It's a it's a it's a fruit that they were actually considered by the by the local people  everywhere as as poor people's food, but it had an amount of nutrients in it that's that's  unknown.  It has like 12 times the amount of vitamin C as as an orange, I was told.  So there's there's a lot of a lot of health to be to be captured from these from these  
**[0:40:42-0:40:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:40:42):**  fruits that were just laying rotten on the field while the farmers were building mice.  And that that's that's a way if you can if you can bring the end product of this baobab  or the baobab powder, if you can can actually brand that in such a way that it becomes a  nice taste enhancer for people that want to live more healthy or you can add it to the  to the school feeding program so you can get porridge with with a bit of a bit of a bit  
**[0:41:11-0:41:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:41:11):**  of a vitamin orange like taste to it.  You're actually doing you're actually doing it all.  You're providing more income to the farmers without them having to do much more extra  work.  You get healthier, healthier diets on schools and in the supermarkets and you can create  
**[0:41:30-0:41:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:41:30):**  a company that could actually make make quite a good return from from actually processing  these these baobab fruits.  So there's a lot of opportunities also within the company investments, but they are they  are broader there as well.  I think it's a perfect end to this podcast.  
**[0:41:48-0:41:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:41:48):**  Thank you so much Martijn for your time and good luck with investing in seed companies  in Malawi and bringing tea to a broader market and investing in baobab powder if that ever  happens.  Yes, that would be great.  Thank you for joining in this early early Monday morning.  
**[0:42:05-0:42:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:42:05):**  Yes, thank you for this interview.  You just listened to an interview with Martijn Blom of Hevos Impact Investments.  I hope you learned something about investing in regenerative food and agriculture companies  and why Southern Africa is so interesting.  Thank you for making the time to listen to this podcast and making it all the way till  
**[0:42:21-0:42:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:42:21):**  the end.  I hope you enjoyed it as much as I did.  If you have any comments or ideas for future guests, please share them on Soundcloud or  Twitter and if you think this content is relevant or interesting for someone else, please feel  free to share the interview.  
**[0:42:33-0:42:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:42:33):**  And I hope to see you again here soon for more of these type of interviews.  If you found the investing in regenerative agriculture and food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few seconds.  
**[0:42:52-0:42:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:42:52):**  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  join my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or in the description  below.  
**[0:43:12-0:43:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:43:12):**  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video  course investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  
**[0:43:55-0:44:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:43:55):**  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to put money  to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011 and recording  this podcast since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework, what to focus on with the podcast, how have  
**[0:44:17-0:44:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:44:17):**  we picked interviewees, what questions should you ask, what is happening in the space, what  should you read, what should you listen, what should you watch, how to approach this space.  For whom is this course?  You, the soil builders and investors in the space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  
**[0:44:37-0:44:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:44:37):**  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management, consultants, etc.  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  
**[0:44:57-0:45:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:44:57):**  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you.  
**[0:45:10-0:45:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:45:10):**  And I'm very aware that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very  different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  
**[0:45:25-0:45:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:45:25):**  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides.  So you don't have to write along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  
**[0:45:45-0:45:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:45:45):**  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  
**[0:46:04-0:46:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:46:04):**  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  
**[0:46:16-0:46:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/08/23/martijn-blom/#t=0:46:16):**  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  