### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2018-29-05)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  You won't be listening to a typical episode of this podcast.  We'll take a deep dive into greenhouses for the production of vegetables.  
**[0:00:21-0:00:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:00:21):**  Why?  Because the middle class in Asia, Eastern Europe and the Middle East is booming and  they're going to their local supermarket and they're demanding fresh and healthy vegetables,  which are now trucked or flown in from thousands of kilometers away.  So get ready for a lesson on soil-less, high-tech greenhouse production, CO2, freshness and  
**[0:00:38-0:00:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:00:38):**  urbanization.  Enjoy!  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture.  Investing as if the planet mattered.  Podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  
**[0:00:52-0:00:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:00:52):**  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  
**[0:01:11-0:01:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:01:11):**  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  Before we get started, I've been recording these interviews next to my day job and I  will definitely continue to do so and release about an episode a month.  But at the same time I would love to take this further, share more interviews, there  
**[0:01:32-0:01:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:01:32):**  are many more stories to share on investing in regenerative food and agriculture.  More depth, improve the quality, maybe even doing some video series.  So I started a Patreon community which makes it easy to support creators like myself.  If these podcasts have been of value to you and if you have the means, I invite you to  support me and make this happen.  
**[0:01:52-0:01:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:01:52):**  For more information please find the link to my Patreon account in the description below.  And now, without further ado, the interview.  Enjoy!  Welcome to Investing in Regenerative Agriculture, Investing as if the planet mattered.  I'm Koen van Zeyen, your host.  
**[0:02:07-0:02:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:02:07):**  Today I'm talking to Dirk Aleven, CEO of Foodventures.  Foodventures develops and operates high-tech greenhouses, close to markets and cities with  large vegetable imports, like Kazakhstan, Turkey, Japan, Georgia and Ukraine.  The focus of agriculture in this case is mostly focused on the regeneration of local communities,  bringing production and jobs closer to the consumer and not so much on the soil aspects.  
**[0:02:31-0:02:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:02:31):**  But we're going to ask Dirk all about this.  Welcome Dirk!  Thank you.  Thank you Koen for hosting me.  And to start with a personal question.  
**[0:02:38-0:02:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:02:38):**  How did you end up in the world of building high-tech, sustainable greenhouses in places  like Ukraine, Japan, Georgia?  Well that's a good question indeed.  You must be wondering about that yourself every now and then.  Yeah I'm not educated in agriculture.  
**[0:02:56-0:03:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:02:56):**  My first company, which I started back in 2004, that was a meet-in.  We were organizing all kinds of business trips for Dutch entrepreneurs to emerging markets.  So we were traveling with groups of entrepreneurs to China, to Brazil, India, Eastern Europe,  all kinds of places.  And one of the things I noticed was that almost in every big city and emerging markets we  
**[0:03:24-0:03:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:03:24):**  were entering, the international retail was already active.  And they were complaining about the supply of fresh vegetables.  So basically they could get all the supplies they needed.  But the issue of fresh vegetables was pretty big.  So I noticed that the Dutch are one of the best worldwide in producing fresh vegetables,  
**[0:03:46-0:03:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:03:46):**  distribution of fresh vegetables.  The whole chain is one of the most professionally organized industries around the globe.  So we started looking into that.  And the first idea was to see if we could support the industry to export their technologies  to new markets.  
**[0:04:08-0:04:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:04:08):**  But that was already done.  We saw pretty high-tech greenhouses built everywhere around the globe.  In fact 90% of the Dutch or 90% of the greenhouses worldwide outside of Europe are supplied by  Dutch technology providers.  But the real issue was that nobody knew how to use these new technologies.  
**[0:04:30-0:04:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:04:30):**  So we visited several greenhouses in Eastern Europe which were underperforming.  Yields were, well, 30%, 40% less than expected.  Which is a problem because these are huge investments per hectare.  We're going to dive into some numbers later.  But if you're underperforming here it really is a problem as a unit because they're high-tech  
**[0:04:56-0:04:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:04:56):**  and require a lot of cash to start, a lot of capital.  And then you don't want to be 30%, 40% under your targets I guess.  Absolutely.  It's absolutely a huge issue.  The issue would be even bigger if it was in the Netherlands.  
**[0:05:09-0:05:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:05:09):**  And then for sure they would face financial crises followed by bankruptcies.  The fact that they didn't in those markets was simply because the prices for the goods  sold was pretty high.  So the low yields were compensated by extremely high prices.  And that was explained by the fact that these markets are net importers.  
**[0:05:31-0:05:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:05:31):**  So they were importing, well, Russia as a good example is importing tomatoes from Europe  as far as Israel, Spain, the Netherlands, shipping them for like 3,000, 4,000 kilometers  by refrigerated trucks, bringing them to the consumer.  So you can understand that the prices for the fresh vegetables are extremely high.  Another example is Asia, whereas Malaysia is importing by air freight Dutch thrust tomatoes.  
**[0:06:03-0:06:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:06:03):**  So the export price of the Dutch tomato is roughly 80 cents, where it ends up at $4 per  kilo in Malaysia.  So just to get it right, they are flying in Dutch tomatoes from greenhouses here in the  Netherlands because there's not the level of sun you might expect to Malaysia to supply  supermarkets there.  
**[0:06:24-0:06:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:06:24):**  Well, everything is there in Malaysia.  And everything is flown in.  Wow.  So technically, you could absolutely produce in Malaysia, but nobody does it today.  So they are forced to import it.  
**[0:06:36-0:06:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:06:36):**  Same goes for Singapore.  Perhaps you've seen the news that the Dutch growers are extremely proud on the fact that  they can supply bell peppers from the Netherlands to China air freight.  So it's ridiculous.  So basically, we're...  
**[0:06:51-0:06:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:06:51):**  Let's not even start about food kilometers there.  So this was the reason that we got interested in this industry and we've noticed the huge  lack of know-how on how to grow in high-tech greenhouses.  So we decided to do it ourselves.  I had no know-how in growing either, but I was lucky enough to involve Dutch growers  
**[0:07:16-0:07:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:07:16):**  into my business.  So we locked in some really experienced Dutch growers who already had experience in growing  outside the Netherlands as well in Mexico and in Russia and among other countries around  the world.  And we started our first project in Ukraine, building a greenhouse to produce salad, which  
**[0:07:36-0:07:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:07:36):**  we are supplying to the local supermarkets in Ukraine.  So that answers your question a bit on how I ended up building greenhouses in Eastern  Europe by accident and by seeing the need that we didn't only want to export technology,  we wanted to invest ourselves, commit ourselves and transfer the know-how to use the technologies.  Because otherwise it would be one of those many cases where something very high-tech  
**[0:08:06-0:08:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:08:06):**  is shipped from, in this case, a very high-tech country, it arrives, maybe it works for a  bit and then either it falls apart or starts, like you said, underperforming, which we've  seen a thousand times in history and probably will see a thousand times in the future as  well with something high-tech coming somewhere where there is no, let's say, good ground  for something high-tech.  
**[0:08:27-0:08:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:08:27):**  I mean, unless you're operating it yourself.  In other industries you do see better examples where technology and know-how go hand in hand  and operators are more professionally organized and connect themselves with the technology  providers.  But in the oil industry, who would even consider buying high-tech equipment without an operator  
**[0:08:48-0:08:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:08:48):**  involved?  I mean, that's absolutely nonsense.  So how come it's not like that in the high-tech greenhouse industry?  I guess because the industry in the Netherlands has developed over generations as a mom and  dad business.  
**[0:09:02-0:09:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:09:02):**  So it's mainly family-owned businesses, rather like smaller scale.  Now we're entering a phase where there's more consolidation and the companies are getting  bigger.  But so far it has been literally thousands of growers in the Netherlands organized through  corporations.  
**[0:09:22-0:09:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:09:22):**  So not having the right scale nor the interest to go abroad.  So the operators themselves, they love the Netherlands, which I do as well, but they  feel comfortable here and they have the whole industry organized in the Netherlands.  And they have no interest in going abroad.  Investing in Ukraine or Kazakhstan or whatever, it requires a different skill set than just  
**[0:09:47-0:09:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:09:47):**  being a grower or just being the best grower.  And to look at Ukraine as an example, can you explain why, first of all, why the shift  to supermarkets and thus also more off-season vegetables and why you cannot just grow them  outside on a non-high-tech, not inside a high-tech greenhouse?  Why is it such an interesting country and such an interesting example for your approach?  
**[0:10:14-0:10:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:10:14):**  So I guess what happened so far is that in Ukraine people had the time to grow some of  their vegetables in their backyards.  And now more and more families are depending on two incomes.  They're living inside the cities.  So there's a huge urbanization like everywhere in the globe.  
**[0:10:35-0:10:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:10:35):**  So they don't have the time to go outside the city, go to their dachas, their family  gardens to grow vegetables.  So they start buying the vegetables in the supermarkets.  And once they are in the supermarkets, they expect, first of all, fresh vegetable.  They expect it to be available whenever they go to the supermarket, not depending on the  
**[0:10:58-0:10:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:10:58):**  season.  And they expect it to be safe because they think and expect that the procurement department  of a supermarket is paying attention to quality and food safety.  So that's the consumer end of the part of the case.  In terms of supply, there are still a lot of smallholders which do not make that transition  
**[0:11:22-0:11:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:11:22):**  from the traditional seasonal production to more extended production throughout the year.  So there's a gap between the more professional and modern consumers and the old fashioned  way of producing tomatoes and cucumbers.  Now it looks, for some of them, it looks like it has a sort of a nice sound of having outside  grown vegetables on a smaller scale.  
**[0:11:55-0:12:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:11:55):**  But reality is that those suppliers, they use a lot of chemicals because they have a  huge influence of weather and insects outside.  And there's absolutely no traceability.  So in fact, they can be good supplies, of course, if you know them.  But there is also a big group who wants to have a decent yield out of open field production.  
**[0:12:20-0:12:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:12:20):**  But they have a huge pressure of insects and all kinds of diseases which they fight with  a high doses of chemicals.  So we think that there's a better alternative if you do it in a protected environment, a  controlled environment and have the right skill to prove your traceability of the products  and the safety of your products.  
**[0:12:42-0:12:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:12:42):**  And that means in this case, close to the consumer or relatively close to the big urban  areas you are building or you have built in this case, high tech greenhouses and are operating  them as well.  Absolutely.  Yeah.  
**[0:12:56-0:13:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:12:56):**  If you compare that with other industries like bakeries or something, I mean, you would  be surprised if the supermarkets buy their breads from thousands of households who are  baking their breads somewhere in the backyard.  But that's in fact what's now happening in Ukraine with vegetables.  So we think it's more logical that you have more organized and larger scale production  
**[0:13:21-0:13:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:13:21):**  of vegetables close to those markets who are depending on the imports right now.  And when you look at, I mean, the moment somebody says greenhouses, everybody immediately thinks  or not everyone, many people would think energy use, sustainability.  I mean, you already highlighted a bit on herbicides and pesticides.  Can you talk a bit about the energy use and sustainability in general as obviously the  
**[0:13:43-0:13:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:13:43):**  sector in the Netherlands has been moving away from heavy gas and heavy energy use?  I mean, what are the things you've seen and the things you have put to work in this case  in Ukraine and in other countries?  So I totally agree that a few decades ago nobody was caring about energy inputs in the  Netherlands.  
**[0:14:05-0:14:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:14:05):**  And that's the reason why some people have bad memories or a bad impression on the industry  itself.  Like today everybody is, well, from a sustainability angle and from a financial angle looking for  alternatives on energy because the energy use in the end makes like around one third  of the cost price of your product.  
**[0:14:31-0:14:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:14:31):**  Plus consumers start asking how do you produce your goods and what is your source of energy.  In Georgia we are using geothermal energy.  So in fact we're almost not using gas at all.  And the gas that we use, we use the carbon dioxide coming from it as a fertilizer for  the plants.  
**[0:14:54-0:14:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:14:54):**  So we're CO2 neutral.  In Ukraine we use biomass as an alternative energy for two reasons.  First one to be more sustainable in our heating of course, but second one is that the gas  is expensive in Ukraine so we also want to have alternatives.  And again the gas that we use is purely from the need of CO2.  
**[0:15:17-0:15:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:15:17):**  So we're almost CO2 neutral there as well.  And in Kazakhstan we're using cogeneration.  So by cogeneration we're using flare gas.  That's gas which normally is burned, simply burned after the oil production.  So not used at all.  
**[0:15:35-0:15:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:15:35):**  These are the big flames you see on top of pipes if you happen to live close to oil production  or refineries.  Exactly, exactly.  And we're using that gas and generating electricity from it and the remaining heat which is coming  from this electricity generation we're using for heating the greenhouse.  
**[0:15:54-0:16:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:15:54):**  So if I look at the industry today it's in the genes of every grower to think about energy  saving.  And the suppliers, if you look at the energy consumption today it's almost like 60% less  than 20 years ago.  And that's one of the reasons why the old greenhouses are now disappearing in Ukraine.  
**[0:16:20-0:16:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:16:20):**  They were still used to very cheap gas in the Soviet Union so their gas consumption  was extremely high.  And they're super leaky basically.  Yeah, super leaky and they didn't have any strategies on how to use energy.  So today the know-how is developed as such in the Netherlands that the growers they know  
**[0:16:40-0:16:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:16:40):**  when heating is absolutely required, when it's sort of less comfortable and when it's  not needed.  So they look at the absolute need and say well in these periods of the day we absolutely  need heating.  There's no alternatives on it.  
**[0:16:57-0:17:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:16:57):**  Or they might consider well we could use a little bit less and that results in extremely  lower gas consumption.  But it does sound funny or weird that I'm burning gas to make CO2, something we're all  trying to fight to have less of, for my plants in the greenhouse to eat.  You can imagine for non-greenhouse people that it does sound a bit weird.  
**[0:17:25-0:17:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:17:25):**  If we would only use it for generating CO2 I would totally agree.  What we do use is we work the other way around.  So we say how much CO2 do we need and in what period.  And then we burn the gas.  With that burning process we create heat which we store in a heat storage tank.  
**[0:17:46-0:17:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:17:46):**  And that heat storage tank we can use the heat at the moment we need it.  For instance, in the greenhouse, all the greenhouses that we build right now, they have these heat  storage tanks.  During the day when the plant is extremely active they use a lot of CO2.  So we start heating or burning the gas.  
**[0:18:06-0:18:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:18:06):**  We store that heat in the heat storage tank and when the plant is asleep in the night  but still needs a nice temperature we use the heating which we have stored in the heat  storage tank.  So it's not that we are purely burning the gas for the purpose of CO2 dosing.  It's a duo use basically.  
**[0:18:26-0:18:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:18:26):**  Yes, absolutely.  And would it be because I've heard and I'm following that industry just a bit like the  carbon capture industry that's trying to drastically lower the price of capturing CO2 from the  air and making it available for industries like maybe the greenhouse industry.  Of course the bottling industry that needs it for your Coca-Cola bottle.  
**[0:18:48-0:18:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:18:48):**  Would it be something, but then you don't have the heat, would it be something in the  future that you could be as an industry client of this new emerging industry that hopefully  for a very low price will be storing will be liquefying CO2 so you can use it?  Is that something you're dreaming of?  Yeah, absolutely.  
**[0:19:04-0:19:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:19:04):**  Because it results directly in higher yields.  So the plants immediately transform CO2 into tomatoes or cucumbers.  So we would absolutely be buying CO2.  As a result, the beauty of a greenhouse is that it's a direct user of heating and direct  user of CO2.  
**[0:19:26-0:19:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:19:26):**  So you could connect those greenhouses to, for instance, energy plants or any industry  which has a waste heat.  The disadvantage today is that if you have waste heat only, you still have a lack of  CO2.  You could supply that if you could take those two things apart.  
**[0:19:44-0:19:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:19:44):**  That would be fantastic.  At the moment, there's no CO2 for a good price for you.  Yeah.  Well, there is.  So it's a matter of math.  
**[0:19:53-0:19:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:19:53):**  So sometimes we are interested in buying it.  You see that happening in the Netherlands where the industry is more developed.  So distribution of liquid CO2 is better.  That's a bit of a problem in countries like Georgia and Ukraine and Kazakhstan where the  industry is not developed yet to supply us liquid CO2 at a reasonable price.  
**[0:20:15-0:20:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:20:15):**  Otherwise, we would definitely consider not using any gas.  Very, very interesting.  And when you look, let's tackle another big one, people that say everything should be  grown in soil.  What's your normal reply to that?  
**[0:20:29-0:20:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:20:29):**  So we would need a drastic reduction of consumption of vegetables.  I mean, let me take an example in Georgia.  We took over a greenhouse which was underperforming and it was producing in the soil in a greenhouse.  So we took over and we started, the first thing we did was taking samples of the soil  and it was absolutely exhausted after three years already.  
**[0:20:59-0:21:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:20:59):**  We could see the results as well in terms of yields.  First year was more or less reasonable and then the yields went down by 20 to 30 percent  per year and the soil was completely exhausted.  So I do understand it has a bit of an industry feel on the natural product with growing soil.  So I do understand that people have question marks about it.  
**[0:21:27-0:21:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:21:27):**  So how we use it is that we are growing soilless means that we're using substrate and that  allows us to dose exactly the amount of water and fertilizers that the plant needs.  Nothing more, nothing less.  So if you look at things like water consumption, for instance, our water consumption in a soilless  environment is 10 times less than an open field production.  
**[0:21:54-0:21:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:21:54):**  That's getting extremely important in countries like Kazakhstan where there's a lack of water  at the moment.  In terms of fertilizers, we add the fertilizers through the water and we have a drain system.  So whatever the plant is not absorbing, we collect it in the drains.  It's coming back in a drain pit which is cleaned with UV again and then we reuse those same  
**[0:22:17-0:22:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:22:17):**  fertilizers.  So we reduce 30% compared to a non-drain system.  And if you would compare that with an open field production, that's even more.  So in those terms, we're much more sustainable than open field production.  So my answer would be like it's more of a question like how many people do we think  
**[0:22:42-0:22:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:22:42):**  we can feed on this planet?  And I think we all understand that there are more people coming.  So we should be finding ways on reducing the inputs, maximizing the outputs so that we  have a maximum transformation from input to food.  Yeah, I think it all depends on the context and you should depend on your tomatoes compared  
**[0:23:00-0:23:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:23:00):**  to something that apparently is flown in or trucked in from 5000 kilometers away.  And all those kilometers also mean inputs in the sense of diesel for the truck, diesel  for cooling it, etc.  And in terms of, because I mentioned that at the beginning, in terms of jobs, and then  we look at a concrete example and how do you finance it, but what is the, because they're  
**[0:23:24-0:23:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:23:24):**  super high tech, meaning probably less people and mostly automated, how many people are  working in an average one hectare or half a hectare high tech greenhouse with you?  So rough numbers are 10 to 15 persons per hectare.  So we're in a normal scale greenhouse, so we have two small ones, one in Georgia, which  is two and a half hectares.  
**[0:23:52-0:23:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:23:52):**  And we have around 60 persons working there.  It's a little bit more because you need all your overhead stuff like sales, administration,  distribution.  We do our distribution ourselves, so we supply directly to those supermarkets.  And the one we're building now in Kazakhstan, it starts with five hectares and it's growing  
**[0:24:13-0:24:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:24:13):**  to 20.  That will be, well, starting point roughly 70 to 80 in the beginning and then we'll end  up somewhere around 200 to 250 people working there.  And that's year round because you're not seasonal, which is a huge thing in agriculture.  Yeah, absolutely.  
**[0:24:33-0:24:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:24:33):**  And we aim to keep our staff as much as possible.  So in Georgia, we have the same staff since the beginning because in the end, the yields  are determined by the know-how of your staff, not only the grower, of course.  So we want to make sure that everyone who works with us stays with us.  So we pay very decent salaries.  
**[0:24:53-0:25:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:24:53):**  We try to create very transparent culture and conditions so that people absolutely know  that they're safe working with us and they have a long-term vision on working with us.  And as a result, we see also that people are starting to spend, which is very nice to see.  Like on the first year, they simply work for a salary and in the second and third year,  they start feeling security from the company and also start developing their spendings  
**[0:25:25-0:25:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:25:25):**  back home in the families.  You have to try to imagine an environment where the unemployment is roughly 30 to 40  percent, where that's in the countries that we work in and especially in the countryside.  So the difference we can make for those who are working with us is huge.  Yeah, and let's not forget you need customers to be able to buy your produce at the end.  
**[0:25:48-0:25:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:25:48):**  Yeah, absolutely.  I mean, it would be great if you automate, no it wouldn't be, but it could be like an  entrepreneur's dream to automate everything, but at the end, nobody can buy your tomatoes.  Who are you producing for?  Yeah, yeah.  
**[0:26:00-0:26:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:26:00):**  Yeah.  And in fact, there are too many inputs in the greenhouse to fully automate it.  So it's a living product.  It needs a hybrid.  And in terms of, in this case, Kazakhstan, if that's a great example, can you dive a  
**[0:26:16-0:26:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:26:16):**  bit deeper into some of the numbers if you want to share them just for people to have  an idea of how asset heavy and capital heavy these type of investments are and what comes  out of it and how you're structuring it now?  Because you're thinking about a fund, you're thinking about different vehicles to speed  up basically because you obviously not finance it all yourself.  
**[0:26:37-0:26:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:26:37):**  Yeah, so it's an absolutely an industry which requires a lot of capital.  So the setup itself in Kazakhstan is that we start with all the infrastructure works  and the head house and the overhead buildings for 20 hectares plus a first five hectare  of operation.  That investment we're doing right now this year, that's 18 million euros.  
**[0:27:03-0:27:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:27:03):**  That includes the co-gen, that includes all the overhead works and the five hectare operation.  This particular one we funded, we are co-funded by an agricultural fund, which is the Silk  Road Agricultural Growth Fund, a private equity fund under international management.  And we invested ourselves along with them.  We had $12 million in equity and the remaining in local debt.  
**[0:27:42-0:27:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:27:42):**  That allows us, of course, this first phase to be up and running, but as well the second  five hectares.  So compared to the first five hectares, we expected a budget of 18 million euros and  the second one should be done for another, let's say, 12.  So we end up at 30 million for the first 10 hectares operation.  
**[0:28:04-0:28:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:28:04):**  That's high, but that's high because of the large part of which is coming from the co-gens.  So normally you would look at roughly, like the rough numbers, 200 euros per square meter.  So 2 million per hectare investment.  You're about 50% up, but also because you're already building most of it for 20 hectares,  right?  
**[0:28:27-0:28:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:28:27):**  Yeah, yeah.  And the co-gen part.  So our returns are also higher.  We generate our electricity ourselves.  So your fixed costs are higher, but your input costs are a lot lower.  
**[0:28:38-0:28:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/09/21/dirk-aleven/#t=0:28:38):**  Yeah, exactly.  So the co-gens itself have a return of five years.  Normally we look at the greenhouses as, well, based on the 2 million euro investment per  year you might expect a 1 million euro revenue per year.  