### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2018-13-25)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  You're going to listen to a deep dive into a very ambitious investment project into regenerative  agriculture, aiming to take a whole region in India with 46 million people of chemical  
**[0:00:24-0:00:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:00:24):**  fertilizers, herbicides and pesticides, all financed by climate bonds.  Enjoy.  Welcome to another episode of investing in regenerative agriculture investing as if the  planet mattered.  Podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  
**[0:00:42-0:00:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:00:42):**  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  
**[0:01:01-0:01:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:01:01):**  And it's time that we as investors, big and small and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  Before we get started, I've been recording these interviews next to my day job and I  will definitely continue to do so and release about an episode a month.  But at the same time, I would love to take this further, share more interviews.  
**[0:01:22-0:01:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:01:22):**  There are many more stories to share on investing in regenerative food and agriculture.  More depth, improve the quality, maybe even doing some video series.  So I started a Patreon community, which makes it easy to support creators like myself.  If these podcasts have been of value to you and if you have the means, I invite you to  support me and make this happen.  
**[0:01:42-0:01:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:01:42):**  For more information, please find the link to my Patreon account in the description below.  And now without further ado, the interview.  Enjoy.  Welcome to investing in regenerative agriculture, investing as a dependent matter.  I'm Koon Vasaheen, your host.  
**[0:01:58-0:02:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:01:58):**  Today I'm talking to Sacha Tripathi, chair of the board of Sustainable India Finance  Facility, a partnership between the United Nations Environmental Programme, World Agroforestry  Centre and BNP Paribas.  It brings long term finance to projects and companies that stimulate green growth, increase  resilience, reduce greenhouse gases and improve rural livelihoods.  
**[0:02:17-0:02:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:02:17):**  Among them is a project which we'll discuss extensively today, a climate bond of 2.3 billion  dollars to finance the transition of six million smallholder farmers to zero budget natural  farming in the state of Andhra Pradesh in India.  As you can imagine, I have a lot of questions on this.  Welcome Sacha.  
**[0:02:33-0:02:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:02:33):**  Thank you Koon.  And to start with a personal question, what brings you to working on connecting institutional  investors to landscapes, to soil, to smallholder farmers?  I think at UN Environment, I lead the work of the organisation on Agenda 2030, which  is more popularly known as the Sustainable Development Goals, the 17 goals and the 169  
**[0:03:00-0:03:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:03:00):**  targets.  And while there's a lot of discussion about indicators, benchmarks, measurement, the resources  are the biggest question, in my opinion, that unless we can find the money that it takes  to achieve the SDGs, the rest of it is just process.  And process doesn't interest anyone and certainly not the people at the bottom of the pyramid.  
**[0:03:30-0:03:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:03:30):**  And that's why what we are doing through the Sustainable India Finance Facility is play  the role of a catalyst.  And I'm delighted that three of the world's leading institutions have come together.  UNEP is the world's environmental authority.  The World Agroforestry Centre is the world's leading research facility on agroforestry  
**[0:03:52-0:03:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:03:52):**  and related matters.  And BNP Paribas is the largest bank in Europe.  And I'm so delighted that they just won the Euro money best bank of the year 2017 on sustainable  finance.  So, we have the right partners coming together with the right intent to make a substantive  
**[0:04:14-0:04:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:04:14):**  difference to the lives and livelihoods of people, because that's at the core of the  climate challenge.  You need to have the right kind of livelihood options available to people that takes care  of health, nutrition, education, and both family and community prosperity, which will  then create the kind of resilience we need to deal with the bigger climate questions.  
**[0:04:43-0:04:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:04:43):**  Hence the Sustainable India Finance Facility.  When you look at this project, which in terms of size, in terms of ambition, seems really  unique and extremely interesting, obviously to me.  Can we dive a bit deeper into how did it came about?  Why this state, Andhra Pradesh, and what is exactly the goal of this project on zero budget  
**[0:05:06-0:05:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:05:06):**  natural farming?  So when did this start and where are you now in the process?  Sure.  Let me start by giving you a little bit of a rather preface it a little bit on what we  are doing in India.  
**[0:05:20-0:05:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:05:20):**  Please.  So there are three big ideas we're working on.  The first is, of course, the zero budget natural farming project in Andhra Pradesh.  The second is dealing with the air quality in North India and also the other countries  in the region.  
**[0:05:40-0:05:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:05:40):**  But we are primarily focused on India as the Sustainable India Finance Facility, but it's  going to benefit the neighboring countries as well.  Once the air quality issue is dealt with.  And then, of course, we're looking at water as a very, very scarce and valuable resource  for a country like India.  
**[0:05:59-0:06:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:05:59):**  And much of the water bodies are completely contaminated and unusable, even for agriculture,  let alone human consumption.  So we focused on these three big issues, sustainable agriculture, water and air.  And then, of course, we're working on big ideas on all these three axes.  Let me start with the zero budget natural farming.  
**[0:06:31-0:06:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:06:31):**  This is something that has been around for a while.  Some call it regenerative agriculture.  Some call it geochemical farming, where you don't use any synthetic chemicals.  So this is how we farmed before chemical fertilizers came about.  And although initially they were seen as a lifesaver because it increased yields and  
**[0:06:54-0:07:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:06:54):**  fed the billions, but a few decades down the line, six, seven decades to be precise, we  know now that it has led to rampant use of synthetic chemical fertilizers around the  world and more or less destroyed the landscapes across the planet.  Not to mention the chemical runoffs into groundwater because nitrates are water soluble.  So they're all over the place in our groundwater.  
**[0:07:28-0:07:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:07:28):**  And then with the concentrations rising, with every passing crop cycle and of course the  chemical runoff into the oceans, which affects life in water literally in 70 percent of the  planet.  So there are huge challenges there.  And in India, in the state of Andhra Pradesh, the chief minister is a champion in his own  
**[0:07:54-0:07:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:07:54):**  right.  And he decided in 2015 that while there's a lot of clamour in India for farm loan waivers,  perhaps for the right reasons, because the farmer is trapped in a vicious cycle of debt,  penury and death.  So he said, okay, the immediate urgency is to get the farmers some farm loan waivers  
**[0:08:21-0:08:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:08:21):**  so that looks after their immediate needs, but this can't be a solution.  This is more a Band-Aid.  We have to look at long term solutions with three goals in mind.  And the first was, of course, reduce the input costs so that the farmers don't have to acquire  unsustainable debt, improve the yields and make it healthy.  
**[0:08:45-0:08:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:08:45):**  And that's what they did with this zero budget natural farming program.  It started in 2015.  It's led by a champion called Vijay Kumar, who is at the heart of India's efforts to  develop women's self-help groups, starting in Andhra Pradesh, but then across the country.  He's the person responsible for leading the efforts that set up the self-help groups in  
**[0:09:13-0:09:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:09:13):**  Andhra Pradesh with 11.5 million women.  So you have the right leader at a political level.  You have the right leader at a program level.  And they have done absolutely outstanding work in the sense that so far they have rolled  out zero budget natural farming to 165,000 farmers.  
**[0:09:36-0:09:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:09:36):**  As we speak, the new agricultural season has started and by September there'll be up to  300,000 farmers.  And then with the next crop cycle, the winter one, there would be up to a half a million  farmers by March 2019.  And then that's when we stepped in.  
**[0:10:00-0:10:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:10:00):**  We started the discussions in 2017.  Eric Solheim, the head of UN Environment, was in Andhra Pradesh meeting with the chief  minister discussing minute details of how we will collaborate and how we will partner.  And then we started the work and we are partnered with some of the world's leading research  institutions and others to bring scientific certainty and accuracy to the program because  
**[0:10:28-0:10:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:10:28):**  the fact is that the results speak for themselves.  And what are they?  What's like an example?  I mean, it's always nice to hear the before and after, but a typical smallholder farmer  that is in the process, what's the impact?  
**[0:10:43-0:10:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:10:43):**  Yeah, to give you an example, there are tens of thousands of cases where the input costs  have gone down by 80% because you do not use synthetic chemical fertilizers anymore.  It is purely natural farming and they use cow dung and cow urine as the base and they  use the local variety of cows because one of the guiding principles of zero-budget natural  farming is that all ingredients, including seeds, must be local.  
**[0:11:13-0:11:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:11:13):**  Nothing comes from outside, so that protects the integrity of the ecosystem and the regenerative  cycle.  And then what they use is cow dung and cow urine of the Bos Indicus variety.  Because that's key to have a local variety because it interacts with the soil in a very  different way than an imported one from the Netherlands, for instance.  
**[0:11:36-0:11:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:11:36):**  Exactly, because they're all part of the cycle, they consume the same things and they excrete  and so it's a part of the regenerative cycle.  And so they use cow dung and cow urine in about 200 different botanical substances,  neem, all kinds of beneficial botanical substances, and they make different mixtures which can  be simply, in simple terms, put across as a process of bio-inoculation.  
**[0:12:09-0:12:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:12:09):**  So this is not organic farming because organic farming is a process of farming where you  substitute one form of fertilizer for another.  So you're basically taking away a chemical fertilizer and using a natural fertilizer,  but you're fertilizing the soil nevertheless.  Here it is not that.  
**[0:12:28-0:12:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:12:28):**  Here it is bio-inoculation, preparing the soil, preparing the seeds to interact with  each other, and then through a complex process of engagement throughout the crop cycle, there's  integrated pest management.  But at the same time, there are concoctions that you use to prevent any pest infestation  and it has proved amazingly resilient to normal pest attacks and all throughout the last three  
**[0:13:08-0:13:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:13:08):**  years of roll-out that has been going on.  So to summarize, the input costs drop dramatically, the outputs increase marginally, anywhere  between 8 to 28 percent depending on the crop and the integrity of the effort you have undertaken.  And then last but not the least, there's solid evidence that water requirements for agriculture  drop by almost 50 percent, which is something again we are working with the UNEP DHI Water  
**[0:13:44-0:13:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:13:44):**  Center to document and scientifically establish that this does indeed improve resilience and  efficiency in water use for agriculture.  And what about the nutrients in the food?  Is there a significant difference between the chemical-based ones and the non?  I mean, I'm assuming yes, but as you are monitoring everything, are you also monitoring this or  
**[0:14:13-0:14:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:14:13):**  will there be something for the future?  We are monitoring this and it will be much more extensive in the future.  And I can tell you that there is a big difference.  And the difference is not as much in nutrient, but more in the chemicals that you find in  food grains and vegetables and fruits as opposed to natural farming.  
**[0:14:40-0:14:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:14:40):**  Here you don't find any chemicals.  So that's the difference.  So it's more the absence of toxics than it is maybe the increase of nutrients?  I wouldn't say there is an increase in nutrients, but that's something that's a more long-term  study.  
**[0:14:56-0:14:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:14:56):**  We haven't seen any significant drop in nutrients.  So that's very encouraging.  But then again, there's all kinds of theories to contend with.  I think to be fair to those that are practicing it and the scientific community, in my view,  this is a more long-term process that would unfold.  
**[0:15:23-0:15:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:15:23):**  So we have instituted studies already that will continually monitor this over the next  several years.  But then we would really know what really happens.  So for the time being, there's no nutrient loss.  That I can tell you for sure, but then it has just started.  
**[0:15:43-0:15:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:15:43):**  So you can't really say that conclusively unless you have substantive data over numerous  crop cycles.  Yeah, and there's a discussion going on in the regenerative agriculture space, which  is slowly getting more concrete on the interaction between very lively soil and healthy soils,  produce, and then your gut system.  
**[0:16:09-0:16:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:16:09):**  But I haven't seen too much research coming out yet.  I know some people are working on it.  That it's not necessarily even the nutrient increase, but actually that your body is able  to access the nutrients just as the roots of the plant is able to access the nutrients  in the soil because it's much more healthy.  
**[0:16:25-0:16:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:16:25):**  Maybe there's a connection there as well between healthy soil, healthy produce, and thus healthy  gut and healthy people.  But that's something that's very on the edge of research at the moment.  But this, of course, could be an excellent case also to see the long-term health impact  on the farmers, not just of the less chemicals they have to use, but also of their diet changes.  
**[0:16:45-0:16:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:16:45):**  Completely agree.  I have actually come across these studies you are mentioning, and I'm really eager to  see more research happening in this space because this is not rocket science.  The fact that if you live within a healthy ecosystem, your body is healthy.  It's the same way if you are in a chemical infested area, you pick up all kinds of problems  
**[0:17:17-0:17:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:17:17):**  because your body is processing all those harmful chemicals.  And body, like any other living creature, has limited ability to deal with these foreign  influences.  And that's why it was really exciting to see.  And we would actually welcome anybody that is doing these research to come together with  
**[0:17:39-0:17:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:17:39):**  us, and we'll provide access to all the data and the farmers and the practices because  our vested interest is in finding a solution, not pushing a particular type of idea.  And the fact that we are working with BNP Paribas and numerous other partners to invest  $2.3 billion into this program to facilitate a smooth transition of the program to 6 million  smallholders, the whole idea is not as much the fact that this benefits smallholders and  
**[0:18:21-0:18:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:18:21):**  it's a good thing to do.  That remains.  That's the primary goal.  But what we think is that this could become the floor or the baseline for amazing research  on a variety of areas, including human health, regeneration of coastal ecosystems.  
**[0:18:43-0:18:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:18:43):**  Andhra Pradesh has the second largest coastline in terms of provinces in India, 900 kilometers  of coastline.  So what happens when you stop all the chemicals running off into the ocean?  What does it do?  With the ecosystem and the local climate and the interaction with the sea?  
**[0:19:03-0:19:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:19:03):**  I don't think, absolutely, I'm pretty sure nobody has ever done this at this scale, meaning  we need to monitor it.  Absolutely.  And not just humans, you know, other species.  What happens to fish?  
**[0:19:15-0:19:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:19:15):**  What changes in their ecosystem?  So there's a lot that can actually come out of it.  And it could possibly give us a solution that the world at large could benefit from.  Because one of the things that hasn't happened, and I think this is crucial to note, that  although there's a large body of people and thinkers and policymakers who are convinced  
**[0:19:42-0:19:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:19:42):**  that we need to do the right things and we need to turn around before we just drop off  the cliff.  But the solutions have just not been there at scale or at a system scale that people  could adopt in full knowledge of the outcomes.  Because once you have that, then I think the right thinking policymakers, politicians,  
**[0:20:08-0:20:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:20:08):**  leaders, the world over, then have something to really choose in full understanding of  the risks and rewards.  And then they would be able to take that quantum leap and change things around.  Until then, what you hear is that you need external infusion of nutrients in the form  of synthetic chemical fertilizers to be able to grow food with the right nutrient base  
**[0:20:35-0:20:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:20:35):**  that benefits humans.  And that's the existing science.  And of course, there's a lot more debate now than there was possibly 30, 40 years ago.  But then the fact remains that an alternative at system scale hasn't been presented with  all the evidence.  
**[0:20:53-0:20:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:20:53):**  So I think the biggest benefit that will come out of the scale out of the JetBNF program  would be not just the fact that it benefits 6 million smallholders and by extension,  the 54 million people in Andhra Pradesh province of India, or the 1.3 billion people in India  itself and the rest of the world, but more importantly, present a system scale alternative  that communities and countries can benefit from.  
**[0:21:23-0:21:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:21:23):**  And I mean, there's a lot to unpack in there, but let's do it step by step.  Because many are working on a thing, there are quite some projects and programs to work  with smaller farmers, smaller groups, like larger groups, etc.  But many stop, I guess, at maybe 160,000 that the program is currently reaching.  Yes, they will get to 500,000 by March.  
**[0:21:47-0:21:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:21:47):**  But then somehow, and I would love to know how that happened, the crazy idea came to  raise 2.3 billion dollars in a climate bond, not in a grand, but in a climate bond to finance  the speed up.  How did that process happen?  And what were you thinking, because it's such a large amount compared to anything else in  
**[0:22:08-0:22:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:22:08):**  regenerative agriculture, and you're going after institutional investors, which are not  known to be the first mover, so it is extremely bold.  How did it go from 160,000 to 5 to 6 million and the idea of getting institutional impact  investing capital involved?  Well, you know, when we started discussing with the government of Andhra Pradesh, two  
**[0:22:31-0:22:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:22:31):**  things were most striking when we talk to the farmers, the energy is absolutely infectious.  They're proud of what they're doing.  And I'll just give you an example.  We recently launched the scale out in a big ceremony in Andhra Pradesh on the 2nd of June,  just before the World Environment Day that India was hosting this year, the global event.  
**[0:22:59-0:23:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:22:59):**  And there were about 8,000 champion farmers that had travelled from different parts of  the province.  And when I say champion farmers, they didn't decide they are the champions.  Their villages voted and decided that these are the best farmers from our village, they'll  represent us.  
**[0:23:16-0:23:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:23:16):**  So you had somebody from literally every village of the province.  And so we had 8,000 farmers in that gathering.  Of course, there were world leaders and others who were also present.  And then one of the distinguished visitors was asking me, you know, this is really surprising  that to see the almost classroom, high school classroom, right discipline among the farmers,  
**[0:23:44-0:23:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:23:44):**  they're sitting there, they're not moving, they're clapping at every word that comes  out.  They're smiling.  It's difficult to pull it off, even in a small classroom.  How is this possible here?  
**[0:23:57-0:24:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:23:57):**  And I was telling the gentleman, I said, sir, you got it entirely wrong.  This is their show.  We are the people that have come here to watch.  They are there because they are proud of their achievements.  And the world has gathered here to felicitate them and appreciate their work.  
**[0:24:18-0:24:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:24:18):**  So why would they even consider walking out and not being attentive?  And he said, my God, you actually hit it on the head, because that's what it is.  And that is why, and there were almost 50% women farmers there, and they were the most  energetic and enthusiastic.  And so, you know, it goes down to the fact that it's about people.  
**[0:24:42-0:24:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:24:42):**  And when people are ready to make a difference, they do.  And so that's the first thing that we found was most infectious, as manifested on the  second June launch event.  And we saw that ourselves at a scale of thousands of farmers.  And then the chief minister, I asked him actually, when we started the conversation, so why are  
**[0:25:08-0:25:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:25:08):**  you doing this?  This is too big.  And of course, we all want it to work, but there are always risks.  When you're dealing with even 160,000 farmers, that's a good number, but not 6 million.  Six million is a lot more, you know, because you're just at about two and a half percent  
**[0:25:30-0:25:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:25:30):**  roughly.  And then he said, you know, no, this is not about scoring some brownie points.  And Chandrababu Naidu, the chief minister, is an amazing human being.  His enthusiasm is infectious, as is aspirations for his people.  And that's when we were convinced that this is the right kind of province to really step  
**[0:25:56-0:26:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:25:56):**  out of our comfort zone and make it happen.  And his point was simple.  He says, you know, if we are not serving the people in the right way, what are we here  for?  What exactly are we doing as leaders?  
**[0:26:10-0:26:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:26:10):**  And he said, I see a great opportunity and the UN environment can be a great partner.  This was even before Sustainable India Finance Facility was set up.  So please help us make it a reality.  And then, of course, we asked, what is your ambition?  He said, everything.  
**[0:26:29-0:26:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:26:29):**  All six million small holders should convert.  And so then we started working on the details.  And then, of course, we started discussing with our partners, or together with whom we  had set up the Tropical Landscapes Finance Facility in 2016.  And it is also a fact that a few months later, UN Environment and BNP Paribas came together  
**[0:26:55-0:27:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:26:55):**  to sign a $10 billion MOU to bring sustainable finance to projects and ideas across the planet  with significant social and environmental impact.  And so we had a lot of things happening after those conversations with Chief Minister Naidu.  And then we thought that, you know, it's something worth doing.  And this is something, this is a borrowing that the government is, this is not a grant.  
**[0:27:32-0:27:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:27:32):**  And we have started looking at different ways and means with which you could actually make  this cost neutral.  And I'll give you a quick example, not that we have agreed with anyone on this, but we  are working on studying the potential and the possibilities.  And the idea is this.  
**[0:27:52-0:27:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:27:52):**  India currently spends roughly about $12 billion on fertiliser subsidies every year.  And give or take a few, about a billion dollars is spent in Andhra Pradesh alone as fertiliser  subsidies.  So in terms of a simple arithmetic, because this form of agriculture completely oviates  the need for any synthetic chemical fertilisers and pesticides, that's a guiding principle,  
**[0:28:18-0:28:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:28:18):**  when you are completely scaled up to system level.  You're going to save about a billion a year.  In perpetuity.  So only that would be enough.  I mean, you need to scale to 6 million farmers more than enough to pay back in less than  
**[0:28:34-0:28:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:28:34):**  three years, obviously.  That's right.  And so, but of course, you would have a scaled rollout.  So it would be a phased rollout.  And obviously, it will take a little more than three years.  
**[0:28:45-0:28:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:28:45):**  So we've targeted five years.  So we start around April 2019.  And then we end in 2024.  So that's basically what it is, the scale out.  But the savings in this case, because it's a climate bond to a state to a province in  
**[0:29:01-0:29:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:29:01):**  India, so it's not to a company or to a project, it's to the state and it specifically will  only be used to scale up this programme.  But in any case, the savings will be probably so large that the cash flow to pay back this  bond is going to be there.  Absolutely.  
**[0:29:22-0:29:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:29:22):**  And it will become cost neutral to everybody.  It will become cost neutral to the state government because technically the money is being spent  now.  So you're just you're going to save and you're going to pay back.  And then the central government, which pays for the subsidies, will end up saving a billion  
**[0:29:41-0:29:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:29:41):**  dollar every year.  They'll start saving already from this year onwards.  But come 2024, they'll be saving a billion dollars with all cost inflation added in perpetuity.  So it's a win win win for everybody.  And that's just yeah, just a fertiliser.  
**[0:30:02-0:30:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:30:02):**  Except and I'm going to ask the devil's advocate question, except for the fertiliser industry,  how much pushback are you and lobbying, dirty campaigning, etc. are you expecting from an  industry that's taking 20 billion a year in India?  I can imagine they're going to play the poor people are not going to eat.  This is horrible for farmers, horrible for anybody, carbs quite strongly.  
**[0:30:27-0:30:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:30:27):**  What are you seeing there?  I look at everything a little positively.  I understand the challenges.  I'm not starry eyed.  But the point is that I think there are several crucial points to note here.  
**[0:30:52-0:30:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:30:52):**  I have a positive take on this.  And I look at the fossil fuel industry.  I look at countries that have been fully dependent on fossil fuels.  They're playing dirty.  Yeah, they're playing just like the GMOs.  
**[0:31:06-0:31:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:31:06):**  They're playing very, very dirty.  They did.  They've been playing dirty for a while.  But now they see the writing on the wall and most of them are changing.  You look at a lot of the oil companies worldwide.  
**[0:31:19-0:31:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:31:19):**  They're going big into wind, solar and biogas.  So they're diversifying their portfolio because you are not a serious business entity if you  don't see the challenges and the risks to business continuity.  So what would you say to a leading fertilizer producer?  What could be their role in India where zero budget natural farming is the norm?  
**[0:31:52-0:31:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:31:52):**  I would urge them to see they are in business.  They are not in the business of selling a particular thing because a business can be  any business.  It doesn't have to be a particular product being sold.  As we have seen the evolution of the fertilizer industry, not every kind of fertilizer was  
**[0:32:14-0:32:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:32:14):**  being produced in the 30s and the 40s and the 50s and the 60s.  As agriculture has grown, we have seen more pronounced needs in a certain segment of the  fertilizer industry and then those have been met by adding capacity and all.  If you look at India's case, I'm coming back to a country level, India imports a lot of  its fertilizers.  
**[0:32:43-0:32:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:32:43):**  So if you look at urea and diammonium phosphate, which is more popularly known as DAP, these  are the two most widely used fertilizers in India that a lot of it is imported.  And this is why, and last year if you look at the third quarter of this financial year  in India, which is between October and December, the by 66 percent.  Even if case of Andhra Pradesh, which is a very big agricultural state in India, but  
**[0:33:28-0:33:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:33:28):**  at the same time uses about one-twelve of the fertilizers used in the country.  So even if it goes to zero, India is in a big way because India is currently importing  all that.  So they stopped importing and it improves the current account, the balance of payments.  So from India's perspective, it's a win-win at several levels.  
**[0:33:55-0:33:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:33:55):**  And absolutely not defending the fertilizing industry.  I think it's adapt or die.  And if they don't see this writing on the wall, like the energy companies saw or fossil  fuel companies saw 10 years ago, it's their business risk.  But I know that they're going to push.  
**[0:34:11-0:34:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:34:11):**  They will not go under or change that.  I fully agree with you in that analysis.  But my limited point is that from India's perspective, they're importing a very large  amount of fertilizers every year, although they have a goal to produce everything within  the country in a few years time.  
**[0:34:36-0:34:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:34:36):**  But the fact remains that they're importing a large percentage of the fertilizer required  in the country from abroad, and which puts a strain on their balance of payments and  the current account deficit and all.  So this helps the country as well at multiple levels.  Yeah, no, sure.  
**[0:34:56-0:35:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:34:56):**  And let's shift gears a bit and look for a second on the bond and the cooperation with  BNP Paribas.  So it's 2.3 billion, but you're cutting it in tranches.  Can you talk a bit about how it would look like and when more or less you're planning  to do?  
**[0:35:13-0:35:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:35:13):**  Of course, you're working on it.  What can we expect when?  When are you going to fundraise?  Well, the target is to get to the market around June 2019, because that's when the funds are  required.  
**[0:35:31-0:35:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:35:31):**  The government has its own funds with the support of the government of India, the central  government.  And so they have their own resources to get to half a million farmers by March 2019.  So they don't need any resources before the next agricultural season, which is around  July 2019.  
**[0:36:00-0:36:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:36:00):**  So the idea is to go to the markets around June 2019, because as you so very well know,  it takes a long time to create the structures, to do the credit rating, to bring the right  actors together, to find a bit of blending so that the costs remain within reasonable  limits.  And of course, that helps create the impact and achieve the higher goals.  
**[0:36:33-0:36:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:36:33):**  Our thinking is that we'll be raising the money in three different tranches because  the program is such that there are no subsidies being given.  This is basically the cost of handholding because it's a very intensive program.  So you have to train people, you have to help them throughout for multiple crop cycles so  that they not only understand what it is, but become adept at it.  
**[0:37:00-0:37:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:37:00):**  There's also part of the program is research and science to establish it as strongly as  possible as we go along and make course corrections if and as needed.  Then there's the education element because you need to prepare the next generation of  farmers.  And in that, we're working with a whole lot of partners, including the Prince's charity  
**[0:37:25-0:37:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:37:25):**  in the UK, the Prince Charles.  And so we're working with a large number of partners worldwide.  The Global Alliance for the Future of the Food is a very valuable partner and so many  others.  So the idea is to prepare everybody as we go along.  
**[0:37:44-0:37:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:37:44):**  So there are technically no subsidies, but there's a lot of costs of rollout, of ensuring  that there's no rollback and that the farmers are helped all through the process, not just  in the first crop cycle, but perhaps into the fifth, sixth, seventh, tenth crop cycle  so that they all become experts in their own champions farmers.  They all become champions in their own right.  
**[0:38:15-0:38:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:38:15):**  And this is the most important part of this program is that it is a farmer to farmer extension.  And you'll be surprised, Sonny Verghese, who's the president of the World Business Council  on Sustainable Development, he was at the launch of the scale out on second June in  Bijawada.  He was there with the top management of Olam International.  
**[0:38:37-0:38:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:38:37):**  As you know, Olam is one of the world's largest agribusinesses and we're looking forward to  collaborate with them and the excitement is mutual.  So Sonny, in his speech, mentioned that even at 165,000, this is the world's largest farmer  to farmer extension.  And I can't even imagine what will happen when you get to 6 million.  
**[0:39:01-0:39:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:39:01):**  I'm very curious on impact, obviously, on people, but also on the ecosystem.  What changes locally on the climate are what happens with droughts and rain?  Because you're at such a large scale that you're probably going to influence not only  the microclimate above the land of the individual farmer and not maybe even above the village,  but actually probably at a state or a region level, which is quite interesting because  
**[0:39:28-0:39:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:39:28):**  we've never seen that.  Absolutely.  And no one has ever seen that.  And then, of course, I mean, we have already seen significant changes to the microclimate  because it's been going on for more than three years now.  
**[0:39:41-0:39:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:39:41):**  And in some places, seven, eight crop cycles have passed by.  And to give you a quick example, a normal healthy soil is supposed to have roughly about  70 earthworms per cubic meter of soil.  And here in many places, we've done the counts and they're up to 120.  It's amazing what happens when you let the soil heal itself.  
**[0:40:07-0:40:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:40:07):**  And of course, the skeptics would say the science doesn't agree because where's the  nitrogen, where's the phosphate?  And I fully respect and sympathize with those questions because that's what they know.  So that question is very natural because here there's a science that we perhaps certainly  knew a hundred years ago, never understood, but knew.  
**[0:40:33-0:40:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:40:33):**  And so we need to bring understanding to that knowledge and a more grounded scientific understanding.  And then that's what we're working on with the World Agroforestry Center, with the University  of Essex, with the Council on Energy, Environment and Water.  So we're partnering with some of the leading institutions in the world to see how best  to establish, observe and establish the science and share it worldwide.  
**[0:41:07-0:41:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:41:07):**  Absolutely independent studies with nothing to have to do with the program implementers  other than the fact that they provide access to the data.  And who are you targeting in terms of investors?  I can imagine with this amount, so you say three tranches, so about 750 million, it's  mostly institutional investors as most of the climate bonds are so far.  
**[0:41:30-0:41:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:41:30):**  Are you targeting high net worth individuals and family offices?  And maybe even because democratization is always a big piece in the discussion on impact  investing and regenerative agriculture.  What are your thoughts on where to raise these tranches?  I think my answer is all of above because you really need everybody to come on board,  
**[0:41:56-0:42:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:41:56):**  the pension funds, the insurance funds who have a very long term view of these matters.  And the recent years has seen a spot of these funds taking a lot of interest in structures  with climate and social impact.  Then, of course, there's a lot of philanthropies who have their own investment arms.  And there again, there's a huge opportunity because some of these philanthropies that  
**[0:42:31-0:42:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:42:31):**  are doing outstanding work, they keep both of it separate.  So investment and arm goes ahead and makes money.  Which is the fundamental tension in impact investing.  I mean, everybody saying bring them together because you're doing more harm with your investment  arm that you can clean up with your...  
**[0:42:46-0:42:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:42:46):**  Exactly.  Exactly.  So you put it so eloquently.  And so here is an opportunity.  They can do both and with very little risk because it's a quasi sovereign that is borrowing.  
**[0:42:56-0:43:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:42:56):**  So it's not like you are giving money to some corporate entity, which could turn out to  be a fly by night operator or somebody who is very articulate in putting across everything  you want to hear, but doesn't deliver the goods.  Here, that is not the case.  Here is a potential client that has shown its intent and integrity, put its money where  
**[0:43:24-0:43:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:43:24):**  its mouth is, would have taken the program up to a gigantic scale already with 500,000  smallholders by March 2019, after which we are intervening.  So this is not things happening in a vacuum.  These are things happening from a solid platform of performance, of genuine achievement.  That's in the public domain for anyone to go and see and inspect.  
**[0:43:54-0:43:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:43:54):**  This is not some lab tests that we are...  You hear those a lot.  That suddenly five years later you find out that all those wonderful scientific papers  were based on dodgy data and all.  Here, that is not the case.  
**[0:44:09-0:44:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:44:09):**  This is about people.  It's out in the open.  Everybody can go and have a look as to what transformative changes are happening across  the landscape.  And so I think this should give potential investors a great degree of confidence.  
**[0:44:24-0:44:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:44:24):**  A, that it is a provincial government with a track record of performance.  Mind you, Andhra Pradesh is growing at more than 10% of GDP consistently, which is bigger  than the national average of India or the global average by a mile.  And they have a very good administration.  They have a history of performance.  
**[0:44:50-0:44:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:44:50):**  This province has been at the heart of India's IT revolution that has helped not only India  but the rest of the world.  And this chief minister was at the heart of that IT revolution.  So he's been around for a long time and is a politician whose commitment to people and  sustainability is above board.  
**[0:45:13-0:45:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:45:13):**  So I think at all levels, this adds up to a great investment for anyone who's looking  to make an impact.  And what would be the biggest risk for this project?  What if you could wave your magic wand and change one thing from the risk perspective  if you have to play the devil's advocate card?  
**[0:45:34-0:45:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:45:34):**  What would you see as over the next years as the biggest risk?  I think I think there are pros and cons.  I think the biggest risk is that they have an election coming up in March next year for  the state government and the chief minister and his party will be up for reelection.  And so that is a risk.  
**[0:46:05-0:46:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:46:05):**  And this will be a subject, obviously?  This is a subject.  I think one would be extremely naive not to take note of the fact that the political champion  is up for reelection.  So I'm in no position to speculate, although depending on who you speak to, people would  
**[0:46:27-0:46:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:46:27):**  tell you that the ruling party is most likely to win.  There will be those that might say that that's not the case.  So we stay out of the politics.  That's not what interests us.  But it is indeed a potential risk that the political champion may not be around to do  
**[0:46:47-0:46:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:46:47):**  this.  But that's one part of the risk equation.  The fact that it would have already gone up to half a million farmers with benefits for  everybody to see is something that makes it an unstoppable force.  And we have spoken to politicians across the spectrum in the state and in the country.  
**[0:47:14-0:47:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:47:14):**  And there's a huge movement forward in recognizing the potential of what is happening.  So no matter who's in power, I don't think it presents much of a risk.  This will go on.  So that's the first.  So there's a pro and the cons.  
**[0:47:30-0:47:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:47:30):**  But keeping that in mind, we also decided not to go to the market before the elections  are over.  So we would also like the elections to be over.  And depending on who's in government, we would revisit the commitments and then we will go  to the market.  
**[0:47:47-0:47:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:47:47):**  So we've taken these things into consideration before deciding when to go to the market.  And I want to be conscious of your time because we are on top of the hour.  What would be not investment advice, but if you imagine that there's an audience, a  theater full of impact investors that are into regenerative agriculture and would like  to do more and move their capital, etc.  
**[0:48:12-0:48:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:48:12):**  What would you say?  Definitely look at this offer, obviously, and follow this.  But where would you give your advice to look specifically?  Where should they learn?  What could they learn from this specific, quite bold and already iconic project?  
**[0:48:29-0:48:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:48:29):**  Where should they pay most attention to in terms of their impact investing practices?  Well I think this particular investment opportunity presents a huge palette of possibilities from  the perspective of a very discerning sustainability focused impact investor.  This is about land.  This is about landscapes.  
**[0:48:55-0:48:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:48:55):**  This is about ecosystems.  This is about the microclimate, the macroclimate.  This is about all species.  This is about biodiversity.  This is about people.  
**[0:49:06-0:49:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:49:06):**  This is about human health.  This is about oceanic ecosystems.  So this is, in summary, this presents an opportunity.  There's all kinds of impact investment going on.  We're talking about saving the coral reefs.  
**[0:49:21-0:49:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:49:21):**  We're talking about saving the oceans.  We're talking about saving the species and what have you.  Here is an idea that saves everything.  So you don't need to take your pick.  Everybody, no matter what their interests, can come together and find their results within  
**[0:49:42-0:49:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:49:42):**  the bigger scheme of things here.  And I think that is why it is such an exciting possibility in terms of, now if you take the  Rio Conventions just to present you a legal case, the three Rio Conventions, the CCD,  the CBD, and the UNFCCC, climate change, biodiversity, and against desertification, this takes care  of everything.  
**[0:50:09-0:50:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:50:09):**  So there has seldom been investments that really at this scale target everything in  one go.  And this could perhaps be the solution that we are all looking for.  This is certainly worth investing and the risks are minimal because it's the government  that is borrowing, a government with a very impressive track record that is borrowing.  
**[0:50:33-0:50:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:50:33):**  And as I mentioned, we are working on studies and research on the fertilizer piece that  could make it completely cost neutral, both for the provincial government and the national  government in India.  So technically you're not paying back, it is cost neutral and you're saving a pile and  it benefits tens of millions of people at the very minimum, the 54 million people who  
**[0:50:56-0:51:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:50:56):**  live in Andhra Pradesh, but the rest of the country and the world.  So it's a no brainer to me.  You really don't have to make a case.  The smart investors would see it for what it is.  I want to thank you so much, Sache, for taking the time.  
**[0:51:12-0:51:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:51:12):**  I know it's very early where you are and you have a very busy day and busy days ahead of  you to share this story.  Just to be clear, we're not giving investment advice.  You should always make your own due diligence, but I'm very much looking forward to following  this and checking with you closer to fundraising or during fundraising to see the reactions  
**[0:51:33-0:51:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:51:33):**  and responses and follow this very bold and ambitious, but very necessary project.  Thank you so much.  Thank you so much, Korn.  It's been a delight.  You just listened to an interview with Sache Tripathi, where we discussed one of the projects  
**[0:51:49-0:51:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:51:49):**  he's involved in to bring institutional capital, this means billions, to the table to restore  landscapes and many millions of acres together with smaller farmers.  Thank you for making the time to listen to this podcast and making it all the way till  the end.  I hope you enjoyed it as much as I did.  
**[0:52:05-0:52:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:52:05):**  If you found the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  It's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  
**[0:52:24-0:52:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:52:24):**  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  join my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or in the description  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  
**[0:52:52-0:52:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:52:52):**  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food.  How to put money to work in regenerating soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while  doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  
**[0:53:06-0:53:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:53:06):**  After a hundred interviews and more than a hundred hours of audio asking the question  how to put money to work in regenerating soils and I've been following the space since 2011  and recording these podcasts since 2016 we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework?  
**[0:53:25-0:53:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:53:25):**  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees and what questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  
**[0:53:35-0:53:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:53:35):**  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  You the soil builders and investors in the space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  
**[0:53:47-0:53:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:53:47):**  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management consultants, etc. etc.  People that are building soil at scale and the investors who are putting their own money  to work through their family office or as private individuals or people who are putting  other people's money to work through foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies,  
**[0:54:12-0:54:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:54:12):**  etc.  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  
**[0:54:22-0:54:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:54:22):**  that among the listeners of this podcast we have people with very different means.  So I'm inviting you if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  
**[0:54:36-0:54:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:54:36):**  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to ride along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  
**[0:55:00-0:55:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:55:00):**  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  
**[0:55:16-0:55:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:55:16):**  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  
**[0:55:31-0:55:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/21/satya-tripathi/#t=0:55:31):**  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking, click on  the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  