### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2018-00-02)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com slash course or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  In this interview, we'll talk about democratization of impact investing in regenerative agriculture.  Why land security over a long period of time is key to soil health and sustainability of  
**[0:00:25-0:00:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:00:25):**  farms.  Enjoy.  Welcome to another episode of investing in regenerative agriculture investing as if the  planet mattered podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and  agriculture space to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil,  
**[0:00:43-0:00:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:00:43):**  people, local communities and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small and consumers start paying much more  
**[0:01:02-0:01:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:01:02):**  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  Before we get started, I've been recording these interviews next to my day job and I  will definitely continue to do so and release about an episode a month.  But at the same time, I would love to take this further, share more interviews.  There are many more stories to share on investing in regenerative food and agriculture.  
**[0:01:23-0:01:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:01:23):**  More depth, improve the quality, maybe even doing some video series.  So I started a Patreon community, which makes it easy to support creators like myself.  If these podcasts have been of value to you, and if you have the means, I invite you to  support me and make this happen.  For more information, please find the link to my Patreon account in the description below.  
**[0:01:44-0:01:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:01:44):**  And now without further ado, the interview.  Enjoy.  So welcome to investing in regenerative agriculture investing as if the planet mattered.  I'm Koon Vasaian, your host.  Today I'm joined by Kevin Egoof, chief financial officer of the Aquarius Valley Farms, a restorative  
**[0:02:00-0:02:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:02:00):**  farmland finance company providing land access to organic family farmers with a specific  focus on the next generation.  Welcome Kevin.  Thank you for having me.  So to start, as I always do with a personal question, what brings you to the space?  
**[0:02:14-0:02:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:02:14):**  What brings you to farming?  What brings you to the future of farming and regenerative agriculture?  I think my path follows the path of a lot of people that are focused on sustainable  ag and that that is through food.  And I really became connected more personally to farming and agriculture through eating.  
**[0:02:37-0:02:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:02:37):**  And it started when I left college and had to start making food for myself.  I was very quickly drawn to what I thought tasted better, seemed fresher from the vendors  at the farmers market in New York City.  And over the course of several years, I started focusing on a more sustainable diet, healthy  food, supporting farmers, all the while I was working in the finance industry in New  
**[0:03:03-0:03:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:03:03):**  York City.  And a few years into that job, actually about six, seven years into that sort of career  path, I decided that that was not what I wanted to do long term, at least the finance application  that I was doing in investment banking and private equity.  And I had become over that same time period, as I mentioned, really supportive of farmers  
**[0:03:26-0:03:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:03:26):**  and the concept of growing healthy food really excited me.  So I took an apprenticeship on a rooftop farm in New York City for a season and very quickly  realized that I was not going to be in production agriculture.  That was not going to be my strong suit.  While I was still very much drawn into the concept of business and finance, and I was  
**[0:03:49-0:03:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:03:49):**  very fortunate to start working around that time during this transition period for Iroquois  Valley Farms, which has a very unique connection in that it is supporting sustainable agriculture.  And the methods that are doing it is using somewhat traditional finance concepts, although  the way we apply them are non-traditional.  And supporting these farmers.  
**[0:04:14-0:04:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:04:14):**  So I sort of was able to combine my passion and interest for sustainable agriculture and  food with my experience and background in finance.  In a nutshell, you've been around quite a bit, I think, I saw 2004, 2006 or something,  which has been a while.  What is it currently doing?  
**[0:04:33-0:04:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:04:33):**  What do people know it of?  And how do you help these organic family farmers to scale or to grow?  So very simply, Iroquois Valley Farms is an organic farmland real estate investment trust.  A real estate investment trust is just a fancy word for a special type of company that only  owns and manages real estate assets.  
**[0:04:58-0:05:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:04:58):**  So we specifically invest in organic farmland investments.  The way we do that is a little bit different than what might be more traditional investing.  Our focus very specifically is around supporting organic family farmers with land access.  So the fact that we are buying and leasing land or providing mortgage financing to these  organic farmers is more the method of our goal to help support the family farmers that  
**[0:05:30-0:05:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:05:30):**  are doing things the right way grow their existing organic business.  So we've raised private capital from over 300 investors in 10 plus years we've been  operating and we use that money to support these farmers, as I mentioned, by farmland  and give them long term leases.  Or in the past couple of years, we started a mortgage financing program to support farmers  
**[0:05:56-0:06:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:05:56):**  that aren't getting the right access to capital via traditional lenders.  So basically, if I can summarize the two approaches, either you buy land close to or nearby successful  organic farmers and lease the land to them for a long term or you help them acquiring  that type of land for them as they are scaling up.  Exactly.  
**[0:06:21-0:06:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:06:21):**  That's the exact model.  The one important item to note is that we are not speculators in the sense that we see  a farm for sale and say, Oh, this would be great for an organic farmer.  Our business model is built first for the farmer.  So we like to say that we're farmer first in that we develop relationships with these  
**[0:06:42-0:06:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:06:42):**  farmers prior to working with them.  And the farmer brings us the opportunity.  This way, we don't have to be knowledgeable about everything, agriculture in the United  States or everything organic agriculture in the United States.  We want to work with existing farmers that are already talented and help them grow when  
**[0:07:03-0:07:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:07:03):**  they need our assistance.  Yeah.  So for instance, I'm running a farm in upstate New York.  I get to know you guys.  I'm interacting.  
**[0:07:12-0:07:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:07:12):**  And the moment I can see my neighbor wanting to retire or I see an opportunity in my area  that would work really well for my farm or my operation.  That's the moment I get in touch with you more seriously.  And we get to work basically to see if we can acquire the land and scale.  Exactly you can acquire.  
**[0:07:32-0:07:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:07:32):**  I can acquire, you can acquire depending on the structure, but to scale my operation.  That's exactly right.  And it's funny the example that you cited, we get that conversation all the time.  Farmer calls us.  Yeah, three of my neighbors are going to be retiring in the next three to five years.  
**[0:07:51-0:07:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:07:51):**  I just wanted to talk to you, learn about what you're doing.  And then it might be another year and a half before the second conversation happens with  that farmer.  Like, yeah, my neighbor told me that, you know, he or she is thinking about this being  their last season and looking to sell.  
**[0:08:06-0:08:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:08:06):**  And I'm sort of the first one in line that they'd like to sell to.  So that's exactly, it's definitely a long lead time.  A lot of these sales are private and localized and you wouldn't even know about them if you  didn't have that relationship with the farmer upfront.  Yeah.  
**[0:08:22-0:08:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:08:22):**  It's not that there's a public website or a public marketplace where you can find these  things.  Exactly.  And so this relationship, I mean, they're building over them.  How much land have you helped acquire?  
**[0:08:34-0:08:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:08:34):**  Have you acquired?  How much money have you raised if that's public to have a sense of scale?  Yeah.  So right now we're working with over 35 farm families.  We've made over 50 farmland investments and that's covering about 10,000 acres.  
**[0:08:53-0:08:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:08:53):**  And right now the REIT is around $50 million in assets size, US dollars that is.  And between brackets, just farmland.  Are you interested or are you helping some of these farmers on the local processing side?  On what, what, what, what should I envision there?  Is it mainly farmland access to farmland that you are helping to establish?  
**[0:09:16-0:09:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:09:16):**  Yeah, we, we are pretty much exclusively focused on helping with the land access piece.  And that is intentionally by design.  One, we don't want to be the smartest farmer in the room.  We want to partner with the smartest farmer in the room.  So we don't necessarily have all the agricultural knowledge that these farmers have that we're  
**[0:09:41-0:09:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:09:41):**  working with.  We work with mostly multi-generational farm families, meaning the farmer we're working  with, their parents were farmers, their grandparents were farmers, sometimes going back six plus  generations.  So on average, these farmers that we're working with have over a hundred plus years of ingrained  
**[0:10:01-0:10:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:10:01):**  family farming experience through these multiple generations.  They are smarter than we are going to be in production systems that work for the areas  they're going to be.  And the systems that work in upstate New York are going to be different than the systems  that work in Montana and what works in north central Illinois.  
**[0:10:22-0:10:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:10:22):**  And the markets are different.  So we can't be an expert on all places.  What we can be an expert in is developing strong and healthy relationships with these  farm families and supporting them.  And to ask an obvious question, but why would they come to you instead of a local bank?  
**[0:10:38-0:10:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:10:38):**  Is that an issue at all for you in terms of competition basically as investors?  Absolutely.  There's a lot of different ways that farmers can access capital and access land.  The two differentiating factors for us on our buy and lease side of the business, which  is about 70% of our assets, is that we are giving long-term leases to these farmers,  
**[0:11:08-0:11:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:11:08):**  leases that they can count on.  We are a landowner that wants to support their specific operation, not any operation.  So while we are trying to do everything at a fair market value, we're also trying to  do it in a way that supports the existing farmer's business.  A lot of leases in the United States are year-long leases where the farmer doesn't have security  
**[0:11:34-0:11:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:11:34):**  to provide these long-term leases.  They can invest in the soil.  They can invest in getting that organic certification and know that they're going to reap the benefits  for a long term.  A lot of times the farmers that we're working with have these long-standing relationships  
**[0:11:53-0:11:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:11:53):**  with native landowners, but at some point those landowners need to sell.  And then the next buyer may not be, they might be just interested in renting to the highest  bidder in terms of who's going to pay the most for rent and not necessarily developing  long-term relationships.  So on the leasing side, it's the longer term security piece that we're offering.  
**[0:12:16-0:12:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:12:16):**  And on the mortgage financing side, the farmers are generally, it's a little bit different  in each geographies, but are not getting the same capital access opportunities that their  conventional neighbor might have.  The agricultural banks for a variety of reasons look at organic farming as a risk factor.  We look at it as a positive.  
**[0:12:40-0:12:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:12:40):**  We view it as a growth market, a more profitable market.  Yes, there's a risk with organic transition, but once they get that organic certification,  it's actually de-risked in terms of their operations.  So they're getting blocked out from some of the traditional lending opportunities.  A lot of the regional banks are starting to remove their agricultural portfolio.  
**[0:13:05-0:13:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:13:05):**  Maybe their banker that covered the farmers has retired and they don't have anyone with  experience or they just want to reduce their exposure to that asset class because of whatever  cyclical activities are happening in the market.  So we are seeing a lot of farmers actually not having good access to mortgage financing.  And we view that as a role that we can play.  
**[0:13:32-0:13:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:13:32):**  And we launched that business a couple of years ago and it's grown from not having done  any mortgage financing to now being north of 20% of our asset base.  Yeah, that's very impressive.  And when you look at the land itself and the movements you see in beyond organic and regenerative  agriculture, building soil, etc, what do you see in that space?  
**[0:13:58-0:14:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:13:58):**  You see a lot of new people moving in.  What do you see in terms of the future of beyond organic as you can maybe qualify this  movement?  Yeah, so I mean that brings in a rabbit hole that one can go very deeply down, but what  is sustainable agriculture?  
**[0:14:18-0:14:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:14:18):**  Obviously the word sustainable is often greenwashed by a variety of companies.  And our take right now is that organic is one of the most recognized production methods  that is a vast improvement over the conventional system.  And the letter of the law of organic is a huge improvement over the chemical systems,  but isn't necessarily the optimal system.  
**[0:14:54-0:14:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:14:54):**  So we work with a variety of farmers that go well beyond what the letter of the law  for certified USDA organic is.  And all of our farmers are focused on building soil health and improving the quality of the  microorganisms and macroorganisms in their soil, in the fields that they're working in.  And that's what we're really looking for is someone that wants to improve agriculture  
**[0:15:24-0:15:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:15:24):**  and what is the ultimate system and methodology that one should use.  I think that's something that science is going to ultimately tease out in the next 20 to  30 years.  But before we can jump to optimal sustainable agriculture, we got to move very quickly away  from the conventional system.  
**[0:15:44-0:15:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:15:44):**  And that's really what we're about and we're about supporting the shift from chemical to  organic.  Once you go to organic, then there's going to be additional opportunities to go beyond  organic and to make more improvements on soil health and maximize soil health.  And you see that happening with our farmers in that once they get their organic certification,  
**[0:16:07-0:16:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:16:07):**  then the opportunities just continue to blossom because of the markets that become available,  because of their knowledge growing, because of getting exposure to other organic farmers  and learning about new systems.  And so we want to see all of our farmers working on incremental improvements.  And the interesting thing, if you go back to the organic movement from the beginning,  
**[0:16:32-0:16:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:16:32):**  that's the basic principle of organic.  It's not don't do this, don't do that.  It's build your soil health, improve year by year.  And we see that happening with all of our farmers.  Very, very interesting.  
**[0:16:46-0:16:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:16:46):**  Let's switch sides to the investor part.  How has been the response?  What do you see over there?  I mean, 10 years is a nice amount of time.  What do you have seen?  
**[0:16:56-0:17:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:16:56):**  For instance, if we look a year ago till now, it's now September, 2018.  Have you seen big changes?  What has been the response so far from mainly accredited investors, if I understood correctly?  What's interesting from my perspective is not a lot has changed in the last year, in  the sense that there's still a huge demand for healthy food.  
**[0:17:20-0:17:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:17:20):**  That growth for organic and sustainable food continues to outpace the growth of the regular  food market.  So from the demand side, it's still growing just like it was.  From the supply side, we're still seeing the same constraints holding back the growth of  organic production.  
**[0:17:43-0:17:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:17:43):**  And that's, you know, farmers not willing to change.  That's the cost of transition being too burdensome to the farmers.  It's the conventional systems having too much of a stranglehold on the existing agricultural  system that fights these changes.  And so the reality is, you know, on the overall level, not much has changed.  
**[0:18:08-0:18:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:18:08):**  We as an organization, we've obviously continued to grow every year.  We continue to raise more capital.  Our business is atypical in terms of a private equity investment.  We use an operating company approach.  We don't guarantee that investors are going to get their money back in 10 years because  
**[0:18:27-0:18:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:18:27):**  we're going to sell the asset.  That's just never going to work for our farmers if we tell the farmers like, oh, yeah, we  want to work with you.  But by the way, we're going to sell this farm in five to six years.  And if you can't buy it, you know, that's just the way it's going to be.  
**[0:18:42-0:18:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:18:42):**  Our business is built on long term relationships with these farmers and we have to commit to  them to not sell the farm unless they want to buy it from us.  And because of that, we can't give the investors a defined exit.  That limited the number of investors that were willing to go into this sort of non-traditional  structure in the past.  
**[0:19:05-0:19:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:19:05):**  Fortunately, we're starting to see some of these bigger investors realize that if they  really want to have impact, if they really want to support the types of businesses that  they want to see, they're going to need to venture into these non-traditional investment  structures.  So we are seeing a lot more interest from folks that previously would have ruled us  
**[0:19:26-0:19:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:19:26):**  out saying, no, you don't have a defined exit.  We're not going to invest in you.  So that's a very positive momentum on the impact investing side.  Yeah, which is very interesting.  It's something that has come back many, many times on this show, like the traditional,  
**[0:19:43-0:19:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:19:43):**  just as the traditional way of agriculture is changing, has to change and needs to change  even faster.  So the way of investing six year exit or fund structures of 10 plus two, when it comes to  building soil, when it comes to rebuilding a food system, simply don't fit or aren't  enough and slowly but surely, like, I mean, groups like you are putting out an example  
**[0:20:08-0:20:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:20:08):**  of another way of another, another tool in the toolbox, but that needs to be met with  investors that are ready also to put that in somewhere in their portfolio and to see  that as a, as an interesting investment, maybe not the one they set out to do, but the reality  in agriculture is, is this in time is, is very different compared to a Silicon Valley  investment.  
**[0:20:31-0:20:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:20:31):**  Exactly.  And let's touch upon the democratization piece.  I've seen soil restoration notes, which were mostly for accredited investors.  What has been your thinking on how to bring this to between bracket the masses and to  investors like me that would like to, who are not accredited or what's your, I've, again,  
**[0:20:52-0:20:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:20:52):**  a theme that came back, comes back many, many times, not many in on the short list that  I talked to many of the expiration to do it and really want to get to retail and get to  small scale, but, but it's been quite tricky except for some crowdfunding examples I've  seen.  So what's your take on that?  
**[0:21:10-0:21:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:21:10):**  Yeah, well, I don't want to go on a long diatribe about SCC rules, making my life very  difficult in terms of achieving the goals that we want to achieve about democratizing  impact investing.  But to make a long story short, it's been very difficult to raise capital.  Going out to the true retail investors and non accredited investors, investors that don't  
**[0:21:37-0:21:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:21:37):**  have a net worth above a million dollars.  Fortunately within the United States, the regulations have started to loosen a little  bit and there are some opportunities.  We are looking to launch what is called a regulation, a offering, a specifically a tier  two, also called a reg a plus offering that will allow us to accept basically all investors.  
**[0:22:03-0:22:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:22:03):**  The only limitation is the investor can invest more than 10% of their net worth or 10% of  their annual income into these types of offerings.  So there is some limits on the amount that they can invest based on their particular  earnings and asset situation.  But other than that, within the United States we can accept money from anyone.  
**[0:22:29-0:22:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:22:29):**  We are working right now on putting that together.  It has been a long, slow process.  It is something that we have wanted to do for the past few years, but there's a huge  cost associated with doing so.  So we needed to have the right size and scale.  
**[0:22:47-0:22:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:22:47):**  We needed to have more of our ducks in a row in terms of compliance activities relating  to audits and being capable of meeting other reporting thresholds that are going to be  required of us.  So the burden on our administration side is going to be much higher.  We needed to make sure we are capable of doing that.  
**[0:23:08-0:23:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:23:08):**  All of these reasons have slowed us down from when we would have liked to do this to now.  Our goal is to launch this offering this year, later this year, and start accepting non-accredited  investors.  We feel very strongly that our investment is appropriate for nearly everyone, and we  want to have an offering that allows us to accept anyone that views this as appropriate  
**[0:23:36-0:23:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:23:36):**  for them.  We fortunately are dealing with a real asset, an asset that has a stable valuation.  It doesn't fluctuate tremendously due to market changes.  It is actually not correlated to the overall marketplace.  For that reason, it is a safe and sound investment.  
**[0:23:56-0:24:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:23:56):**  For these smaller investors, the more investors we have, the easier we can provide liquidity  for those smaller investors if anything happens.  That's obviously one of the biggest concerns of the SEC is that the smaller investor gets  trapped and isn't able to get their money when they need to.  We're very fortunate to have a wide investor base and can use that wide investor base to  
**[0:24:18-0:24:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:24:18):**  help take out these smaller investors if and when they need liquidity.  Yeah, extremely interesting.  Without going too much into details, what would that mean for me?  Could I put, what's the minimum?  Is it $1,000 if you already know, and what kind of term am I looking at?  
**[0:24:37-0:24:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:24:37):**  Is it 10 years and dividends?  What kind of structure should I think of if you can already share that?  Obviously, we don't want to go across any lines, but what's the thinking there?  Yeah, so we are looking at a $10,000 minimum.  And the reason for that is there's a limit on the number of investors that we can accept  
**[0:24:59-0:25:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:24:59):**  before we have additional compliance reporting thresholds.  And once we decide to cross that, we can lower the amount.  But for now, we're trying to make sure that we don't cross those thresholds yet.  There still is a lot of administration per investor, and we need to figure out how to  reduce those onboarding transaction costs.  
**[0:25:22-0:25:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:25:22):**  The investment is going to be the same as the investment that people can make right  now.  You're going to see equity shares in the real estate investment trust.  So you as the investor would buy a share of the company, and that company has the diversified  portfolio investment.  
**[0:25:40-0:25:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:25:40):**  So you actually buy the same asset that everyone else already owns, which is great.  You get that instant diversification with your share, that existing portfolio that's  generating revenue.  Long term, you would expect dividends in the 2% to 3% per year.  Right now, we're at about 1%, so we need to continue to grow and leverage some fixed costs  
**[0:26:03-0:26:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:26:03):**  to hit that sort of target, 2% to 3%.  And you would also expect annual appreciation on the value of the stock.  In terms of liquidity, it is going to be the same structure that we have right now, seven  years before you can sell back to the company.  With the big asterisk that anyone who's ever asked for their money back, we paid them out  
**[0:26:30-0:26:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:26:30):**  at whole current value without sort of dinging them on anything.  So we don't want to have investors that don't want to be invested.  We're fortunate that we have the capital, that we have a growing investor base.  We can take out those investors that want out.  We don't want investors coming in thinking that they're only going to be invested for  
**[0:26:50-0:26:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:26:50):**  a year or two.  We want them thinking about seven plus years.  But at the same time, we realize life circumstances change and want to be amenable.  So anyone who's ever asked for their money back, we've given it to them at the current  valuation.  
**[0:27:05-0:27:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:27:05):**  Every single redemption that we've had to date, the investor has made money and has  made a profit on their investment over time.  So we have the track record.  We just can't 100% commit to anything other than the seven years at this time.  No, of course.  
**[0:27:21-0:27:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:27:21):**  You cannot guarantee that as you'd never know the amount of people that could ask in January  2019 suddenly, or I mean, that's fair enough.  And if you look at, let's imagine there's a theater full of smart impact investors listening  to this podcast and they are interested in soil.  They read the books.  
**[0:27:42-0:27:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:27:42):**  They see this generation problem as well.  They see that the organic farmers need to scale a lot of land comes on the market.  What would be your advice, obviously without giving investment advice, but what would be  your advice to where to start if you're not in agriculture or food, but you would like  to get started on that.  
**[0:28:01-0:28:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:28:01):**  You would like to move some of your portfolio or a big chunk of your portfolio in that space.  Where would you reckon both maybe let's look at the US as you know that the market probably  a bit better.  What would be a direction to take?  Well, obviously sitting, you know, working for a company that is supporting the farmers  
**[0:28:22-0:28:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:28:22):**  and supporting the systems directly in the soil.  I would say start, start with the soil.  And there's some asterisks there, but you, you do see the biggest problem for farmers,  especially young farmers is access to land and access to capital.  And those sort of go hand in hand.  
**[0:28:49-0:28:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:28:49):**  I think if we can figure out ways to be creative and support farmers with land security, you're  going to see an increase in the production of sustainable food.  That's going to drive sort of the next layers, the processing, the consumer demand is there.  I don't think you need to, you know, invest in ways to increase the consumer demand.  I'm not sure what that would even look like, but the demand is there.  
**[0:29:20-0:29:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:29:20):**  The supply is not there, at least domestically in the United States to meet the demand.  So if we can figure out how to increase the supply, the systems and the money will flow  into the systems that follow, I personally believe.  So I think starting with something like Iroquois Valley Farms, or depending on your financial  situation, maybe you can be more direct in supporting land access.  
**[0:29:47-0:29:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:29:47):**  But something that meets the farmers where they need it most and meets them in a way  that works for their business systems is essential if you want to see this grow.  There are a lot of landowners that I've come across that are very supportive of sustainable  agriculture and they rent land to farmers for arguably below value because they want  to see that farmer have a low cost, but they're not willing to guarantee them access.  
**[0:30:21-0:30:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:30:21):**  And without that guarantee, the farmer can't develop the infrastructure and they can't  invest the same way if they had that long term security.  So not only do you need that creative capital in terms of maybe willing to be an impact  investment, you also need it to be willing to make commitments long term.  Yeah, it's interesting how time comes back in this discussion because why would you as  
**[0:30:47-0:30:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:30:47):**  a good soil building farmer try to build soil if you only have a one or two year contract?  I mean, from an asset point of view, why are you building up their asset basically, the  soil, if you can be kicked off between brackets a year from now?  Exactly.  And the farmers do it because that's what they believe, but they'd probably be able  
**[0:31:09-0:31:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:31:09):**  to do it better if they had more security.  They'd also be able to invest in things that have a longer lead time in terms of paying  off, especially for soil building, bringing animals into the systems and working rotations.  And to do that, fencing is needed and potentially to increase yields, irrigation is needed,  a fishing gear.  
**[0:31:34-0:31:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:31:34):**  And so there's a variety of infrastructure type things that both are beneficial to the  soil and beneficial to the farmer's bottom line and diversification that need that long  term commitment.  Let alone if you start speaking about trees, et cetera, which I mean, many are completely  out of the 10 year are extremely interesting for soil and farmers.  
**[0:31:57-0:32:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:31:57):**  But yeah, you need the lead time to get to 10 or sometimes 12 years before they are productive.  Absolutely.  Which basically that's the reason why you don't see many trees on farming.  I definitely think that, you know, more incorporation of permaculture systems needs to be brought  in and there's also a learning factor on that as well, because there's not as many systems  
**[0:32:20-0:32:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:32:20):**  in place, the farmers aren't educated on how to use them.  So there's a training aspect needed on that side as well, which goes a little bit beyond  the impact investing needs.  And if you look at the market on a farmer level, are there enough?  Do you see enough good capable?  
**[0:32:38-0:32:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:32:38):**  I mean, they need to be trained obviously, but soil building farmers that is, if we would  really increase the amount of capital organizations like you are managing and does much more land.  Are there enough good farmers to, to, to farm the land and build up the soil?  Absolutely.  Uh, you know, we personally are inundated with requests from, from farmers.  
**[0:33:05-0:33:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:33:05):**  We cannot fulfill sort of the pipeline of farmers that come to us, uh, you know, and  knock on wood.  That's good.  We can pick the cream of the crop, so to speak, and work with the best farmers.  We don't even advertise in terms of trying to find new farmers.  
**[0:33:26-0:33:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:33:26):**  Farmers come to us mostly through word of mouth.  We do go to a couple of agricultural conferences a year and we'll meet some, some new farmers  that way.  Uh, but if we had twice as much capital or three times as much capital, we'd still be  able to deploy it in a reasonable amount of time.  
**[0:33:44-0:33:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:33:44):**  There's plenty of farmers out there that, that need this.  There are plenty of talented farmers around and it's just needed that the capital needs  to be there.  The systems need to be there.  And that all, that all starts with the land security piece in my mind.  
**[0:34:02-0:34:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:34:02):**  And is that your, like, let's say we, we talk in a year from now, September, 2019, I mean,  obviously you want to launch this year, the democratization piece.  Um, will you be mostly focused on the fundraising part as, as that seems to be, but correct  me if I'm wrong, the big bottleneck so far, the biggest leverage point.  Yeah, absolutely.  
**[0:34:24-0:34:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:34:24):**  You know, in the next year, I sort of hope that we haven't changed too much.  I hope that we're a larger company that we've, you know, provided access to a wider base  of investors.  Uh, what we need to do personally is become more efficient and continue to grow and scale  and leverage our existing resources.  
**[0:34:47-0:34:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:34:47):**  Uh, but we are never going to get that big VC type money because we're not dealing with  a company that has exponential growth opportunities.  We're, we're in the soil working with the farmers one farm at a time, and that is a  slow growth, uh, business and takes time to build.  And we, I just hope a year from now that we've stayed our course and are true to ourselves  
**[0:35:13-0:35:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:35:13):**  and are still working with the same great farmers and, you know, have more investors  and we're always going to need to continue to grow and operate more efficiently and make  sure that the investors are getting the liquidity that they need, getting the dividend that  is attractive to them, but in a way that still is working appropriately for our farmers.  And just very briefly on exponential growth, do you see exponential growth in terms of  
**[0:35:42-0:35:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:35:42):**  learnings of a farmer, like when they, he or she, or as a couple or as a family go to  organic and then beyond, is there a speed up?  I've seen it sometimes that some people get really into it and you can see almost that  the soil, the carbon level in the soil follows the same, like as it gets over a certain threshold,  like the systems just began to turn faster as the farmer learns and learns and approves  
**[0:36:07-0:36:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:36:07):**  and of course adjusts a lot.  Do you see that a lot happening, like people get, get into it more and that there is a  nonlinear path there?  Definitely in the early years, absolutely.  I think that there is, when a farmer makes that commitment to organic and maybe they've  
**[0:36:25-0:36:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:36:25):**  been farming conventionally in the past, it's drinking from the fire hose is probably the  best analogy, just like anything else.  And there's so much to learn, so much to do.  And the deeper you dive, you realize the more you can go into the science and technical  aspects and you see some of our farmers digging very deeply into that stuff.  
**[0:36:49-0:36:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:36:49):**  You see a lot of our farmers taking it from a higher level perspective, coming up with  systems and rotations that work for their geographies and their markets.  I think you start to see some plateauing once you've gotten through those first probably  five to 10 years of experience.  But even after that, there's still continual learning.  
**[0:37:14-0:37:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:37:14):**  You know, I sort of talked earlier about optimal soil health and I don't know if there is such  a thing, but there always is opportunities to improve and all our farmers are looking  for those.  And those are not only going to develop by better science and understanding, they're  going to develop by markets and access and equipment and other techniques that are more  
**[0:37:43-0:37:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:37:43):**  than just understanding the soil biology.  And how are you facilitating those lessons learned, the sharing between the farmers?  Because all these pioneers, even though they might operate in slightly different geographies  and does different rotation systems and obviously different markets, there seems to be a big  role for an organization like yourself to really make sure that they get access to this  
**[0:38:09-0:38:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:38:09):**  maybe a bit underground knowledge that they won't find at their neighbors.  Yeah.  We're very fortunate that the farmers communicate a lot amongst their networks.  You know, one of our big items when we are reviewing a farmer and their operation is  understanding who they're learning from and how they're learning.  
**[0:38:32-0:38:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:38:32):**  So we want to work with someone that is applying this concept of continuous improvement and  continuing to learn.  So they generally already have their existing networks.  With that being said, we share information between our farmers when it might be relevant.  We are very supportive of our farmers going to organic farming conferences.  
**[0:38:55-0:39:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:38:55):**  You know, there's a whole host of great farming conferences across the United States.  And in the past, we've actually paid for them their attendance to those so that they have  access to more of those farmers and have the opportunity to continually learn.  I don't think as I mentioned, we are going to be those in-house resident experts, but  we can be a conduit for giving them access to those experts and encouraging that and  
**[0:39:22-0:39:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:39:22):**  making it affordable.  And you know, that accrues to everyone's benefit.  It's beneficial for the planet because their operations improve.  It's beneficial to our investors bottom line because they potentially become more profitable  by becoming more efficient and needing less inputs and becoming more holistic.  
**[0:39:44-0:39:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:39:44):**  So it really is a win-win to support those types of conferences and learnings.  And you know, we have sponsored those conferences in the past.  We want to make sure that our farmers continually to be engaged and that's economically feasible  for them.  So that's really the biggest role that we can help in continuing to help them develop  
**[0:40:09-0:40:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:40:09):**  and grow their knowledge base.  And in terms of impact investing, it's always a big topic.  Measurements.  What are you measuring when it comes to sustainable agriculture?  Yeah, that's a great question because there's so much one could measure and there's a cost  
**[0:40:30-0:40:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:40:30):**  for measurement, which is always tough.  Right now we are developing a soil measurement protocol and we are going to focus on one  of the big biological markers that is not, you know, the end all be all in terms of soil  health, but is probably what we think as one of the biggest indicators of soil health and  that's organic matter.  
**[0:40:55-0:41:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:40:55):**  So we are in the process of working with a third party to develop this soil measurement  protocol, which will look at organic matter over time.  And we've worked with a few farmers that have already been doing this and shown that they  can take farms with very low organic matter, you know, 1% and over a reasonable time period  develop that to 5 and 6%.  
**[0:41:22-0:41:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:41:22):**  And we want to see that over time with the farms that we're working with and the farmers  businesses.  And so that is our focus right now in terms of direct soil health measurements.  And I'm sure as science evolves and as testing becomes more reasonable, we can look and add  on top of that.  
**[0:41:44-0:41:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:41:44):**  And beyond the soil health, obviously we look at the number of acres that are under organic  management, the number of acres that we are bringing from conventional to organic, the  number of farm families that we are supporting.  Those are all important metrics for our business because we're about supporting these organic  farm families and increasing the number of acres in organic production.  
**[0:42:09-0:42:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:42:09):**  Yeah.  That seems to make a lot of sense.  And maybe also the answer to the plateauing of at some point a field reaches, like it's  sort of not optimum, but in that system, the maximum soil organic matter, but then maybe  the farmer gets restless or their neighbor wants to retire and they knock on your door  
**[0:42:29-0:42:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:42:29):**  to acquire the next field of one or even less percent organic matter that they can get their  hands dirty again to see even if they can get it even faster up to six or seven.  Absolutely.  And just as a final question, I want to be conscious of your time.  We're almost on top of the hour.  
**[0:42:46-0:42:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:42:46):**  If you could wave your magic wand in the industry, not necessarily for the company itself, what  would you change to make regenerative agriculture and actually regenerative food as well more  accessible, more mainstream?  What would be the one thing, one barrier that you would take away with your magic wand?  Yeah.  
**[0:43:07-0:43:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:43:07):**  That's a, that's a really interesting question.  And from my perspective, unfortunately there's no silver bullet, right?  There is a whole host of issues that need to be addressed within the agricultural system.  What I personally think would have the most benefit sort of improving the agricultural  landscape would be removing the systems that encourage and allow for confined feeding operations.  
**[0:43:41-0:43:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:43:41):**  I think if you can bring animals back into the farm,  Just to be clear, CAFOs, factory farms.  Exactly.  Bring the animals back onto the farm, eating their natural diet, especially the animals  that are grazers.  
**[0:43:57-0:44:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:43:57):**  That is going to do wonders for a whole host of environmental problems caused by factory  farms.  It's going to force farmers to bring animals back into the land, which is better for the  soil management.  It's going to provide farmers opportunities to diversify.  
**[0:44:16-0:44:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:44:16):**  It's going to create food that is more healthy for humans.  I mean, there's tons of studies that show the, you know, especially on milk specifically  that show the increase in nutrient content of pasture raised milk versus industrial sort  of milk operations where they're just tied up all day.  And that's the same for pasture raised meat.  
**[0:44:42-0:44:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:44:42):**  I don't think you're going to change the consumer's behavior in terms of how much meat they want.  I think that trend is going to continue to be there.  I also think that there's production systems that's essential to have animals on the land.  So I don't want to change that system.  But if you can improve the way meat is raised, there's going to be a whole host of benefits  
**[0:45:04-0:45:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:45:04):**  both environmentally and socially because you're feeding the population with better  quality meat.  And so that would probably be the biggest thing that I would like to see changed in  the system.  And that's going to do, you know, would make a huge dent, but there's still tons of other  
**[0:45:23-0:45:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:45:23):**  work that would need to be done.  Yeah, obviously.  And with that, I would like to thank you, Kevin, for your time this morning.  And I'll definitely be checking in how the democratization piece is going, the fundraising  in general, and of course, the allocation, soil management or measurement levels.  
**[0:45:41-0:45:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:45:41):**  It all sounds extremely necessary and interesting.  Thank you so much.  You're welcome.  Thanks for having me, Colin.  You just listened to an interview with Kevin Ego, CFO of Iroquois Valley Farms.  
**[0:45:53-0:45:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:45:53):**  I hope you learned something about how you can put money to work to help farmland transition  towards organic and beyond organic and into longer term hands, farmhands actually, while  helping the next generation of family farmers grow.  Thank you for making the time to listen to this podcast and making it all the way till  the end.  
**[0:46:12-0:46:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:46:12):**  I hope you enjoyed it as much as I did.  If you found the investing in regenerative agriculture and food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast.  
**[0:46:26-0:46:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:46:26):**  And it only takes a few seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you, and if you have the means, please  join my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or in the description  
**[0:46:48-0:46:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:46:48):**  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  
**[0:47:14-0:47:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:47:14):**  Why are we doing this course?  After a hundred interviews and more than a hundred hours of audio asking the question,  how to put money to work in regenerating soils, and I've been following the space since 2011  and recording these podcasts since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in this space over the last years?  
**[0:47:31-0:47:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:47:31):**  How have we built our decision-making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees and what questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  
**[0:47:43-0:47:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:47:43):**  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space for whom is this course?  You the soil builders and investors in this space, the soil builders, people working in  this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers, vehicle builders, crowd investing,  
**[0:47:59-0:48:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:47:59):**  platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food companies, permaculture key line  miners, holistic management, consultants, et cetera, et cetera.  People that are building soil at scale and the investors who are putting their own money  to work through their family office or as private individuals or people who are putting  other people's money to work through foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies,  
**[0:48:21-0:48:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:48:21):**  et cetera.  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning, I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you.  
**[0:48:30-0:48:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:48:30):**  And I'm very aware that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very  different means.  So I'm inviting you if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  
**[0:48:45-0:48:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:48:45):**  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides.  So you don't have to ride along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture.  So risky.  
**[0:49:00-0:49:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:49:00):**  How to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to invest  in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find if  you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  
**[0:49:20-0:49:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:49:20):**  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately, that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  
**[0:49:33-0:49:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/10/05/kevin-egolf/#t=0:49:33):**  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  