### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2018-00-14)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  Welcome to another episode of investing in regenerative agriculture, investing as if  the planet mattered.  
**[0:00:21-0:00:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:00:21):**  A podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  
**[0:00:42-0:00:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:00:42):**  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  You will listen to an interview about something many never consider, but we have discussed  before when it comes to land with Thomas and Ian, ownership structures.  
**[0:01:01-0:01:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:01:01):**  In this case, it's not necessarily about land, but about companies and especially mission  driven companies.  Do we dare to ask the power question, who controls the steering wheel of a company?  And is that steering wheel for sale?  Is it inherited or is it steward owned?  
**[0:01:16-0:01:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:01:16):**  And how do we make sure that companies, especially impactful companies, won't turn into a commodity?  Because what use is it if we all spend a lot of our time, sweat, energy and money to build  amazing regenerative food and agriculture companies that get sold when they become profitable,  while they still could have and could have made an enormous impact for the decades to  come.  
**[0:01:36-0:01:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:01:36):**  And now without further ado, the interview.  Enjoy.  Welcome to the podcast.  I'm Koen van Zeyen, your host.  Today I'm joined by Armin, entrepreneur in food, co-founder of the Purpose Network and  
**[0:01:47-0:01:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:01:47):**  Impact Investor.  Purpose Network helps companies to stay independent and mission driven for the long term.  They believe that by innovating the way companies are owned, financed and governed, companies  become more successful in the long run and can benefit all of society.  Steward owned companies make a legally binding commitment to their employees and customers,  
**[0:02:06-0:02:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:02:06):**  that the company is not a speculative good or commodity, but a group of people working  for a purpose.  This all sounds extremely interesting and very relevant for the regenerative food and  agriculture sector.  So let's find out more.  
**[0:02:17-0:02:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:02:17):**  Welcome Armin.  Hi, good morning.  So to start with a personal question, how do you end up working on ownership structures  of mission driven companies?  Yeah, I started several companies myself.  
**[0:02:30-0:02:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:02:30):**  And so I was more or less forced to think about ownership structures already very early  on.  And but there was one particular moment or one particular event that somehow pushed me  to think even more about it.  That was actually an employee of mine.  
**[0:02:47-0:02:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:02:47):**  So I founded also one company in the organic food sector and organic food for children.  And my co-founder and I, we always told everybody, ourselves, our families, but also our employees,  well, we're all getting up every morning to get children excited for good and healthy  food.  That's the reason.  
**[0:03:07-0:03:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:03:07):**  You know, that's why we're working here.  And one day, one of the employees of us came to us and said, wait a minute, is that actually  true?  Are we actually working for that purpose?  Or aren't we actually working for you both?  
**[0:03:23-0:03:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:03:23):**  Because you can monetize it.  You can sell it.  You can pass it on to your children.  They can monetize it, etc.  And we actually working for your wealth.  
**[0:03:35-0:03:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:03:35):**  And that was kind of a provocative question.  But we realized legally, she was right.  And I realized, you know, without intending it, without wanting it, I had set up a legal  entity that would somehow serve my wealth.  And that was against my feelings, against my intentions, because we had this understanding  
**[0:04:04-0:04:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:04:04):**  of, you know, we're working together.  It's a project.  We want to serve a certain purpose.  We want to create something great, etc.  And that's what so many of the impact entrepreneurs somehow feel.  
**[0:04:16-0:04:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:04:16):**  They really want to change something.  You know, that's the attitude.  And then you look for a legal form.  You need to incorporate because you need a bank account.  Very simple.  
**[0:04:27-0:04:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:04:27):**  And that's only possible with a legal form.  So you look around and you probably choose a limited company in whatever form in whatever  country.  But in the moment of incorporation, something strange happens.  Suddenly you're not anymore like the steward of this idea, the custodian, the servant who  
**[0:04:45-0:04:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:04:45):**  really helps this idea to life.  But suddenly the relationship changes.  The idea, the purpose suddenly serves you because you have you are owning wealth.  You can sell your idea.  You can destroy it.  
**[0:04:59-0:05:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:04:59):**  You have all the rights that you have if you own, for example, this laptop you are sitting  in front of now.  So that somehow felt strange when I realized, oh, there's something wrong.  I have to look for different ownership structures to somehow make sure that we can all work  really for a purpose here and that I can remain a steward and don't become just a normal,  
**[0:05:26-0:05:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:05:26):**  you know, shareholder and in the future an absentee owner who just collects profits.  So that was somehow the problem.  And that led me to thinking about these questions and then also finding solutions and starting  purpose.  And can you, I mean, it sounds extremely relevant and interesting.  
**[0:05:44-0:05:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:05:44):**  Can you make it concrete with some examples?  I know you've been working in the startup space and you've been working in the slightly  later stage, more much more mature companies.  Can you do an example in both of how that how do you keep this practical?  How do you keep this workable?  
**[0:06:00-0:06:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:06:00):**  How does it work?  And some examples to make it concrete.  Yeah.  So maybe before I give an example of a startup, I can give the example of my own company.  So now with that problem in mind, how can we have a different ownership structures?  
**[0:06:16-0:06:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:06:16):**  I went around and looked for companies who did it differently.  And I found actually there are companies who have been doing it differently for four decades,  even more than 100 years.  And I collected a lot of them and some of the brands are known, like John Lewis company,  some are less known, like ZEISS or Dr. Hauschka.  
**[0:06:43-0:06:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:06:43):**  And I realized they all have found very interesting ownership structures, sometimes with a foundation  involved in there, sometimes with a trust that all ensure basically two things, two  main principles that I became to believe that they are actually the core of really making  sure that the company is steward owned, as I call it, or you could also say self-owned.  And so one thing that all of them make sure is self-governance.  
**[0:07:14-0:07:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:07:14):**  So they all somehow make sure the majority of the voting rights, the majority of the  steering wheel basically of the company isn't a tradable commodity anymore.  So the steering wheel cannot be sold, it cannot be passed on to children.  It's always held in trust basically in hands of people who are stewards, who are really  connected to the company, who are often actively engaged working in the company.  
**[0:07:40-0:07:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:07:40):**  And this can be made sure, as I said, by a foundation, by a trust, by many other different  solutions we can come to that later.  And the second principle, besides the self-governance principle, is the principle of purpose that  all of these companies, even big companies like Bosch, really adhere to.  And that's, yeah, principle of purpose that basically says our entire endeavor, our company  
**[0:08:02-0:08:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:08:02):**  is there for a purpose.  And yes, we need to make profits, but profits are seen as a means to an end and not an end  in itself.  And what does it mean concretely?  It means you are, if you make profits, of course, you pay back investors or you're paying  
**[0:08:17-0:08:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:08:17):**  even a good return to investors.  But then the rest, you are reinvesting, you're donating, and you are capping the upside for  all stakeholders to make sure that there's enough money being reinvested and used for  the purpose.  Now, these are two principles that somehow all of these companies that I and then later  
**[0:08:37-0:08:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:08:37):**  also a lot of other friends and colleagues looked into, somehow implement.  And yeah, that's what we came to call Steward Ownership.  And now, how is that doable concretely in a certain situation?  Let's say a startup.  Let me give you an example of maybe, you know, Ecosia?  
**[0:09:03-0:09:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:09:03):**  Yeah, sure.  The search engine.  Ecosia is a great search engine that everybody should use because it's planting trees with  your searches and it's not tracking you, so it's better than Google.  Has planted over 40 million trees in the meantime.  
**[0:09:21-0:09:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:09:21):**  And the founder could be a quite filthy rich man if he sold the company because he has  more than 8 million users.  And you know, you can calculate yourself how many millions he would get if he sold it to,  let's say, Dr. Go or Yahoo or whoever.  He decided not to do that.  
**[0:09:42-0:09:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:09:42):**  He decided, I want to promise to the entire world, to all stakeholders, to my employees,  that this is a company that's self-owned, that's Steward-owned.  That means I and also some others are stewards for a certain time.  We cannot take out any profits for ourselves.  We just have the voting rights.  
**[0:10:00-0:10:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:10:00):**  We just have, so say, the steering wheel in trust.  Then we need to give it back to the company once we leave the company and there are certain  succession mechanisms in place.  So he promised that and we designed his entire charter in that way that, you know, now he  holds only shares that have voting rights.  
**[0:10:22-0:10:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:10:22):**  But then there is a very important problem because a charter can always be changed.  You could promise this and then, you know, the next day, once a big hedge fund comes  along and says, well, we want to buy you for a crazy amount of money, you could say, well,  wait a minute, I just changed the charter again.  So we needed a security there and we needed somehow a mission lock.  
**[0:10:47-0:10:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:10:47):**  And that mission lock we found in a golden share or impact share or veto share as we  sometimes call it.  And so basically Ecosia now implemented exactly that structure.  They said, okay, we have two share classes.  One is for stewards.  
**[0:11:04-0:11:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:11:04):**  They hold the control.  And they can do everything, but they cannot change their promise.  They cannot fall behind their promise.  If they want to change that, they need 100 percent majority and one percent of the shares  lies in a foundation.  
**[0:11:17-0:11:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:11:17):**  In that case, it's the purpose foundation, but it can be also any other foundation that  has the right and the obligation to veto any attempt of falling back behind their promise.  And this foundation itself has in its charter this kind of rule to veto these attempts.  And in the case of the purpose foundation, it holds these kinds of veto shares now in  more than a dozen cases.  
**[0:11:42-0:11:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:11:42):**  So this is one way, but there are, of course, many other ways to implement steward ownership.  And you cannot believe what kind of effect this very hard legal commitment that you cannot  roll back, that's the important thing, had when Christian, the founder of Ecosia, told  this to his employees.  You know, that was such a magical moment because people really understood, okay, he's serious.  
**[0:12:13-0:12:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:12:13):**  We're not talking just about it.  So that it has an enormous motivational effect.  It somehow enables people to and it fosters intrinsic motivation.  That's maybe the best expression.  It allows people to really be intrinsic.  
**[0:12:28-0:12:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:12:28):**  So this is a startup example.  Is that what you know, what helps you to understand or do you want to hear something more from  the investment world?  Definitely.  It helps to, I think, paint a picture that in the impact sector and maybe in food in  
**[0:12:43-0:12:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:12:43):**  the impact sector and agriculture as well, we often talk about impact, but maybe leave  it at that.  And things change, companies change, interests change, personal situations change.  And maybe at some point we find ourselves in a position where there's an offer or a  lot of money on the table, like in many cases, or like the organic food movement now is being  
**[0:13:04-0:13:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:13:04):**  threatened by that.  And it's very difficult to say no to that when there's a huge, huge offer on the table.  But when there's a, we maybe forgot to make the logical next step to actually make it  a legal legally binding agreement to not change the mission.  And unless you have that, there are only very few people that say no to, I don't know how  
**[0:13:24-0:13:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:13:24):**  many pensions and their children's pensions.  And who's to blame if somebody offers 200 million or 50 million or whatever the number  is for your company that you and all your colleagues worked for so long.  The problem is it goes to one family.  Yeah, absolutely.  
**[0:13:38-0:13:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:13:38):**  No, it's, I would say our human psych is not built to resist to that kind of 100, 200 million  offers.  And it, well, I, we work together with entrepreneurs who actually have gone through that kind of  internal processes.  And that's super interesting.  
**[0:14:00-0:14:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:14:00):**  You know what, how hard it is even for impact entrepreneurs.  I can give you one example of a company that I shouldn't mention, like, but, but I can  tell you they, they, it's a company in a tech space and they got an offer by LinkedIn, you  know, one of the big companies.  And LinkedIn started and they were like 20 million and they said, no, we're not interested.  
**[0:14:24-0:14:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:14:24):**  You know, we are so mission driven.  We do what we want to do because, et cetera.  And then suddenly they said 40 million and then they still said no.  60, they still said no. 80, they still said no.  And then they asked them, you know, what, is there a price at which you are selling  
**[0:14:40-0:14:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:14:40):**  or are you not just not selling or what's going on?  Because in the meantime, even the CEO of LinkedIn had spoken to them and they, and they thought  about it and said, well, maybe, you know, a nine digit number.  And then they said a hundred million and said, wait a minute, that's the first nine digit  number.  
**[0:14:55-0:14:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:14:55):**  That's not what we meant.  And they said, okay, then you come up with a number because they really wanted to buy  them because they thought that is, you know, we need a company.  And they thought about it and said, well, maybe 120 million.  They will never do this.  
**[0:15:09-0:15:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:15:09):**  This would be so crazy.  Both founders were 23 and 26 year olds.  Now they are just a little bit older.  So it's, and then LinkedIn said, no, you know, that's not possible.  But of course, three days later they got a text message.  
**[0:15:23-0:15:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:15:23):**  We do 120 and they had, they couldn't sleep at night and they sat together, the founders  with their employees.  They calculated how much everybody would get.  And then they thought, wait a minute, are we already done?  Do we really, are we done with what we're doing here?  
**[0:15:39-0:15:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:15:39):**  No.  And an advisor had asked them that question.  Are you done?  And they said, no, of course not.  We still want to do self management, decentralized work, you know, all these things that we're  
**[0:15:48-0:15:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:15:48):**  doing and, and continuing with our mission.  And he said, well, then you can't sell.  And then they ended up not selling, but it was such a tough process.  The founder who negotiated with LinkedIn, he said, you know, he had to meditate so often  before he actually got on the call with LinkedIn, he, he had this text like by heart that what  
**[0:16:10-0:16:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:16:10):**  he would say, et cetera, because it's so many forces inside you go crazy.  If you're saying to somebody, no, I, as a founder, co-founder don't want to have 60  million on the bank account tomorrow.  And the other co-founder neither.  You know, what, what kind of, how many soul forces and psychological forces are we, it's  
**[0:16:31-0:16:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:16:31):**  very difficult to imagine.  And it's, it's a very difficult technique that capitalism in that sense is, is using  there basically corrupting people, I would say by these enormous numbers and only, only  the ones that are really, that are young enough, I would say, and internally strong enough  can say no to that.  
**[0:16:52-0:16:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:16:52):**  And I don't blame anybody who, who uses the opportunity and sells.  And as you said, especially one industry is currently under attack.  And that's of course the industry that you're also working in the organic food industry  and agriculture industry with all the pioneers who really wanted to change the world.  And now for years, nobody was interested in their companies.  
**[0:17:18-0:17:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:17:18):**  And now suddenly everybody becomes interested in wants to buy them.  And but what's interesting there is I think you have to make your, you have to make your  calculation also with the customers.  I don't know whether you saw that in Germany, there's this one of the largest natural care  and natural cosmetic companies, Logona was sold to L'Oreal just a few weeks ago.  
**[0:17:47-0:17:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:17:47):**  And a customer heard about it.  Of course.  And what you saw is customers were outraged.  You know, they were the ones who built that brand.  They went to organic supermarkets and organic cosmetic stores for years over years.  
**[0:18:07-0:18:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:18:07):**  They asked, where's this brand?  I want to buy it.  They build it.  Yeah.  Where's this brand?  
**[0:18:13-0:18:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:18:13):**  They paid much more for that brand.  They were stuck in traffic to go to that one little shop in the corner of the city 10 years  ago when it wasn't sold everywhere.  So these were the people who were really, really fans of it and helped this brand.  And now once it's profitable, so what you saw is actually a big shitstorm and actually  
**[0:18:33-0:18:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:18:33):**  organic supermarkets letting customers vote whether they should throw it out or not.  And 80 percent voted yes, throw them out.  We don't want to see them anymore.  So it's interesting.  It's we are getting into a time where it's important for your brand how you are owned.  
**[0:18:49-0:18:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:18:49):**  And if you're owned by a multinational company because you're selling to them, it will definitely  damage your brand.  And so do you have an example in that?  I know there are some.  And can you talk about one or two for the pioneering companies that have been around  
**[0:19:02-0:19:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:19:02):**  for a few decades, especially in the organic space?  I mean, you can see the ones that started, let's say, 30 years ago and now a founder  or maybe a management team has come to an age where it also starts to be interesting  to think about pension and retiring, although the mission, of course, is still not completed.  What do you do with a company that wants to transition to steward ownership?  
**[0:19:26-0:19:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:19:26):**  And how do you make that work also from the investor side of things and still sort of  take care of the pension, maybe not with two, three, four hundred million, but with enough  to live comfortably for the founder?  A fair return.  Yeah.  
**[0:19:39-0:19:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:19:39):**  Yeah.  Maybe maybe one good example there is organically grown company OGC in the US, Portland, Oregon.  That's the second largest organic produce wholesaler in the US, I think.  And with only 200 million in revenue and 200 employees, they were founded as a co-op by  farmers already 30 years ago.  
**[0:20:06-0:20:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:20:06):**  And then they transformed to ESOP ownership, Employee Stock Option Plan, and the US a very  particular plan.  And now they were actually in a very dangerous situation because first, part of the shareholders  were former farmers, former employees, so people who weren't anymore really connected  to the company and were interested in a pension.  
**[0:20:35-0:20:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:20:35):**  And then you had the ESOP plan getting close to 51 percent.  And the problem in the US is ESOP, in the ESOP plan, employees can't vote themselves.  They just get the benefits.  That's the pension plan for them.  But a trustee votes and the trustee is obliged by law to always vote and use his voting power  
**[0:20:56-0:20:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:20:56):**  and to maximize profits for the employees.  That means if he gets an offer, for example, by Amazon or selling would be the maximum  profit.  He has to do it.  He has to sell.  
**[0:21:06-0:21:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:21:06):**  You cannot get around it.  And that's when they realized, oh, damn, you know, we are in a very dangerous situation  around us.  All of the organic pioneers are bought up by, you know, seven generations was bought  up.  
**[0:21:21-0:21:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:21:21):**  You know, that Whole Foods was bought by Amazon, et cetera.  We have to change something.  And they looked around and said, OK, we want to actually set up something like steward  ownership.  So the steering wheel of the company isn't a tradable commodity anymore.  
**[0:21:35-0:21:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:21:35):**  And the other thing that they realized, actually, is once they went into this ESOP plan a few  years in, people started to behave a little bit differently because they had an internal  conflict.  They were employees.  They were stewards of the company, yes, but they were also interested and they were also  
**[0:21:56-0:21:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:21:56):**  pension holders and investors.  And sometimes this conflict became apparent that they were actually thinking of the company  as investors and not anymore as stewards.  So there was this little strange thing.  So they thought, OK, we don't want to have investors or employees as investors.  
**[0:22:12-0:22:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:22:12):**  We want to make sure they really can be stewards.  And they looked for a good ownership structure in the US.  And what they found is a very, very unknown structure.  It's a perpetual purpose trust.  That means it's a trust that, unlike all other trusts, doesn't have any beneficiaries, any  
**[0:22:34-0:22:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:22:34):**  natural persons as beneficiaries, but it has a purpose.  In that case, it's organic agriculture as the purpose.  And it's perpetual.  So it doesn't end.  And they set this up.  
**[0:22:47-0:22:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:22:47):**  And now the question was, how can we get the company in there?  And that's when they needed financing and also a new kind of financing.  They needed basically alternative buyout capital, alternative private equity and capital in  order to buy out some of the old investors.  And that's when we went in there and we negotiated with them.  
**[0:23:09-0:23:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:23:09):**  And the former owners or some of the former employees and farmers said, well, we don't  want the full valuation.  We can be much lower, et cetera.  And so we found a good way.  Some also helped basically exchange their shares for a new class of shares.  
**[0:23:28-0:23:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:23:28):**  And it was financed through a mix of that and equity.  And but the equity side, of course, must be very different because if you want to make  sure that is now maybe the interesting part here.  Yeah.  How do you invest in this without taking the steering wheel away again?  
**[0:23:48-0:23:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:23:48):**  Exactly.  Without taking the steering wheel.  Because the usual way of investing and that's what we all learned.  You give money, you get power.  Very simple.  
**[0:23:58-0:23:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:23:58):**  Money equals power.  That's the equation of capitalism.  So that's how investment functions.  And now they are saying, wait a minute, you don't get power because the power is held  in trust by distrust.  
**[0:24:09-0:24:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:24:09):**  So OK, that's a hard pill to swallow for some investors.  It's super scary because basically you have to trust literally that the processes of the  trust work to come along in the long run.  Well, yeah, exactly.  And also interesting for you.  
**[0:24:24-0:24:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:24:24):**  Yeah, but there are also other instruments that can reduce the need of only trust and  it can give you a bit more security.  But indeed, one important process is can we make sure that the perpetual purpose trust  in that case, the steward owner has a good governance structure and we help them to design  that.  
**[0:24:43-0:24:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:24:43):**  It's a very interesting stakeholder governing structure.  So both employees and farmers, suppliers that supply that supply most of their crops yearly  to O.G.C.  They can be they are considered stakeholders and then they can vote people to the to the  Trust Protector Committee.  
**[0:25:07-0:25:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:25:07):**  That's what it's called.  But of course, we said, you know, guys, we need some kind of other protections.  We don't know whether you because we are now holding shares as purpose.  We are now holding shares.  But what does it help to have shares with some dividend rights without any voting rights  
**[0:25:24-0:25:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:25:24):**  if you can basically decide whether you distribute dividends or not?  So we need a certain security that one if you have free cash flow, you you're actually  paying it out.  So we said, OK, we're not interfering.  We don't have any voting rights, but you should give us a certain security that once you have  
**[0:25:41-0:25:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:25:41):**  free cash flow, you you are paying it out.  At least in that case, it was five percent needs to be paid out.  And then there's a certain waterfall that they can use the money to reinvest, help their  farmers, help the employees, give them a little bit better, you know, flexible pay, et cetera.  And then once that is done, we get even more return, six percent.  
**[0:26:03-0:26:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:26:03):**  And then, you know, there's a certain waterfall that we negotiated through.  You have to do this thing then already in advance.  The question of how do you distribute the money?  And that gave us and also other investors who were participating in this 10 million  preferred equity round enough security.  
**[0:26:27-0:26:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:26:27):**  But yeah, as you said, it's for some, it's definitely still very scary.  Yeah.  And that seems to be your I mean, this is the way you're working.  Not scary, but you're you're advising, you're working with companies, either startups and  larger ones to to get them through that process, which is much more than just being the investor.  
**[0:26:46-0:26:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:26:46):**  But of course, the governance structure and all the structures around have to be either  invented or rediscovered, like in this case, this perpetual purpose trust.  And then everybody has to be comfortable with that.  And so I imagine it's a that's quite a lot of work.  Yeah.  
**[0:27:02-0:27:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:27:02):**  And I'm excited to you have been doing this investing part with startups for over the  last years.  And now you're working on a fund.  Can you tell a bit more about that?  And what what that is looking at?  
**[0:27:14-0:27:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:27:14):**  Yeah, I know.  Happy to do that.  And so as you said, over the last years, we we invested in around 10 companies more in  the startup space companies that said, we want to be student like Ecosia, but we still  need to grow.  
**[0:27:29-0:27:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:27:29):**  Can you finance us without taking without us needing to sell our soul and our values  and without giving you a track along ride and voting rights, et cetera?  So we did this and this was quite just work quite well.  But we realized there are actually many companies in the more mature space, high impact companies  that somehow have grown and that that now after years of successful business, they're  
**[0:28:00-0:28:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:28:00):**  thinking about succession and about long term ownership plans.  And some of them are very, very open to steward ownership.  Actually, they want steward ownership because they say, well, selling it doesn't what what  would potentially undermine our mission drive and our and definitely our independence.  I don't want it.  
**[0:28:22-0:28:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:28:22):**  I don't want to do a traditional IPO.  I need something else, but I have to problem my investors still need some kind of liquidity  or you know, my co-founder is crazy.  He doesn't want to do that.  He wants the highest valuation or whatever.  
**[0:28:38-0:28:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:28:38):**  So you have all kinds of obstacles in the way.  But and we said, OK, these people, we need to be able to help.  And there is nobody around and no private equity fund that is actually helping basically  to companies to set up foundation ownership, steward ownership, alternative buyout capital,  like you mentioned before, which is super alternative, obviously.  
**[0:29:01-0:29:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:29:01):**  Yeah, yeah.  It's not really there.  And that's when we said, OK, actually, we need to set up a special vehicle that can  do that.  And that's when we sat together with the GLS Bank.  
**[0:29:12-0:29:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:29:12):**  That's the largest sustainable bank in Germany.  We talked with them about it and said, OK, that's a very good idea.  We want to support that.  And we found and then one of the guys, Daniel Formolka, who was the co-founder of the Traders  Organic Growth Fund.  
**[0:29:31-0:29:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:29:31):**  That is, yeah, as you probably know, also an evergreen fund.  But that's not really focused on these ownership structures and actually not able to invest  in these kinds of ownership structures, as we found out.  In one case, we even, it's another story, we had to buy them out because they were blocking  it.  
**[0:29:49-0:29:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:29:49):**  But that's, as I said, another story.  For another time.  For another time.  But so Daniel Formolka joined us and we said, OK, let's set up something that we call now  Purpose Evergreen Capital.  
**[0:30:00-0:30:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:30:00):**  So it's an evergreen structure.  It's not a typical fund.  We got an exception from the German regulators that we're not regulated as a fund, but more  as a holding company because it's more holding.  Because otherwise you would have your 10 plus 2 plus 2 maybe, but who knows what's happened  
**[0:30:17-0:30:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:30:17):**  in 14 years.  You'll be structured completely opposite to the way you're trying to invest as an alternative  buyout fund.  Yeah, exactly.  We want to be able to think in the long term, to invest in the companies and if one, stick  
**[0:30:33-0:30:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:30:33):**  around, if not, go out again, but not have this kind of pressure because that kind of  closed end fund structure, as you mentioned, is one of the reasons why we're selling companies  again and again and again and where they can't just be in calm waters and have a long term  owner.  So we said, OK, that can't be the structure.  
**[0:30:58-0:31:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:30:58):**  And now the structure is, will be, as I said, evergreen.  That means liquidity for investors is achieved through a secondary market and through buyback  windows, yearly buyback windows.  And the secondary market is organized by the GLS Bank.  And the fund, obviously the fund has to be of a certain size.  
**[0:31:20-0:31:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:31:20):**  We said we're going to start with a more smaller size with 30 million, 30, 35 million.  And now and that means we can only, all the investments we do, we have to do as co-investors  because even such an OGC deal within total 20 million needs, of course, much more.  But that's also what we like.  We like to convince other investors and help them to understand these kinds of steward  
**[0:31:46-0:31:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:31:46):**  ownership models.  That's also what we see as our pioneer role.  And we also help our investors to co-invest in our portfolio companies.  And the fund basically has this aim of helping some lighthouse companies and helping high-impact  companies that want to make sure they can stay on mission, they can stay independent  
**[0:32:13-0:32:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:32:13):**  and really make sure their values are enshrined in the charter, help them to do that.  Because otherwise, I think, you know, we somehow lose a lot of what we've built because, you  know, so many impact investors and go in, measure, measure, measure, make sure the company  makes an impact and then they go out and then what?  I think that's like a loose end.  
**[0:32:40-0:32:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:32:40):**  We somehow need to think through the entire lifecycle of a company and we need to make  sure that the years in which the company is big and is particularly impactful, you know,  these years don't become the years of selling out and of losing your mission, etc.  So a company reaches this certain size of maturity, etc.  And that's when it's achieving the most impact.  
**[0:33:06-0:33:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:33:06):**  And that's also often when it's actually being sold and that's not achieving anymore.  So that's the fat years for the impact.  Exactly.  And that's when it's undermined.  Yeah.  
**[0:33:15-0:33:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:33:15):**  And then you can say, well, come on, you know, there are also buyers who are nice and will  make sure.  And you create a lot of capital for the founders that probably have a certain set of values  and might invest it interestingly as well.  Of course, there's a second part to this.  
**[0:33:29-0:33:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:33:29):**  No, that's true.  And I totally admit there is a trade off.  Probably some of your investors in the fund now have maybe sold the company at some point  and are now able to do that.  Exactly.  
**[0:33:41-0:33:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:33:41):**  You know, I don't I think that is totally legitimate for you just have to make the trade  off yourself.  You have to think about what's more impactful, is more impactful to sell it and then have  the money and do something with it.  Or is it more impactful to have a company that is that can stay true to its value?  
**[0:34:00-0:34:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:34:00):**  A lot of employees that won't get under the wheels of a new regime of investors who are  really short term interested.  And it's suppliers because sometimes you are I think you're misjudging this by only looking  at your company, but your company is better than ecosystem.  And it has a tremendous effect on the entire ecosystem.  
**[0:34:22-0:34:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:34:22):**  I can give you an example from the organic food industry.  So again, this is a global.  I mentioned it's a very interesting case because the founder of Logona and I don't know, I  think it's only a 60 million revenue company, but still it's an unknown brand in many countries.  The owner thought, OK, you know, I want to get out.  
**[0:34:46-0:34:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:34:46):**  I sell it to very value aligned investors.  And there was a group of investors who said, yeah, we're super value aligned.  We want to keep it independent.  It's nice.  Thank you.  
**[0:34:55-0:34:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:34:55):**  Here's the money.  What happened just two years from then?  They sold it to L'Oreal, which is partly owned by Nestle, 23 percent.  In two years, their whole values had changed of the investors.  Yeah, the entire game changed.  
**[0:35:11-0:35:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:35:11):**  And now what happens in the industry is that they are, of course, applying different sales  techniques, different that, you know, the organic food sector has this different way  of, I would say, dealing with each other, more cooperative, you know, not as hard as  that you're not suing your competitor the whole time, et cetera.  But now we're getting increasingly these companies that are owned by the big multinationals in  
**[0:35:41-0:35:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:35:41):**  that space and they're behaving completely differently.  They are not any more bound to that implicit contract, basically that implicit cooperation  contract that all of them have.  And it destroys an entire ecosystem.  So it's not as easy to just say, well, it's just my company.  
**[0:35:58-0:36:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:35:58):**  I think it's yet a many, many, many things connected to it because we're living in a  complex system, a complex world.  And I want to be conscious of your time and end with one final question.  If you could wave your magic wand and change one thing in the food and agriculture system  from the sustainability point of view or from the long term, I mean, that's pretty much  
**[0:36:20-0:36:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:36:20):**  the same.  What would that be?  So one thing in the organic agriculture system, also the food system and the cosmetics system,  cosmetics obviously are or should be all deprived from natural ingredients, should be all coming  from natural ingredients.  
**[0:36:34-0:36:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:36:34):**  Yeah, absolutely.  I think I would make sure, so the one thing probably most impactful would be to have a  law that basically makes farmland steward owned in that sense.  So everything that I was talking about, companies now that for land and that's very simple to  do that by law.  
**[0:37:00-0:37:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:37:00):**  Some countries have that already.  Helping making sure that this land can only be held by people in trust as stewards and  doesn't become a speculative commodity, what we see often with enormous prices, etc.  So I think that's what I do.  And if I had another wish free, I would then say, OK, then we need a legal form for these  
**[0:37:26-0:37:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:37:26):**  food and agriculture companies that makes steward ownership much more simple.  Also as a company.  Because that's what you see often, right?  It's very difficult to do and you have to jump through all kinds of hoops and come up  with creative ways for something that should be so much more simple and straightforward.  
**[0:37:42-0:37:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:37:42):**  Exactly.  It's a natural need.  But all of the legal forms for land, but also for companies, both are somehow designed for  a different system, for a different age.  They were designed when capitalism was really just starting and it was all around making  
**[0:38:02-0:38:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:38:02):**  profit.  And now we have entrepreneurs and people who think profit is necessary, yes, but it's  a means to an end, but all the legal forms are somehow still from these old times.  So yes, it's super hard to do it differently.  And I think my example that I gave from OGC and from others can show a little bit how  
**[0:38:27-0:38:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:38:27):**  somehow strange and also difficult it is to convince other people to understand it.  It's a big thing and that's why a new form, a new legal form would make it much more simple  because you have them an understanding and you don't have to design around with hundreds  of different new forms that nobody knows.  Is the B Corp movement in some, I know some countries or some states have it as a legal  
**[0:38:58-0:39:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:38:58):**  entity now, but is that that falls in the same direction or it's part of the same movement?  I think the B Corp movement is a great movement, but their main aim is to enshrine certain  purposes and values into the charter.  But they are not asking what I would call the power question.  The steward ownership is asking the power question, who has the power in our companies?  
**[0:39:25-0:39:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:39:25):**  Who has the power in organizations we're all spending most of our time in?  Are these people who can buy the power?  So is this money?  Is this the principle of money or are these people who just by chance inherit the power?  Is this the principle of blood or do we have another principle, a principle of purpose  
**[0:39:43-0:39:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:39:43):**  or stewardship that someone makes sure there are always people that are able and values  aligned, ability and value relatives, so different kind of families so to speak, that are getting  the power there.  So that's that deep power question.  That's not really what B Corp is interested in, obviously, which is totally fine.  
**[0:40:08-0:40:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:40:08):**  But that's why I think it's still necessary to go beyond B Corp.  And I want to thank you so much.  I will definitely link the interview I did with Thomas Rippel on farmland and also the  Agrarian Trust I did on farmland investing and farmland commodities and speculation below  in the description.  
**[0:40:27-0:40:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:40:27):**  I want to thank you so much for your time.  I know it is one of the most busiest weeks you have in this year with the fund, with  a lot of other projects and a big conference coming up.  And there's much more to discuss, but I'm looking forward to check in again soon and  discuss more on this often forgotten part of the power question and dive deeper into  
**[0:40:47-0:40:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:40:47):**  that.  Thank you, Gun.  Thank you for listening to this interview.  And I hope you learned something about an often forgotten subject, ownership structures.  So next time you are investing in a company or next time you're starting a company or  
**[0:41:01-0:41:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:41:01):**  next time you're taking over a company, dare to ask the power question, who is controlling  the steering wheel?  Not the most sexy subject, but definitely crucial.  Thank you for listening all the way till the end.  I hope it was interesting and relevant to you.  
**[0:41:26-0:41:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:41:26):**  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question, how to put money  
**[0:41:45-0:41:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:41:45):**  to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011 and recording  these podcasts since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision-making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  
**[0:42:01-0:42:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:42:01):**  How have we picked interviewees?  What questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  
**[0:42:09-0:42:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:42:09):**  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  You, the soil builders and investors in this space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  
**[0:42:22-0:42:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:42:22):**  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management consultants, etc.  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  
**[0:42:42-0:42:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:42:42):**  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  
**[0:42:56-0:43:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:42:56):**  that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  
**[0:43:11-0:43:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:43:11):**  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to ride along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  
**[0:43:34-0:43:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:43:34):**  if you're a soy builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  
**[0:43:50-0:43:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:43:50):**  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment please find professional investment advice.  
**[0:44:06-0:44:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/19/armin-steuernagel/#t=0:44:06):**  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  