---
title: 6 Things We Accomplished In 2020
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2020-12-30)  
### Author(s): Koen van Seijen  

**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/six-things-we-accomplished-in-2020#t=0:00:00):**  Six things we accomplished in 2020. 2020 was a very, very intense year. It's hard to believe it  was only 12 months. We hope you and your loved ones haven't been personally affected by the  health crisis. Many thanks for listening, watching, sharing and participating this year. The attention  
**[0:00:14-0:00:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/six-things-we-accomplished-in-2020#t=0:00:14):**  for food and agriculture has absolutely exploded and our eating habits have completely changed.  As the year ends, we would like to share with you our main accomplishments and discoveries  of this 2020. Pay what you think is worth actually works. We launched a video course after more than  
**[0:00:31-0:00:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/six-things-we-accomplished-in-2020#t=0:00:31):**  100 interviews. We thought it was time to share our lessons learned. We launched this video course  in August and the response has been amazing. More than 300 people decided to download and join the  course. Thank you so much for anyone who has purchased the course. The video course is made  
**[0:00:45-0:00:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/six-things-we-accomplished-in-2020#t=0:00:45):**  to understand the opportunities, get to know the main players, learn about the trends and how to  put money to work in investing in regenerative agriculture and food. If you want to know more,  you can find the link in the show notes below. We published more than 40 full length episodes with  
**[0:01:00-0:01:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/six-things-we-accomplished-in-2020#t=0:01:00):**  great guests from Zach Bush to Joe Clapperton, from Chris Newman to Elaine Ingham and from  Jonathan Lundgren to Bastien Saché. Others like John Kempf and Greg Schumacher came back on the  podcast for a long check-in interview. Thanks so much to our guests and to special series see below.  
**[0:01:16-0:01:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/six-things-we-accomplished-in-2020#t=0:01:16):**  The investing in regenerative agriculture and food podcast had more than 100,000 downloads this year  and we did something new. In lockdown we decided to bring together the community and launch a number  of webinars. They were ask me anything webinars which you can watch below. Just find the link.  
**[0:01:31-0:01:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/six-things-we-accomplished-in-2020#t=0:01:31):**  We had guests on the webinar like Abby Rose from Vida Saiko and Farmerama, Geert van der Veer of  Heerenboeren, Brendan and Phil from the Perennial Fund and Ethan Steinbeck from Propagate Ventures.  They shared with us their knowledge and experience on agtech, agroforestry, finance, community-owned  
**[0:01:47-0:01:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/six-things-we-accomplished-in-2020#t=0:01:47):**  regen farms and much much more. We launched the soil builder series. We believe that most change  in agriculture will come from entrepreneurial farmers, investors, entrepreneurs, food companies,  agtech companies, fund managers and anybody that's building the tools and vehicles to regenerate soil  
**[0:02:03-0:02:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/six-things-we-accomplished-in-2020#t=0:02:03):**  at scale beyond their own farm gate and with more than their own money. That's why in soil builders  we're following these people. We're welcoming back previous friends of the podcast to understand  their progress and we're discovering new companies, startups, farmers and investors all engaged in  
**[0:02:19-0:02:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/six-things-we-accomplished-in-2020#t=0:02:19):**  building soil all over the world. You can find the link below. The transition finance for farmers  series. We'll never forget our first series with co-host and regen farmer Benedikt Beuzel. In this  series we put all of our effort to explore the potential and challenges of transition to understand  
**[0:02:37-0:02:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/six-things-we-accomplished-in-2020#t=0:02:37):**  what is the role of banks, private investors, crowdfunding. We discovered the power of having  skin in the game profit sharing and much more on the role of farm to fork food companies.  An enormous thanks to all of the participants. Julian Apers of Triodos Bank, Sally and Esther  
**[0:02:52-0:02:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/six-things-we-accomplished-in-2020#t=0:02:52):**  of Senegal Capital and No Regrets Initiative, Robin O'Brien, Replant Capital, Bert Mulder of  Burbakkebert, Tomasso Soy Sauce, Nicolas Verschuren of Soil Capital, Phil Taylor and Brandon Wells of  Mad Agriculture, Thomas Klimt-Rippel of Coutureland Genossenschaft and of course Benedikt Beuzel our  
**[0:03:09-0:03:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/six-things-we-accomplished-in-2020#t=0:03:09):**  co-host and partner in crime. What was our conclusion? Long-term off-take agreements are  probably more important than transition finance. They come first. So first we need to make sure  farmers get paid well, get paid on time and then we can start talking about bringing on transition  
**[0:03:27-0:03:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/six-things-we-accomplished-in-2020#t=0:03:27):**  finance to speed up their transition. You can listen to all the episodes with the link below.  Bye bye Patreon, hello Gumroad. We continue to grow our group of financial supporters. We try to  and failed with member-only perks. It seems like you prefer to support the podcast regardless of  
**[0:03:43-0:03:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/six-things-we-accomplished-in-2020#t=0:03:43):**  any exclusive content which is absolutely amazing. If you do, thank you so much. We decided to move  from Patreon to Gumroad which is much more creator friendly. If you want to become part of this  amazing group of supporters please find the link below. And that's it. We are accomplishments of  
**[0:04:00-0:04:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/six-things-we-accomplished-in-2020#t=0:04:00):**  this year. We are very much looking forward to next year. We have a lot of things planned and  looking forward to see you then and checking in. Bye bye and have a great holiday season.  