### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2019-00-29)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  This is an interview on how the sustainable clothing giant Patagonia is investing in organic  regenerative agriculture and food.  
**[0:00:22-0:00:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:00:22):**  Welcome to another episode of investing in regenerative agriculture, investing as if  the planet mattered.  This is a podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture  space to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local  communities and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  
**[0:00:42-0:00:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:00:42):**  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  
**[0:01:00-0:01:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:01:00):**  Before we get started, I've been recording these interviews next to my day job and I  will definitely continue to do so and release about an episode a month.  But at the same time I would love to take this further, share more interviews, there  are many more stories to share on investing in regenerative food and agriculture.  More depth, improve the quality, maybe even doing some video series.  
**[0:01:21-0:01:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:01:21):**  So I started a Patreon community which makes it easy to support creators like myself.  If these podcasts have been of value to you and if you have the means, I invite you to  support me and make this happen.  For more information please find the link to my Patreon account in the description below.  And now, without further ado, the interview.  
**[0:01:41-0:01:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:01:41):**  Enjoy!  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture.  I'm here today with Phil Graves at the Patagonia headquarters and Thin Shed Ventures.  Very excited to hear more about their work in regenerative agriculture and food and what's  next for them.  
**[0:01:55-0:01:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:01:55):**  Welcome Phil.  Thank you.  Thanks for having me.  And to start with a personal question, what brings you into the space?  Why soil?  
**[0:02:03-0:02:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:02:03):**  Why regenerative food?  Well, soil is key to our future.  I started my career working with a global consulting firm and I realized that we spend  so much of our lives at work.  Decoupling your craft from your personal values and interests is something that really bothered  
**[0:02:22-0:02:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:02:22):**  me.  So that's what led me to Patagonia and Thin Shed Ventures.  And then now when we look at some of our most intractable environmental problems that we  face with the climate crisis going on right now, soil for us seems like our most compelling  solution to help mitigate some of these problems like global warming.  
**[0:02:42-0:02:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:02:42):**  And with our food business, we make and sell apparel and we've done that for nearly 50  years.  You eat every day.  And for us that's one of the key reasons we launched Patagonia Provisions, our in-house  food business, why we have Thin Shed Ventures, our investment arm where we can fund regenerative  
**[0:02:58-0:03:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:02:58):**  ag and scale this movement.  And that's what gets me excited each and every day to come to work and make the world a better  place for my three young daughters.  And when you look at the regenerative ag and food movement, we were talking about it before  I started recording, it seems like we're having a moment and we're having a moment in the  
**[0:03:18-0:03:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:03:18):**  movement.  What excites you the most at the moment when you look at regenerative ag and food?  Well for me, the data has been compelling for a long time where you look at chemical  ag, industrial ag, conventional ag, I prefer chemical ag just to call it what it is.  There have been decades long studies, agricultural health studies that show that the incidence  
**[0:03:41-0:03:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:03:41):**  of cancer rates for farmers, the health of the soil, all of these things, the taste,  nutrition are deteriorating at a rapid rate.  Our health and the food that we eat is literally killing us.  So it's been very refreshing to see some of these studies come to light.  They've been buried in academic papers for a long time, but you're starting to see the  
**[0:04:02-0:04:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:04:02):**  movement with Roundup being banned and Germany, Bayer's backyard, that was the headline I'd  love to see a couple of weeks back.  And of course you can identify a problem, but that's not going to help anything if you  don't identify a solution.  And now with the spotlight being on regenerative or organic agriculture, it's something that  
**[0:04:23-0:04:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:04:23):**  Patagonia is keenly interested in right now.  We helped develop a new certification called Regenerative Organic Certification, which  of course is being tied to organic.  It doesn't use harmful chemicals, but goes broader than that to encompass compassion  to the workers that are key to the farmer supply chain, compassion to the animals to  
**[0:04:45-0:04:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:04:45):**  ensure that they're treated with dignity and respect.  And then importantly, the soil itself too.  So not just avoiding chemicals, which of course is a great first step, but looking at tilling  practices and cover crops and crop rotations, actually building healthy soil that can sequester  carbon and be one of our best shots at tackling global warming.  
**[0:05:07-0:05:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:05:07):**  And when you look at what you've done so far, you've been setting up a food brand, Patagonia  Provisions, which I will definitely link below because you have a lot of amazing videos and  stories to really explain the ingredients in that brand.  You've set up a new certification scheme.  What's next for Patagonia when it comes to, of course, what you can share?  
**[0:05:26-0:05:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:05:26):**  What's next for Patagonia when it comes to Intenshed Ventures, when it comes to Regen  Food and Ag?  What's most exciting for you at the moment?  We're talking October 2019.  I'm proud at what we've done thus far with provisions and Tenshed, but I really feel  
**[0:05:40-0:05:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:05:40):**  like we've just laid the foundation at this point.  We've got a lot of great stories out there, whether it's Kerns of Beer, Kerns is a perennial  grain that is a great alternative to annual wheat.  It's got a deep root system that needs less water, fewer nutrients, and is a terrific  regenerative crop.  
**[0:05:59-0:06:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:05:59):**  That's one example.  We've invested in a buffalo company that's restoring the Great Plains of South Dakota.  They make a delicious product.  We're selling buffalo jerky through Patagonia provisions, our food arm.  And then the most important part is the Great Plains ecosystem and the soil health and bringing  
**[0:06:17-0:06:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:06:17):**  bison back to the prairie.  And that for us has been a great example to show that you can bring these products to  market and build regenerative food supply chains.  But if we stop there, we failed.  We've got to get these practices to scale.  
**[0:06:32-0:06:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:06:32):**  And that's where we're delighted to see some conversations that are actually resulting  in action with some of the bigger food companies adopting Kernza.  Some of the biggest bison herds in the land are looking at Wild Idea over the fence literally  and saying, hey, we like this practice of raising the bison on the prairie and harvesting  them on the prairie.  
**[0:06:53-0:06:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:06:53):**  So there's no grain that's fed to them their entire life because that's how they were designed  to be for thousands of years.  So it's something that, to say it succinctly, we're looking to scale these practices over  the next five years.  And when it comes to investing, what do you see the role of Tin Shed Ventures in that?  
**[0:07:12-0:07:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:07:12):**  How do you see the role of an investment fund, a long term investment fund, but still an  investment fund in the regenerative food and ag space?  The key word you mentioned there is long term.  When you transition to organic, as many farmers are painfully aware, it takes some time.  It's a three year process to convert.  
**[0:07:32-0:07:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:07:32):**  Whenever you flip from conventional, your soil is dead.  It's been growing crops on these synthetic harmful inputs.  And the intent in chemical ag is to sterilize the soil.  So out of the gate, you're going to have lower yields.  You're going to not realize the organic premium.  
**[0:07:50-0:07:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:07:50):**  And it's a really difficult place to be in financially when you're trying to put food  on your family's table, literally and figuratively.  So for the investors that want to come to the table and fund this transition to regenerative  ag from chemical ag, having that patient capital mindset, taking a long term view of the fact  that this is a broken food system that we're trying to fix.  
**[0:08:15-0:08:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:08:15):**  And to fix it, it's going to take time.  You have to understand that it's not simply just buying seed, working the tractor and  then harvesting your mono crop.  You're going to have to be really thoughtful about the crops that you play, what region  are you in, what climate are you in.  
**[0:08:28-0:08:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:08:28):**  And now with global warming getting worse and worse every day, you're going to have  to deal with extreme weather events, too.  So it's finding the right creative farmers, problem solvers, giving them the capital to  do great things, and then stepping back and not demanding, hey, what was our financial  return last quarter?  
**[0:08:46-0:08:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:08:46):**  What's our net income last quarter?  That's been our approach with Tench Adventures.  We don't ask for financials on a quarterly basis.  We target entrepreneurs doing the right things in regenerative organic ag and renewable energy  and the apparel side on innovations that can help us build the best product with the least  
**[0:09:04-0:09:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:09:04):**  environmental harm.  We equip them in what they need in terms of resources, and then we let them do the great  things.  So we don't check in and what we've seen as a result of that is on the venture side,  we have a 100 percent survival rate.  
**[0:09:15-0:09:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:09:15):**  Knock on wood, that continues.  The return on invested capital is quite good.  We're proud of that as well.  And it's because we have that long term view.  The Chenards and Rose, Chenards are, of course, our founders and Rose is our CEO.  
**[0:09:30-0:09:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:09:30):**  They don't demand to know how's the fund doing financially.  It's how do we save our home planet?  That's the mission.  And by doing that, taking that long term view, you're able to have that strong financial  returns.  
**[0:09:41-0:09:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:09:41):**  And I would encourage others to take a similar mindset when they deploy capital.  And I don't know if this has happened actually, but have you invested in farmers specifically,  apart from the Bison maybe?  And how has that been through the transition as a fund, which probably was set up more  on the private equity side?  
**[0:09:59-0:10:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:09:59):**  Have you been flexible there?  What have you seen in terms of your interaction directly with financing farmers, which is  something that comes back to the show.  Very often I hope to do a transition finance series specifically on farmers.  So I'm very curious about your interaction with farmers directly.  
**[0:10:15-0:10:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:10:15):**  Again, the key is direct.  Each time you give me a good word to latch on to, you have to have a direct connection  with the farmers.  That's what we found has been the best.  So when we bring regenerative organic grains to market, buckwheat, for example, we actually  
**[0:10:31-0:10:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:10:31):**  go to the source.  We meet the farmers, we shake their hand, we look them in the eye, we see the practices  they're doing, and then we hear what their pain points are.  So another example where we've deployed capital to help enable this supply chain and build  it from scratch in some cases is for the buckwheat that we're using with the Patagonia provision  
**[0:10:48-0:10:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:10:48):**  soups, we learned that the flour mills in the US are solely concentrated on annual wheat  and they don't have the ability to process any kind of ancient or specialized grains.  And we had to get the product launched, ship it to Asia for processing.  And then of course from a carbon standpoint, that doesn't make any sense.  And then when you dig in-  
**[0:11:12-0:11:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:11:12):**  A lot of tea property as well.  Absolutely.  Then you look into the facts, we used to have thousands of local flour mills in the US that  can process specialized grains with the industrial ag system where everyone's growing corn, wheat,  and soy using Monsanto seed.  
**[0:11:29-0:11:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:11:29):**  Those infrastructure pieces didn't exist anymore.  So we literally funded a flour mill from scratch and they built a flour mill that can process  local regenerative grains like buckwheat and bring them to market through Patagonia provisions.  It's probably something you didn't think you would fund when you said, let's do a number  of soups.  
**[0:11:48-0:11:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:11:48):**  And then you went to do buckwheat and then you went to do mills.  But it's probably also the exciting part of being an investor in regenerative food and  agriculture.  It's all connected, meaning that we have to completely rebuild the infrastructure, probably  a lot more in grain and meat, et cetera, because most of that has been completely centralized.  
**[0:12:06-0:12:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:12:06):**  Also actually on the seed side, when you look at other investors in the space, what would  you see, because you have a very free role and a lot of flexibility to do things, what  would you say for others, let's say outside this building, what are the main barriers  for them to become more active?  Because I see a lot of them are very interested.  
**[0:12:24-0:12:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:12:24):**  They start to see food and ag as an absolutely key part if you're interested in healthcare,  education, inequality, climate, obviously water.  But still I don't see a lot of them actually moving into the space and being as flexible  as you.  What would you see?  
**[0:12:38-0:12:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:12:38):**  What would be the biggest barrier for them to be really joining you in this wave that  you've been creating?  You can join the movement apart from Patagonia.  One of the things I'd encourage people to do is if you're working for a large food company  that may say they'd like to move to regenerative, but you just haven't seen the follow-through  
**[0:12:54-0:12:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:12:54):**  and the action steps, is to create a clear case for why we should do that.  I think you can look towards younger people and how they purchase food and clothing and  every product.  They want to ensure that it's made responsibly.  They want to ensure that it's on the apparel side a durable good.  
**[0:13:10-0:13:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:13:10):**  For food, they don't solely care about price.  They want to know how nutritious this is for me and how was the farmer treated in the entire  process.  How was the soil treated?  Showing that business case and that you can see it manifest through large traditional  
**[0:13:26-0:13:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:13:26):**  food companies buying smaller brands that are trying to do things the right way, you  can make that change within.  Again, I would encourage those trying to shift their organizations to regenerative and organic  ingredients and food to take the long-term view.  This is something that on a quarterly basis might not pencil out.  
**[0:13:47-0:13:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:13:47):**  In fact, our founder, Yvon Chouinard, has said every time he makes a decision for the  planet, it ends up making him money.  But what he doesn't say is it may not be that next quarter.  It's over the long term.  It's the cumulative effect.  
**[0:13:59-0:14:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:13:59):**  I think taking the long-term view, looking at building relationships with farmers and  having long-term partnerships instead of a simple transactional relationship, that's  key.  Then on the flip side, showing the business case that consumers are clearly moving towards  this in their purchasing habits.  
**[0:14:17-0:14:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:14:17):**  If you are known as a brand that does things the right way, you build supply chains if  they don't exist and get these regenerative and organic products to market, those are  the brands that are going to succeed in the future.  In fact, those may be the only brands that survive in the future.  You mentioned consumers.  
**[0:14:33-0:14:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:14:33):**  Do you see, I mean, you're very much on the consumer side of things and on the producer  side of things.  Do you see that growing interest?  I think many people in the bubble obviously understand region ag, understand region food,  understand soil, but do you see a growing interest from the average consumer into something  
**[0:14:53-0:14:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:14:53):**  beyond organic or into something that really goes further in terms of soil building?  I do.  I think before I dive into the response, it's important to say how critical organic is to  the foundation of regenerative, even if it's not certified.  But the organic movement, while imperfect, it has made a lot of strides in the industry.  
**[0:15:13-0:15:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:15:13):**  If you look at the premiums that customers are willing to pay for organic, even if they  don't fully understand it, that helps with the business case and funding the transition  too.  So for us being paired with organic in Patagonia as a company that's used organic cotton exclusively  since 1996 and all of our products, it's something we're really passionate about.  
**[0:15:32-0:15:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:15:32):**  So I definitely want to just as a foundation lay the table for organic as a starting point.  But then beyond that, building on organic of the good foundation, the solid foundation  of organic is also really important too.  We've done a lot of surveys with customers as we're looking to further the regenerative  organic movement and ensure the rock certification scales well.  
**[0:15:56-0:15:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:15:56):**  And they care about these things.  We've done customer focus groups across the country.  So not just Patagonia customers or Dr. Bronner's customers, the types who would logically care  about these types of products and demand it, but all over the country.  And the universal feedback is that they care and they want to have a comprehensive certification  
**[0:16:17-0:16:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:16:17):**  and ag that doesn't use chemicals where the animals are treated with respect and the farmers  and the farm workers are also treated fairly.  These things matter.  The word regenerative doesn't really matter to them.  And I think we just have to use some really smart marketing and communication folks to  
**[0:16:32-0:16:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:16:32):**  help convey what we're doing to those customers because these are the type of products they  want.  Now that's very encouraging.  And we probably, yeah, we need some great marketing people to figure out soil building  or something that immediately that touches us much more.  
**[0:16:46-0:16:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:16:46):**  To come back to the organic discussion, what would you say, because I was just at a conference  in Oakland on investing in region food systems and it was a lot of discussion around organic  as we've heard the, I would say, even say horror stories of industrial organic plowing  like there's no tomorrow, basically just swiping one chemical for, and let's say an organic  chemical.  
**[0:17:06-0:17:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:17:06):**  And that's one of the reasons why organic probably has a bad rep and is not financed  through green bonds because of actually a lot of carbon, a lot of habits in terms of  workers, et cetera, that we don't want to.  What would you say to a farmer that has been greatly reducing their chemicals, but is that  that limit of cashflow, et cetera, and cannot make that jump yet?  
**[0:17:26-0:17:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:17:26):**  Is it absolutely essential to go organic first?  Is there another route basically around and arrive at regenerative as well?  Or is that really a first step you have to step to organic before you go to step two  or three or four in terms of region?  Yeah, fair question.  
**[0:17:42-0:17:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:17:42):**  I think organic at its core is a great starting point.  The premiums I mentioned a few minutes ago, those are real.  My background is in finance and I'm a CPA and you can't deny the fact that you can charge  more for organic food.  Now as newspaper headlines are increasingly showing, you can have bad actors in organic  
**[0:18:01-0:18:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:18:01):**  and you can have fraud in organic where you're buying some organic products at Whole Foods  and it may not be actually organic and there's just a paperwork scheme.  So that integrity of organic is incredibly important.  And for us, you have to look at everything.  That's why we built this comprehensive three-pillared standard rock where it takes into account soil  
**[0:18:23-0:18:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:18:23):**  health, it takes into account animal welfare, and it takes into account social justice at  the farm level.  We think moving a step in any of those pillars forward towards the high bar, whatever you  want to call it, if it's rock or regenerative organic without being certified, that's fine.  But we think we should take stock of where we are with our food system, acknowledge that  
**[0:18:44-0:18:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:18:44):**  it's broken, and then encourage others to make steps.  We personally feel strongly about organic, but encourage people to look at what regenerative  practices you can begin with.  Look at using as few chemicals as possible with a very short-term goal to use no chemicals  because we feel like, as you can see in the beautiful film by our friends at Apricot Lane  
**[0:19:07-0:19:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:19:07):**  Farm called The Biggest Little Farm, you can work with nature and have a farming and ranching  operation that's in harmony with nature and use nature without paying anything to Monsanto  for synthetic inputs to have solid yields, delicious food, and build a great brand and  a viable business from.  I think it's an excellent point.  
**[0:19:26-0:19:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:19:26):**  It will be a discussion we're going to have, I feel, many, many times as we have to explain  soil building, but it's something we need to keep coming back to.  I want to end with a few questions.  I always like to ask, let's imagine there's, we're in a conference room here, but let's  imagine there's a theater full of impact investors.  
**[0:19:43-0:19:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:19:43):**  They've read the books, they've been to The Biggest Little Farm.  What would be your advice, obviously without giving investment advice, to get started because  they haven't made their first investment yet.  They haven't built or bought any farm, they haven't invested in a farm, they haven't made  any investment in food and egg space yet.  
**[0:19:59-0:20:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:19:59):**  Where would you suggest them to, say, start looking?  I'd say go direct and local if you can.  I think the local food movement is important, but also we have to acknowledge that regional  practices matter and wine in certain regions is better than wine in other regions, just  to put it in kind of fun terms.  
**[0:20:16-0:20:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:20:16):**  But local is easy.  So, if you look in terms of talking to a farmer in your area and understand where are their  specific pain points.  If they're already organic, how do they move to regenerative organic?  If they're a conventional farmer that's spraying chemicals every day, ask them how their financial  
**[0:20:31-0:20:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:20:31):**  situation is.  My guess is it's pretty bleak.  It's all over the Wall Street Journal about how small and mid-sized farms are folding  right and left.  They're going bankrupt and the only ones that are surviving are the mega farms and even  
**[0:20:44-0:20:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:20:44):**  they are not doing as well financially.  So understand what the farmers' needs are and see if you can deploy capital in a way  that can help get them on the journey or on the road to regenerative organic.  And in terms of your work at the moment at Dinch Adventures and Patagonia Provisions,  what are you most excited about, what you can share, let's say what you're working on  
**[0:21:05-0:21:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:21:05):**  for the next few months, let's say until the end of the year or if we speak next year at  the same time, what would you look back on and what really excited you again, obviously  if you can share?  Absolutely.  Rock, as I've talked throughout the interview, is something that is our highest priority  
**[0:21:21-0:21:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:21:21):**  right now.  There's a lot of science that affirms that regenerative and organic farming and ranching  can sequester carbon in the soil.  And with climate week happening, with young people and old people getting out in the streets  and demanding action, pointing to solutions as a key next step and regenerative ag we  
**[0:21:40-0:21:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:21:40):**  think is again so important to build that healthy soil.  Rock is imperfect.  It's in the pilot phase right now.  We're learning so much through the public comment period we had last year, through the  pilots that are happening across the world now too.  
**[0:21:53-0:21:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:21:53):**  We are most excited about making Rock successful, raising our game in our own supply chain with  cotton and with our ingredients for Patagonia provisions being sourced in South America,  being regenerative organic certified here in the near future.  And then again, we don't want these things to just be a Patagonia innovation where we  make great environmentally responsible products tied to Rock and that's where it lives.  
**[0:22:16-0:22:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:22:16):**  We want the big food companies, Denone, General Mills, you name it, to take a look at Rock  and maybe launch it with one product line, do an experiment, see how the customers react  to that.  My guess is this is going to be a good step where you're going to take many steps after  that.  
**[0:22:31-0:22:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:22:31):**  And would you consider that as a success next year, let's say we talk in October 2020, that  at least one or two of these major food companies have launched a single line of Rock products.  Is that what you can consider success or is there something else you're targeting or measuring,  let's say a year from now?  We want Rock to be everywhere.  
**[0:22:50-0:22:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:22:50):**  On every grocery store across the world.  Now that's an ambitious long term goal.  I think a successful launch with some lines and sub brands within some of the big food  companies and seeing how those do, proving them successful, making it a scalable model  for the farmer financially.  
**[0:23:07-0:23:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:23:07):**  Because again, if it works for Patagonia and Denone, but the farmer is not doing well financially,  that is not a viable model.  So we want to ensure that we can set this up to minimize costs without compromising  on the integrity of the certification, be successful with launches to the pilot and  then have this take hold and see traction where it takes over entire businesses, a billion  
**[0:23:29-0:23:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:23:29):**  dollar conglomerates.  And of course, the little brands, too.  We feel it feel like the future is bright for smaller brands that are willing to do  things the right way.  And we want to support them as well as the big companies as they transition to regenerative  
**[0:23:43-0:23:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:23:43):**  and organic.  If you could wave a magic wand and tomorrow morning wake up and feel has changed something,  you could choose anything.  What would that be in terms of food and egg?  Well, moving away from chemicals would be the easiest thing to.  
**[0:23:59-0:24:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:23:59):**  And I think that's the the clearest first step.  I'm a native Texan.  And one of the things that I see all the time is when my friends have kids, they may not  have eaten organic food previously, but they don't want to feed their baby pesticides.  And they may not vote the same way as we do in California.  
**[0:24:17-0:24:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:24:17):**  They may not do everything the exact same way, but they care about the human health  aspect.  And when you look at organic and regenerative, organic, that chemical free aspect is really  compelling to people.  So I would love to weigh the magic wand and get rid of Roundup and glyphosate and any  
**[0:24:34-0:24:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:24:34):**  other harmful chemicals that are used in an industrial ag.  And then, of course, you know, I'd love to think bigger than that, too.  And beyond just eliminating the chemicals and ag, moving to regenerative and building  a healthy soil and sequestering carbon and using that as a solution to fight climate  change.  
**[0:24:51-0:24:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:24:51):**  And as a final question, I always say final question and I come up with two or three more.  What do you believe to be true in regenerative ag?  What others don't?  And I borrowed this question from John Kemp and he always asks on modern agriculture,  would I like to ask it on on region ag?  
**[0:25:05-0:25:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:25:05):**  So what do you believe to be true on region ag that others don't agree with?  Well, unsurprisingly, I think the fact that organic should be paired with regenerative  is important, again, whether it's ultimately certified or not.  I think certification is one tool.  But if you know your farmer and you source for them at the local market, you visit their  
**[0:25:21-0:25:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:25:21):**  operations.  For example, I could go buy from Apricot Lane Farms and they don't have a certification  and I'm good with that because I know John and Molly personally and I don't need to have  that certification.  That may not be the reality for most people, especially if you live in a city.  
**[0:25:34-0:25:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:25:34):**  So certifications do play a key role.  And I think the fact that organic is paired with regenerative and the rock certification  is incredibly important.  And I'd encourage one of the big personal things that I have is that we can't look at  regenerative in a silo.  
**[0:25:49-0:25:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:25:49):**  There are some organizations that say, like, let's only till less or let's reduce chemicals.  And there's other initiatives and I won't name them and throw stones right now.  And I think moving a step is good.  But with the state of the climate crisis, things are really grave right now and we have  to go big and take a comprehensive approach and look at every tool in our toolbox for  
**[0:26:11-0:26:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:26:11):**  regenerative ag, organic ag broadly and make solid progress on them.  I think it's an excellent point.  We saw it actually again and again with the presentation of David Montgomery in Oakland.  And as he always says, it's very easy for farmers to stop tilling for a few years and  then say, oh, this regenerative ag thing doesn't work.  
**[0:26:30-0:26:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:26:30):**  And unless you do the four or five principles, it depends a bit who you talk to.  But it doesn't really work.  And it takes time.  So it takes I think we lose quite a few that are doing two of the three or three of the  four and then a few years only down the line and say, this doesn't work.  
**[0:26:45-0:26:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:26:45):**  And they get invaded by pests like the biggest little farm.  And if they would have given up at that point and start spraying, we would not have this  amazing example.  I want to thank you so much for your time.  I want to be conscious of your time, make sure we end on time.  
**[0:26:57-0:27:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:26:57):**  And thank you for your amazing work and hope to check in and see what kind of investments  you have made and how you put money to work to restore soil, people and ecosystems.  Thank you so much.  It was a real pleasure talking to you.  And I can't wait to see this momentum continue.  
**[0:27:10-0:27:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:27:10):**  It's it's good hold that it's got so far.  If you found the investing in regenerative agriculture and food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  It's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast.  
**[0:27:26-0:27:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:27:26):**  And it only takes a few seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  join my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or in the description  
**[0:27:47-0:27:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:27:47):**  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  
**[0:28:14-0:28:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:28:14):**  Why are we doing this course?  After a hundred interviews and more than a hundred hours of audio asking the question  how to put money to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011  and recording these podcasts since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  
**[0:28:32-0:28:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:28:32):**  How have we built our decision making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  What questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  
**[0:28:42-0:28:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:28:42):**  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  
**[0:28:50-0:28:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:28:50):**  You, the soil builders and investors in this space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management consultants, etc.  People that are building soil at scale.  
**[0:29:09-0:29:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:29:09):**  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  No.  
**[0:29:24-0:29:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:29:24):**  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  
**[0:29:44-0:29:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:29:44):**  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to ride along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  
**[0:29:59-0:30:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:29:59):**  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  
**[0:30:20-0:30:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:30:20):**  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  
**[0:30:34-0:30:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/29/phil-graves/#t=0:30:34):**  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  