### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2019-00-26)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  You're going to listen to an interview with regenerative farmer Matteo Mazzola, who after  many years of working with leading region farmers from around the world has set up a  
**[0:00:22-0:00:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:00:22):**  beautiful farm with his partner Paola in northern Italy.  Thanks to developing their farm he is creating his vision for how regenerative agriculture  in Italy could and should evolve into a system where city and countryside meet and ecology  and landscapes lead the way.  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture.  
**[0:00:43-0:00:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:00:43):**  Investing as if the planet mattered.  Podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  
**[0:01:01-0:01:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:01:01):**  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  In March last year we launched our Patreon community to make it easy for fans to support  
**[0:01:21-0:01:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:01:21):**  our work and so many of you have joined as a member.  We've launched different types of benefits, exclusive content, Q&A webinars with former  guests, ask me anything sessions plus so much more to come in the future.  For more information on the different tiers, benefits and how to become a member check  patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or find the link below.  
**[0:01:41-0:01:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:01:41):**  Thank you.  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food.  I'm here with Matteo Mazzola who is a very interesting regenerative farmer in Northern  Italy but who has traveled the world and worked on many different sides.  And I'm interested to take a deep dive into his vision of regenerative agriculture but  
**[0:02:01-0:02:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:02:01):**  of course also to hear what's happening here in Italy and what are the biggest barriers  and opportunities.  Welcome, Matteo.  Thank you.  To start with the personal question I always love to ask, why soil?  
**[0:02:13-0:02:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:02:13):**  Why agriculture?  What happened?  What went wrong?  What went right?  And how did you end up owning this farm at Lago di Zeo?  
**[0:02:20-0:02:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:02:20):**  Well, we have to look back many, many years.  I don't come from a farmer's family.  I grew up in a town, quite a big town, but I was always very interested about the natural  world, living outside and not really accepting to be in a school, in a room.  So I grew up really loving what was nature.  
**[0:02:48-0:02:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:02:48):**  Basically, when I was six, seven years old, I was reading and actually not really reading  but looking at the pictures of the book of John Saymore on self-sufficiency, which was  basically teaching you on how to do anything on your farm.  And from there on, really, I've been cultivating my love and passion for nature in all its  form, lots of observation all the time.  
**[0:03:16-0:03:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:03:16):**  Just love to observe without really trying to understand anything.  Then I studied at the agricultural high school where we had a farm with animals.  We had different productive systems like rice, cereals.  We had orchard.  We had vegetables.  
**[0:03:37-0:03:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:03:37):**  We had a bit of silviculture.  There was a bit of everything.  It was a 35-hectare farm, conventional farming as well as the teachings in the school.  But it was very good in having a relation with my classmates, which were mostly all  farmers, sons and daughters of farmers.  
**[0:03:58-0:04:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:03:58):**  Two days after high school, I just grabbed my bicycle and I started to travel around  Europe with the focus of ecosystem observation and also going to work and to study in certain  projects I was interested to get a deeper understanding.  And basically, I choose not to go to university because I believe also is what I believe now  is the leading principle of who I am and what I do, of what I do is that we first have to  
**[0:04:36-0:04:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:04:36):**  understand what we are made for, but especially we have to understand what is the pace and  the type of workflow that we need to…  The pace and the way we do the things that we do is very important to understand in which  direction to go.  For example, creating my own university has allowed me to go much faster in the understanding  
**[0:05:03-0:05:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:05:03):**  of certain principles, not stressing myself about learning something that I would have  never used in the future, as well as something that would have moved my understanding of  certain things in a different direction than going into a more natural flow of things,  which sounds a bit naive, but again, is about time efficiency, as well as reaching a result  in a fast but good way without wasting energy, without wasting too much money, without wasting  
**[0:05:41-0:05:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:05:41):**  too much time.  And when you say creating your university, it means creating your education path yourself,  basically, and can you give an example of maybe the most surprising lesson during your  university years, or your education years and your study years, which continue obviously,  but you were the young Matteo on his bike going through Europe, what was a special moment  
**[0:06:06-0:06:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:06:06):**  or something you still remember as an aha moment, or for sure there are many, but if  you had to pick one now, a few years later, what would that be?  Actually it's not really one event, but it's a series of events connected with the possibility  that I had of observing landscape through perception, not just by looking at the landscape,  but with all the senses to live the landscape that I was sort of passing by and doing this  
**[0:06:39-0:06:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:06:39):**  for 12-13 hours a day for months or for years, because this is what it has been.  It really teaches you something that then will help you in anything you will do, because  it is about functional observation, but at the same time observing and perceiving without  expectations, without judgement, which again, it sounds something very naive, very unscientific,  but basically it's the base of science.  
**[0:07:13-0:07:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:07:13):**  It's like not giving your ideas too much importance and just especially observing ecosystems changing,  consortium of species dynamics and behaviours of nature in certain parts of Europe, repeating  in certain other parts of Europe.  Maybe you don't get it straight away, the connection, but little by little when you  work in agriculture, you work into everything that is connected to ecology and managing  
**[0:07:40-0:07:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:07:40):**  ecosystems, then little by little it comes back, not really what you have seen, but the  principles that you manage to pick, you pick from your multiple observations, like repetition,  continuous repetition of observation is what creates the foundation of understanding a  little bit more nature and our impact on nature when we do something.  So basically this was the most important thing.  
**[0:08:10-0:08:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:08:10):**  People often ask me, oh, you did the course with Joel Salatin or with David Holmgren or  with this and that.  I was very lucky to visit and to stay and to work and to live with many of these amazing  farmers and scientists and so on.  But again, the humblest experience was from what I understand, what I think the most important,  
**[0:08:44-0:08:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:08:44):**  the one that really allowed me to understand much better all of these people, allowed me  to understand much better principles and insights that I learned in the various courses or in  the farms and in the projects where I've been working and studying.  So yeah, functional observation has been something I didn't look for.  It tends to the point.  
**[0:09:06-0:09:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:09:06):**  If you would be looking for it, functional observation wouldn't be working that way.  And I would love to unpack a bit of the principles with you and then go to where we are now.  So if you would have to share a few of those principles that you observed over the years  and over your travels, what would be, is that a long list, first of all?  Are we talking about 20?  
**[0:09:29-0:09:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:09:29):**  Are we talking about two, three, five?  What do you see as the principles in your vision, in your regenerative agriculture work?  Basically, actually, there are maybe not even principles.  There are more foundations, which basically are connected straightly to energy flow, energy  behavior and how energy, what shapes and behavior energy takes.  
**[0:10:08-0:10:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:10:08):**  Energy is all about forms and behavior of energy.  When you observe nature, when you observe ecosystem, when you observe villages, towns,  because everything is nature.  Everything is just basically elements which have been cooked in a certain way and prepared  in a dish or in another dish.  
**[0:10:30-0:10:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:10:30):**  And basically the key is to understand that everything comes from either stored energy  or potential energy or most of the time it comes from sun energy, photons, which are  transformed as nature needs in different shapes and behavior.  And when you understand that, it becomes very easy also to understand that human ethics  are just less than a secondary element of importance when we look at planning and making  
**[0:11:05-0:11:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:11:05):**  projects, when we are working for nature.  First of all, and if you look at a more eco-centric and non-anthropocentric reality, it is extremely  important to take into account energy behavior and energy flow because it's what dictates,  it's what gives the rule of the game.  You can't really, either you go and buy energy from outside and you will create a certain  
**[0:11:33-0:11:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:11:33):**  amount of social or environmental unsustainability or you manage to work with what you have.  And what we have is stored energy, if there is any, and potential energy that we can use.  So if we really want to be true to ourselves, we shouldn't even think about ethics because  it comes after.  Nature will decide the ethics, if something can be done sustainably, that's something  
**[0:12:07-0:12:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:12:07):**  it will also become the base of the creation of an ethic.  But if we keep on allowing ourselves to believe in our own subjective ethics, we will not  really go far.  Do you have an example in agriculture of that, where we don't take we meaning society,  humanity, don't take, don't look at the basic energy flows and by not doing that we basically  
**[0:12:37-0:12:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:12:37):**  create unethical situations?  Yeah, totally.  Is the easiest thing, is the whole thing about either connected either to agriculture and  nutrition when we are talking about what type of energy, carbohydrates, sugars or fats we  use in our diet in order to move and have the basics, the basic elements for our metabolism.  
**[0:13:08-0:13:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:13:08):**  So basically when we choose to use more carbohydrates and simple sugars, we basically choose unsustainable  type of agriculture because it is based on annual crops.  Annual crops by nature are just a very specific tool which is used in the ecological succession  process is a tool that is used by nature in a very short period.  In most of known completely degraded environments, annual crops or annual plants are basically  
**[0:13:49-0:13:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:13:49):**  covering the soil the first, the second and maximum the third year and then they leave  the space for a more sensible energy managing device which are all the perennials and with  all the animals that will manage the perennials in the most efficient way possible.  Basically then, rather than producing energy sucking crops and basing our diet on a more  vegetarian diet, we should really think what nature would do if it was in our position  
**[0:14:33-0:14:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:14:33):**  on this field.  Of course, nature will never choose to keep some annual cereals, some annual legumes,  some annual vegetables, some annual weeds for more than two years and we should learn  from that.  The alternative is simple, it's based on millions of years of evolution and is either pasture  
**[0:14:56-0:15:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:14:56):**  land managed by a consortium, an orchestra of animals or again, forest which is again  managed by animals and other elements.  And going to where we are now, your and your partner's farm, how did you, after touring  the world, not only with your bicycle, obviously also with other means, how did you come back  to Italy and decided or came about to buy this six hectare farm at Lago di Zeo which  
**[0:15:31-0:15:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:15:31):**  I've been in a few farms, it's probably one of the most beautiful views, not necessarily  today because it's raining a lot, but in a pretty day it's an absolutely breathtaking  view, not the easiest farm to work with, but how did you ended up here and then what is  Isida as a regenerative farm?  So actually I didn't come back straight to Lake Isia, before I started and managed a  
**[0:15:58-0:16:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:15:58):**  six hectare farm on, just by Lake Garda with other two friends.  Before that I was in Australia where I went to study with certain farmers or consultants  that I wanted to know from closer and also to check from closer what means broadacre,  permaculture and broadacre regenerative agriculture.  And then for me it was time to start a farm after many years of working in other people  
**[0:16:33-0:16:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:16:33):**  farm as well as going to courses and really absorbing lots of experience, information  and so on.  And just before going to Australia I met Martin and Helene that they wanted to start a farm  and in them I've seen really the right partners to start something which was really the closest  thing to what I wanted to start.  
**[0:17:02-0:17:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:17:02):**  So I came back, we started a farm, in three years we reached 55 families that were buying  vegetables from us, we were producing bread, pasta from our legumes and cereals and we  also had chickens for eggs as well as chickens for meat on a movable system on our pastures.  So we were starting a very good farm.  Then I met Paola during a course I was running on agroforestry and then love made the rest.  
**[0:17:42-0:17:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:17:42):**  The move to the next valley basically.  And then actually I didn't choose this farm, Paola my partner did everything for me.  I was actually telling her but with this money we could get many more hectares and start  something more impactful and start something closer maybe to what is our vision.  But because of different reasons she was very convinced that this was the land and which  
**[0:18:13-0:18:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:18:13):**  is actually a very beautiful land with very interesting elements also to create a quite  interesting project from an impact, social and media and environmental impact is a quite  good place.  So if you had to describe Easy to farm in a few, no more than a few sentences, in a  few paragraphs, what would you say now four years after you started more or less?  
**[0:18:43-0:18:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:18:43):**  What is it and where are you now in terms of what do you produce, what do you sell,  to whom and then we'll talk about the future.  Basically now we're producing vegetables, olive oil, different all sorts of fruits,  of course typical from our latitudes, berries and eggs.  And this more or less is what we produce.  
**[0:19:13-0:19:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:19:13):**  We also planted some carbohydrates and protein and fat rich perennial crops, so almonds,  hazelnuts and walnuts, but they will take a little bit more time to come into production.  And we will soon reinforce the whole area and sector of animal production.  So sheep for meat production and whole, we have different ideas and different projects  on that as well as small animals, chickens, guinea fowls, geese, ducks and individual  
**[0:19:56-0:19:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:19:56):**  rabbits.  Going more and more toward a grassland based productive system or actually I should say  a silvopastoral system where we will have mainly trees, shrubs and grazing animals.  So at a certain point we will stop to breed, not to breed, we will stop to manage and to  have chickens and all the animals that requires high level of proteins that can be produced  
**[0:20:32-0:20:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:20:32):**  easily on our farm.  So all the animals that make a good use of grass will be taking place mainly on our productive  systems.  In terms of transformation, you currently sell everything direct through CSA+, you sell  lots of restaurants, but it's all, I mean you're doing your first few experiments with  
**[0:20:56-0:21:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:20:56):**  the transformation of raw ingredients into other products.  Can you tell a bit more about that?  Well, yeah, the ideas are many, the bureaucracy limits are many and the idea is really to  increase the nutritional and economical value of every single simple product that we can  produce on our farm in order to increase the potential of what we are doing.  
**[0:21:31-0:21:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:21:31):**  Natural production for example is extremely energy demanding and resources demanding and  is not something that can be maintained for a long period if we really look at energy  flow and energy consumption.  What do you mean?  Because you hear a lot of people, especially the smaller organic farms and biodynamic farms  
**[0:21:58-0:22:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:21:58):**  and a lot of the no-till market gardens, etc. focus heavily on veggies, veggie boxes, etc.  And when you say it's not sustainable in terms of energy, is that on the human side, is that  on the soil side, the input side of all three?  What do you see as a farmer?  Basically all three.  
**[0:22:18-0:22:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:22:18):**  Vegetables are domesticated.  I've heard you say they're weeds.  Yeah, they're weeds.  They're basically domesticated weeds, selected weeds.  They share the same behavior of natural weeds which are growing normally on either disturbed  
**[0:22:32-0:22:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:22:32):**  soil or a soil with an excess or deficiency in certain elements, which means it's an unbalanced  soil, a soil that straight away we can understand that it can't grow in that right moment very  nutritious and nutrient dense foods.  Because basically most of the time it's not balanced.  We can reach very high level of analyzing the situation in the soil and in the sap of  
**[0:23:04-0:23:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:23:04):**  the plants, but we will be never as intelligent and as capable of understanding the complexity  of the natural cycles of nutrients and connected with the biology.  So for one reason, vegetables became one of the most important elements of micro farms  or small farms, successful farms, is because they create economy very fast because they  are very resilient.  
**[0:23:35-0:23:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:23:35):**  It's like if I grow a tree from the first year to the third, fourth, I have to wait  a long time before seeing the production.  And it could be that during the flowering or during the fruit set, an hail or a frost,  late frost or something like that, it will compromise completely the production for another  year.  
**[0:23:56-0:24:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:23:56):**  So of course, from an economical point of view, vegetables are much more resilient.  From a short term.  From a short term, yeah, exactly.  Especially with climate change, often it happens that vegetables, maybe yeah, you will lose  some vegetables, but there will be always something surviving.  
**[0:24:14-0:24:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:24:14):**  But from ecological point of view, to produce properly vegetables, you need a lot of carbon  coming from outside, which it could be no dig gardening with layer of compost.  It could be mulch gardens, market gardens, but you will need wood chips coming from somewhere  else that wood chips that have been produced using a petrol engine, petrol powered machine.  So vegetables, they don't produce enough biomass to feed themselves in the future generations  
**[0:24:51-0:24:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:24:51):**  as well as to cover the soil enough to activate all of those processes of soil building, soil  regeneration that are needed to change our presence on the landscape and on this planet.  With your functional observation on this piece of six hectares, you started with easy, I  mean, it's not easy, fast cashflow, vegetables, etc.  But at the same time, planted a lot of trees, obviously on key line, very much thinking  
**[0:25:24-0:25:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:25:24):**  about the next 10, 15, 20 years with a lot of experiments in it to see what actually  grows here because nobody knew.  I think I remember a story from when we met is that the neighbors were saying, you can  only grow olives here and sheep.  And yet you're doing I don't know how many types of fruit plus 40 types of vegetables  
**[0:25:43-0:25:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:25:43):**  and a lot of other animals and sheep and the sheep are coming.  So I find it fascinating, especially that this cash flow thinking but not being stuck  in I have to be a tomato grower or I have to be a zucchini or a courgette grower or  I have to be.  No, I'm growing with the landscape, which is something I see with many farmers, interesting  
**[0:26:01-0:26:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:26:01):**  farmers or good farmers, even though obviously I cannot say somebody is a good or a bad farmer.  So where do you see the farm going over?  Where do you see this transition from vegetables?  How many years are you still thinking about doing vegetables?  Is that five?  
**[0:26:16-0:26:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:26:16):**  Is that 10 years?  Is it three?  Or is this, let's say the five or 10 year idea, I wouldn't call it vision, but idea  and vision of we see the farms?  The biggest problem is that I had to switch from a less landscape reading process based  
**[0:26:35-0:26:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:26:35):**  farm planning.  I had to switch on something completely different because we were sort of obliged by the state  and the local rules to take a completely different path because you have to reach a certain level  of production in order to be seen as a farmer, not just by the neighbors, but also by actually  who's the whole compartment of bureaucracy and low making machine.  
**[0:27:08-0:27:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:27:08):**  And basically haven't been working in the way we should have.  And this is amazing because you could have the most amazing experience, the most amazing  knowledge, but it's all relative location.  But would that be, I hear you say the biggest barrier is local rules, bureaucracy that haven't  been made for regenerative farmers.  
**[0:27:32-0:27:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:27:32):**  I mean, they weren't made in the mind, okay, let's go against this group.  No, let's try to maintain a system that is very broken and let's put some rules around  to at least somehow go against the worst effects of that.  And they never thought that there would actually be a group to something completely different.  But isn't that also part of the landscape reading?  
**[0:27:53-0:27:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:27:53):**  It is part of the landscape at the end.  So somehow being very zen and it's part of your observation at the beginning, like what  can I actually legally do here?  Or what maybe changes in five to 10 years?  Because I mean, we are in a flexible world as well, in a sense that some of these rules  
**[0:28:11-0:28:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:28:11):**  are actually changing, thanks to a lot of farmers like yourself that are lobbying.  So is it fair to complain about that while it may be actually as part of the landscape?  This is a very important insight and this connected to the self limiting nature of our  enterprise.  What it means this, we come from a capitalistic mindset where normally we grew up in a very  
**[0:28:36-0:28:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:28:36):**  clean society where we could get and we could have anything we wanted the fastest way possible,  the cheapest way possible.  And it's very important to switch from that mentality to a more nature based timing or  pace of processes taking place and so on.  So of course, what you say is connected really to we want to reach a certain result the fastest  
**[0:29:08-0:29:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:29:08):**  we want to show.  We know that this is possible.  We know that we think it's possible, but it's not because in the current context of laws  and regulation, it's we almost trick ourselves to dream about it.  You tell me, look at this landscape, this could do X, Y, Z.  
**[0:29:22-0:29:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:29:22):**  But actually, if you look at the local laws that are there for whatever reason, that's  not the point of discussing that now.  Actually you can't.  If you cannot put sheep in that way, then you cannot put sheep in that way.  It's useless to dream about it.  
**[0:29:34-0:29:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:29:34):**  But obviously we want to because we see like an untapped landscape or an underperforming  ecosystem or underperforming landscape, which makes it very difficult.  So what would you say, what's the biggest barrier for regenerative agriculture at the  moment that you see?  If you had to pick one, because for sure you have a list.  
**[0:29:55-0:30:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:29:55):**  I think it's what I said just before is recognizing that we have to deal with different types  of mindsets.  It has to be closer to an idea of eco-centrism rather than anthropocentrism.  And this is why our idea is not our farm.  It will probably become popular, at least in the Regenach movement, not because we wish  
**[0:30:30-0:30:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:30:30):**  or it's our will to reach popularity, but it will be by accident because our nature  is getting more and more closer to a mindset, to an eco-centric mindset, which is automatically  what is self-limiting yourself into not becoming the farm.  Our idea is to experiment, to research, to make available information that will be used  by many other farms that have to be able to start and to manage and to grow a farm like  
**[0:31:06-0:31:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:31:06):**  our or actually a much better one.  It's pointless to me to have superheroes, it's pointless to me to have farm gurus, because  it's not the reality.  It's important, it makes people more enthusiastic, but I don't believe it's at the reach to a  wider target of people.  
**[0:31:27-0:31:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:31:27):**  I think most of people like something at people level.  You're doing a lot of courses throughout Italy, actually you're teaching a lot of courses,  and hopefully soon with a few structures on the farm you'll be able to also do it on the  farm here, which makes it more people level because you can point that what you actually  have done instead of being on a farm of somebody else who could be amazing, but you don't know  
**[0:31:53-0:31:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:31:53):**  the framework and the decisions and their principles.  What else do you see?  I mean you do a bit online, Facebook and Instagram, I will definitely link them below, usually  in Italian and English, which I think is very, very interesting.  What do you see in the next years?  
**[0:32:08-0:32:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:32:08):**  If you would have a lot of time, which you don't, to do other things, what would you  focus on?  Definitely focusing more and more on the farm, because even if I think that courses and consultancies  are extremely important, from what is my experience, to show people and farmers and customers and  consumers what we are doing, what we are really doing, and they can touch it and they can  
**[0:32:38-0:32:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:32:38):**  connect with all the frustrations, all the energy that has been used in order to reach  something apparently extremely simple, I think this is the most important thing.  We don't want to create a farm based on appearance, on very beautiful aesthetic, I mean this is  also very important, but it has to be a functional aesthetic.  People don't have to wow just because something is different than what they are used to see,  
**[0:33:08-0:33:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:33:08):**  people, they have to, to me, they should be amazed about the connection of aesthetic to  something that creates resonance in something that they maybe didn't even know, but it sounds  logical, it sounds interesting, it sounds obvious to the eye of a person that is not  judging something and is not expecting something.  I would like to give to people, this I think is what I want really to give to people, what  
**[0:33:41-0:33:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:33:41):**  I had the chance to have when I was traveling, which is a complete freedom to experience  a real reality, because we can't really keep on telling people what to do, what to think,  what to read, what to eat, people have to understand themselves.  Even when I tell people about free choice mineral or talking in a simpler way, when  a cow needs a mineral, go and check for the rock or for the material that is reaching  
**[0:34:16-0:34:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:34:16):**  that mineral and leaks it and some people ask me, how do they know it?  And I tell them, you know it too, it's just that you're not trained anymore or you think  you can't do it anymore, but just by looking at the wine tasters and honey tasters and  all the people working in the perfume industry, like how to use the nose should be the first,  really one of the first courses that people should do if they want to understand more  
**[0:34:49-0:34:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:34:49):**  about the reality that surrounds them, because we are basically animals that use senses to  perceive reality, but don't know how to use their senses.  So I remember when I was in high school, we did a small course on wine tasting and what  activated in me managing little by little to smell something that it was there, but  I wasn't able to decode it.  
**[0:35:15-0:35:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:35:15):**  It really opens not just my capacity of smelling something more complex, but actually the understanding  that we live in a reality which is complex, but we are living it in a simple way, is a  stratification of simple insights that we have to become able to understand, to perceive  through senses and then through experience.  Just a note for my American listeners, we're in Italy and tasting wine at high school,  
**[0:35:48-0:35:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:35:48):**  let's say the later years of high school is quite common, so just to put everybody at  ease.  Let's keep it for a moment in Italy.  What's your vision of where you would like regenerative agriculture to go?  I think you know most of the farmers here in Italy that are somewhere on the path in  
**[0:36:10-0:36:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:36:10):**  transition.  You've either seen them in your courses, you've either visited them, you've either worked  with them as a consultant.  I know you have some strong opinions on size and going fast and slow.  Where would you like in an ideal world if it would be Matteo deciding with a magic wand  
**[0:36:27-0:36:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:36:27):**  to move the agriculture industry, let's keep it in this huge country, very diverse country,  but I think it's a roadmap for others as well.  Where would you like to see the ag and food space in Italy go?  If we would make you agriculture minister or if you would have the control?  Possibly one of the most complex tasks in this country because basically even known  
**[0:36:54-0:37:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:36:54):**  people that do not have any experience in farming will give their ideas about farming.  If you are at a table with 10 people and there are two farmers, all of the 10 people will  speak about farming.  It's like football basically.  It's like football.  
**[0:37:15-0:37:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:37:15):**  It's just like everybody knows or everybody thinks that they know.  And we're now talking to somebody that knows a bit more, maybe doesn't know know as in  know it all but knows definitely a lot more than the average people on the table.  Where would you like to see it go?  For me, the first thing, the most important thing to me is education through experience  
**[0:37:39-0:37:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:37:39):**  as I said before because if you create a tool, if you create a toy for a kid that will not  be able to use the toy is useless.  It's just connected to our, directly connected to our ego, to our needs, subjective need  of creating something that we think is good for the others.  First we have to understand the direction that education should take, education of everybody  
**[0:38:12-0:38:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:38:12):**  in order to have a population of consumers, of eaters, of people that require, that ask,  that understand what these new visionary farmers are doing.  Otherwise most of farmers will have to work double of their time and using double the  energy to creating a sort of compatibility with the complexities that they are creating  but that which is not understood by most of consumers.  
**[0:38:44-0:38:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:38:44):**  So first is education, education in schools, education of farmers, education to consumers  associations through I think consumers association we can do a lot because there are very powerful  associations in Italy and through them I think we can really reach a wider range, a wider  target of people which don't even know what is regenerative agriculture.  Many times they don't even know what is organic agriculture.  
**[0:39:12-0:39:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:39:12):**  So first is education of the future eaters, of the future consumers and then little by  little is to understand especially for Italy, maybe I think of small farming because I grew  up in Italy which is a country, one of the most diverse country from geographical, morphological,  topographical point of view as well as social point of view is very important to understand  the entity, every single entity of bio-regions, of areas and to reach the highest vicinity,  
**[0:39:53-0:40:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:39:53):**  to get the closest to observation and interaction with the natural systems in order to create  planned design agricultural systems which are based on the efficiency of energy flow  of local natural ecosystems but that of course need an outcome result which is food production,  biomass, fiber, all the things that agriculture should provide.  So it's much more complex work than creating models that can be applied on broad acre and  
**[0:40:32-0:40:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:40:32):**  I think if we really want to reach a high level of environmental regeneration and efficiency  in the use of energy we really should look at smaller systems which are more complex  because the nature of a small system most of the time is of a more complex system because  it's normal.  If you have a broad acre you will not observe as you observe a smaller piece of land.  
**[0:41:03-0:41:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:41:03):**  The machinery will be bigger, bigger is the machine, less precise is the machine.  Smaller is the system, you will reach to a system which is managed by hands and hands  are not machines, hands are nerves, it's something that interacts not in a bi-dimensional way  but in a fourth dimensional way with the landscape.  So I really see that we could go from broad acre systems towards a small acre system but  
**[0:41:40-0:41:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:41:40):**  I don't really know if it will be really possible to change what is the nature of landscape  fragmentation which in Italy is one of the most important problems.  I don't know if it will be easy to reorganize the landscape from a ecology point of view.  Not just ecology but really who owns what and this probably is one of the most difficult  things either in the broad acre agriculture but also when we are talking about small farms.  
**[0:42:20-0:42:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:42:20):**  So I don't know really what is the key.  I see that the landscape should be the element that decides whether broad acre or small acre  farming is the most appropriate thing to do.  It's like for center possibly for certain places it would be more intelligent, more  sensible to create and to work on efficient small farms, in other situations it would  
**[0:42:50-0:42:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:42:50):**  be the opposite.  But again we go back to the landscape.  We have to take time to find the tools to understand the landscape and we have to find  the time to interact with the landscape using actively the experience which has been stored  and stratified by the evolution of the natural ecosystems which is a huge book that is there  
**[0:43:18-0:43:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:43:18):**  for us and use it in order to take the closest path to the one that nature expects us to  do.  And I want to be conscious of your time as well to end with a slightly maybe provocative  question but I would like to explain why I'm asking it, I think in the sector we need to  start thinking about larger numbers, larger numbers of investments as I think many more  
**[0:43:49-0:43:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:43:49):**  are waking up to the potential of regenerative, from a soil perspective, climate perspective,  water, healthcare, inequality, etc.  And I think we're going to get quite an influx of people trying to get into the space and  I would like you to imagine to be managing a portfolio of a billion dollars and I choose  a ridiculous high number for a reason because I think there's going to be a lot of money  
**[0:44:10-0:44:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:44:10):**  flowing into the space and I think we need to start getting ready to absorb this.  So if you would be tomorrow head of an investment fund or head of a portfolio of one billion  dollars that has to be invested with different returns but invested not granted, what would  you do?  So after you get a heart attack after you check your bank account obviously.  
**[0:44:36-0:44:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:44:36):**  For sure the first thing as I said before I want to create the substrate, the base in  order to multiply the potential of this billion of dollars and this means to me again to do  education to prepare the mass to understand the change.  This would be one of the first thing or one of the most important at the beginning and  then connected to the bio-regional idea I would start many different pilot farms in  
**[0:45:15-0:45:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:45:15):**  many different bio-regions where research and functional research, functional experimentation  should be taken very seriously in order to reach results that will help the farmers of  that area where the pilot farm is to allow these farmers to modify, to renew their productive  system towards a more regenerative regime in order to from one side decrease the costs  of production, from the other side increase the quality of the produce that will be then  
**[0:45:56-0:46:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:45:56):**  flood will be floating the market and at the same time understanding how to create ecosystem  services that will allow the whole bio-region to increase general health and general genetic  potential of the living beings that are participating in order to live in that certain bio-region,  that certain group of ecosystems.  And together with this, this should be given a lot of importance to mechanization and the  
**[0:46:37-0:46:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:46:37):**  technology which should work on light simple functional machineries which will allow the  soil and the farm and the agricultural world little by little to disconnect from what is  the spiral of interest of the industry in keeping the farmers in their arms.  So this is possibly the most complex thing, in fact a consistent amount of the investment  should go in the direction of lobbying and new policy making that sees the farmer as  
**[0:47:18-0:47:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:47:18):**  the most important element of the human society and not the most important slave of the human  society.  And those have to be changed, modified, we have to create again a more rural based society  because the energy we consume to survive in any of this form is basically coming from  agriculture in one way or another.  
**[0:47:50-0:48:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:47:50):**  And I believe that turning forward a renewed complex interaction with the natural world  is what is needed also to reestablish what it used to be or it has been in different  very enlightened societies of the past where nature was the teacher of the human society  and through complexity was creating complex beings, not simple beings that are just good  in buying on the internet and filling a hole that has been drilled for them by basically  
**[0:48:33-0:48:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:48:33):**  the industry and the capitalistic world.  So yeah I think when I say pilot projects, especially in Italy, I must admit that I don't  know well the other countries, maybe I don't even know this country but from what I see  from my experiences when I show something not with words but with facts, with results  and with something that people can touch with their hands, I change the mind of people in  
**[0:49:05-0:49:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:49:05):**  seconds.  Sometimes people come to me and ask me, you completely turned me upside down, things that  I've been thinking for 50-60 years, in 10 minutes now you made them trembling and now  I have to start to think about something else.  But really of course it's thanks to my experience and so on but I think through showing people  
**[0:49:32-0:49:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:49:32):**  that you're doing something continuously, not really caring about energy consumption  and frustration and difficulties and so on is what gives people from one side hope, from  the other the possibility of really seeing something different.  And a smart agriculture, a complex smart agriculture is very subtle, it's interesting because what  it does, it activates multiple effects that don't touch just the natural kingdom and the  
**[0:50:08-0:50:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:50:08):**  ecological kingdom but a certain type of agriculture will activate positively the regeneration  of society, of the economics and all the aspects that inhabit our existence.  So through agriculture really we have a huge potential of destroying, destruction and simplification  of our own reality at the same time of a very important potential of complexifying from  a functional point of view and regenerating what are all the kingdoms that create our  
**[0:50:57-0:50:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:50:57):**  reality.  There's so much to unpack there, I think we can do this for hours but we're going to do  that in another episode, I promise Matteo will be back.  I think agriculture is the perfect Trojan horse to change a lot of things in our society  and it's probably the biggest leverage point we have so I will definitely check in with  
**[0:51:19-0:51:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:51:19):**  you again, I will follow you as you're heading this one billion dollar investment fund anytime  soon.  If somebody has that lying around definitely give Matteo a call and I want to thank you  so much for your time, your insight and for sharing these experiences with us.  If you found the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast valuable, there  
**[0:51:40-0:51:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:51:40):**  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  1.  Rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few seconds.  2.  
**[0:51:51-0:51:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:51:51):**  Share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  3.  If this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means please join my Patreon  community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or in the description  
**[0:52:09-0:52:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:52:09):**  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food.  How to put money to work in regenerating soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while  
**[0:52:35-0:52:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:52:35):**  doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to put money  to work in regenerating soils and have been following this space since 2011 and recording  this podcast since 2016 we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  
**[0:52:52-0:52:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:52:52):**  What have we seen in this space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  What questions should you ask?  
**[0:53:03-0:53:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:53:03):**  What is happening in this space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  
**[0:53:10-0:53:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:53:10):**  For whom is this course?  You the soil builders and investors in this space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management consultants, etc.  
**[0:53:29-0:53:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:53:29):**  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  
**[0:53:45-0:53:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:53:45):**  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  that among the listeners of this podcast we have people with very different means.  So I'm inviting you if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  
**[0:54:03-0:54:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:54:03):**  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to ride along.  
**[0:54:17-0:54:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:54:17):**  We're gonna look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  
**[0:54:38-0:54:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:54:38):**  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're gonna look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  
**[0:54:53-0:54:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/11/28/matteo-mazzola/#t=0:54:53):**  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  