### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2019-00-10)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  Disrupting the Cow  This interview is about how factory farms, agriculture and land prices will be disrupted  
**[0:00:20-0:00:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:00:20):**  by precision fermentation.  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture.  Talking as if the planet mattered, a podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative  food and agriculture space to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate  soil, people, local communities and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  
**[0:00:44-0:00:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:00:44):**  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  
**[0:01:02-0:01:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:01:02):**  Before we get started, I've been recording these interviews next to my day job and I  will definitely continue to do so and release about an episode a month.  But at the same time I would love to take this further, share more interviews, there  are many more stories to share on investing in regenerative food and agriculture.  More depth, improve the quality, maybe even doing some video series.  
**[0:01:23-0:01:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:01:23):**  So I started a Patreon community which makes it easy to support creators like myself.  If these podcasts have been of value to you and if you have the means, I invite you to  support me and make this happen.  For more information, please find the link to my Patreon account in the description below.  And now, without further ado, the interview.  
**[0:01:43-0:01:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:01:43):**  Enjoy!  Welcome to another episode of this podcast.  Today I'm joined by Catherine Tubb of RethinkX, the lead author of Rethinking Food and Agriculture  2020-2030, the second domestication of plants and animals, the disruption of the cow and  the collapse of the industrial livestock farming.  
**[0:01:59-0:02:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:01:59):**  Welcome Catherine.  Hi Koen.  So, a personal question.  What brings you to the space and what brings you to ag and food?  So after my PhD I actually ended up in finance looking mainly at the kind of fertiliser,  
**[0:02:12-0:02:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:02:12):**  crop protection chemicals and seed companies.  And part of that work we looked at the global trends.  A very fun space.  Yeah.  Well, yeah.  
**[0:02:20-0:02:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:02:20):**  It is fun but probably not for the reasons.  And just kind of the feed that we're looking at many things, including the feed the world  theme.  And I just got really interested in the whole agriculture space there, mainly really from  a data point of view.  
**[0:02:34-0:02:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:02:34):**  It felt a very opaque industry.  So after I kind of moved on in my firm, I was always mainly kind of this interest in  the agricultural space.  But the job came up at RethinkX and I really felt it kind of married my interest in the  agriculture space along with a kind of data-driven approach to that.  
**[0:02:52-0:02:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:02:52):**  And then also perhaps doing something, scratching the itch to do something that I had with a  bit more impact as well.  Yeah.  I mean, can you, for whoever didn't read the report yet, I definitely encourage you to  do so.  
**[0:03:04-0:03:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:03:04):**  I will link all the links to the report, which is freely online available.  Disrupting the Cow, a subtitle I think is enough to make you read it.  But can you give us a short overview of what you mean with precision fermentation and how  that is going to disrupt in the next decade basically, because we're almost in 2020.  Especially as you focus on the US and the factory farming industry.  
**[0:03:25-0:03:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:03:25):**  Yeah.  So our report looks at how technology is going to converge and basically become cheap enough  and good enough to transform how we produce protein.  So this report is really about a protein disruption driven by economics.  And essentially we're going to be able to produce the same proteins found today in livestock  
**[0:03:42-0:03:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:03:42):**  by a method we call precision fermentation.  And by 2025, this technology will be able to compete cost-wise with bulk proteins.  And this is the point where adoption is going to be a tip and accelerate exponentially and  all that time cost are going to continue to improve.  And ultimately we see proteins as being five times cheaper by 2030 than existing animal  
**[0:04:03-0:04:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:04:03):**  proteins.  And I guess the other point is not a single disruption, but multiple parallel disruptions  across every single part of the cow from the milk, the meat, the leather, the collagen.  And these are all going to impact each other.  And it doesn't depend on a kind of one-for-one substitution of the end product.  
**[0:04:19-0:04:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:04:19):**  This is an ingredient business to business led disruption.  Yeah, because I think that's an absolutely crucial point that it's not disrupting the  cow as a whole.  It's very similar to a report Ritin wrote before about oil.  It's looking at all the different parts and which one is going first and probably taking  
**[0:04:36-0:04:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:04:36):**  away the business model actually for most cow farming as it is very, very thin margins.  Can you explain a bit more about how that whole picture works in terms when we look  at a cow and how it's being processed today and how that might be partly replaced as in  a roadmap over the next five to 10 years?  Yeah, so the best example of this is really milk.  
**[0:04:56-0:05:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:04:56):**  So if you think about if you take milk from a cow, only 3.3% of it is the protein.  And I think another couple of percent is the fat.  And if you think about how milk is actually used globally, a lot of the milk is actually  kind of put down into the solids, the milk solids, and that's what's exported.  So for example, New Zealand exports 70% of their milk as these solid exports.  
**[0:05:17-0:05:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:05:17):**  If you can make that at the same cost anywhere in the world, that's going to completely obliterate  New Zealand's export milk industry and therefore obliterate their dairy industry.  And that's going to obviously have huge knock-on effects.  And once you take out the dairy industry, you take out kind of cheap meat and that's  going to increase prices in the meat.  
**[0:05:37-0:05:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:05:37):**  And then that's going to kind of drive investment and into the further kind of PF for precision  fermentation for meat.  Then that's going to kind of basically disrupt the whole cow.  So this is what we mean when it's not this one for one disruption.  You don't have to be able to make like the same amount of meat or the same amount of  
**[0:05:54-0:05:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:05:54):**  milk.  You can just make those parts.  We call it a food software model.  So you're just building up from the bottom of our food system, essentially.  It seems a very fragile system and almost a domino effect.  
**[0:06:07-0:06:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:06:07):**  Like if you take out one and the whole thing will very quickly, because that's what you're  writing about, the disruption will very quickly collapse.  Exactly.  So I mean, particularly the cow industry is very on very, very thin margins, as I'm sure  people are aware, there's a lot of subsidies going on.  
**[0:06:25-0:06:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:06:25):**  So it's kind of very knife edge industry and that makes it very kind of susceptible to  disruption.  And that's something we've looked at, as you mentioned in our previous report.  And this is kind of our bread and butter.  This is what we look at.  
**[0:06:36-0:06:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:06:36):**  We look at disruptions, technology driven disruptions.  So this is something we feel particularly confident about.  And can you describe, because for sure a few people now think, OK, what is this PF precision  fermentation?  What is it exactly?  
**[0:06:48-0:06:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:06:48):**  How should I imagine a factory looking like?  How should I imagine these proteins being created?  So precision fermentation is when you take microbes and basically kind of program them  to produce anything you want, mainly proteins, right?  So things like yeast, fungi, you'll be able to just program just as we do its fermentation,  
**[0:07:09-0:07:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:07:09):**  just as you do to make beer or sugar or kimchi or ketchup or wine or yogurt.  You know, you're going to harness these microbes to be able to make any protein you want.  So if you imagine a farm, it could look very like a kind of local craft brewery with lots  of tanks going on, making these proteins that are going to be used.  So of course, it could be anywhere in the world, right?  
**[0:07:32-0:07:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:07:32):**  You're not limited to kind of this centralized production system.  These tanks could be in your back garden or in the car park of a supermarket.  You know, it could be anywhere on a rooftop.  And what does it use as feed?  Because these microbes need to eat.  
**[0:07:46-0:07:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:07:46):**  So what do we need to feed them, basically, to create these proteins?  It's mainly sugar and then nitrogen.  Sugar from anything, we eventually think that they'll be able to get carbohydrates from  kind of biomatter.  So even leaves or household waste in the end.  
**[0:08:03-0:08:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:08:03):**  But you just need a lot less of it than you do currently with the current livestock system.  So if the livestock, if you imagine a cow, it's like a 25 to 1 roughly.  I mean, you hear any 4% feed efficient cows, whereas if you're going to a 1 to 1 feed efficiency,  it's just a lot less feed you're going to need.  And does the quality of the sugar of the material, because I think for now it will be mostly  
**[0:08:25-0:08:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:08:25):**  sugar, does that influence the outcome of the protein?  Is it, as in software, I mean, you say software as a service, like garbage in, garbage out.  What does that do to the microbe if you're feeding X type of sugar or is there, what's  happening in that space?  It's a bit like a car, I guess, depending on if you're using the right fuel, but it  
**[0:08:46-0:08:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:08:46):**  depends on what the car wants to use.  I mean, if you put petrol in a diesel car, it's not going to work.  If you put diesel in a diesel car, it is.  So it depends on how the microbe is tuned to take the input.  And that's something that you can also program.  
**[0:08:58-0:09:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:08:58):**  So you're not just programming the outputs, but you can program the kind of inputs needed  as well.  So yeah, I mean, I know a lot of microbes at the moment like to kind of bathe in the  best possible sugar, the purest glucose, but that can change.  It's just an efficiency question and a programmable question.  
**[0:09:14-0:09:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:09:14):**  And the big question on health, like what comes out of this process?  I think we all know the incredible health issues of the industrial factory farming system  and what comes out of that.  I don't think we can even call it meat, but what comes out of this, probably it will be  a big fight if we can actually call it legally meat.  
**[0:09:33-0:09:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:09:33):**  I mean, that's for a separate discussion, but in terms of health, what do you see where  we're now and where we're like in five years compared to the meat products you can now  buy in the supermarket or the protein products?  Because it could be milk as you said before.  I mean, I think there's a disease and nutrition question on health.  
**[0:09:50-0:09:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:09:50):**  So disease, obviously you're not going to have those kind of issues that you get with  factory farming and then the slaughterhouses where you get a lot of contamination of the  food.  So they've done some tests, I think, on the meat produced via kind of, which is slightly  different to precision fermentation, but if you can produce meat, it usually doesn't get  
**[0:10:07-0:10:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:10:07):**  the same bacteria and microbes that you have an issue with.  But then on the nutrition side, obviously there is a bigger kind of question and people  are still looking into that a lot.  But on nutrition, I think the ability to kind of build up the products, you know, very personalizable  nutrition questions that you need, like based on the particular proteins that you may or  
**[0:10:27-0:10:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:10:27):**  may not need, it's going to be extremely valuable.  You know, we definitely say that it's going to be better because you're just not going  to have that contamination that you get in the current system.  But is it safe to say that, let's say on the nutrition side of things, there's still, at  least I see that in the say the regular ag and food space, there's still a lot of unknowns  
**[0:10:45-0:10:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:10:45):**  on what actually is nutrition and what nurtures us and where that actually comes from.  Is that figured out already in precision fermentation?  Well, you're just producing the same protein.  So that could be a plant based protein or an animal based protein.  So for example, the impossible burger uses this technology to make heme, but it's heme  
**[0:11:04-0:11:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:11:04):**  from a soy plant.  So you could do it to make any kind of protein, right?  So I think the ability to make these pure proteins would enable us to understand much  better the impact that they're going to have on us.  But I wouldn't, yeah, I would definitely agree with you that obviously still a lot of questions  
**[0:11:18-0:11:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:11:18):**  about nutrition.  We're not necessarily trying to answer that here.  We're just saying if you can make any protein cheaper than people generally, that's generally  how people choose their food, right?  It's actually based on taste, cost and convenience.  
**[0:11:31-0:11:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:11:31):**  Nutrition is becoming increasingly important to people, but that's not the main driver.  And you mentioned a few times in the report actually hormones.  I mean, we know the hormone story on the CAFO side of things.  How is that in precision fermentation?  I want to keep saying precision farming because I see the F. It's actually precision fermentation.  
**[0:11:50-0:11:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:11:50):**  I'm going to mess up a few times in this podcast probably.  Yeah.  I mean, you're not going to need any hormone inputs, right?  This is going to be a closed system telling the yeast, giving them sugar to produce a  protein.  
**[0:12:01-0:12:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:12:01):**  There is no other kind of impacts how you then use that protein, whether it's to make  meat further on or, you know, to make up a kind of plant plus, you know, precision fermentation  burger food or milk wouldn't have any hormones in.  You're just not going to have those excess hormones at all.  So I think that's an incredibly that on the nutrition or health side, that's obviously  
**[0:12:21-0:12:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:12:21):**  a really good benefit.  And I mean, you mentioned you could have these plans or these fermentation fats basically  anywhere like microbreweries, et cetera.  How do we prevent that?  We have the same kind of concentration because they sound like quite big investments in terms  
**[0:12:41-0:12:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:12:41):**  of infrastructure, especially at the beginning.  Of course, prices will come down.  But to really build up this huge fermentation industry that will give us a lot of animal  protein.  How do we prevent this enormous concentration that we have now, especially in the KFO industry  
**[0:12:55-0:12:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:12:55):**  in the US, where I think there are just a few producing all pork and just a few producing  all chickens and actually mostly the same companies and also in the beef industry, there's  an enormous concentration.  Is there anything to say on that as a potential danger and what this movement could do for  that?  
**[0:13:10-0:13:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:13:10):**  Yeah.  So this is really part of the point of our report.  We want to kind of alert people that there are going to be choices to be made with this  technology disruption.  And we really kind of advocate to ensure an open and transparent competitive market, because  
**[0:13:23-0:13:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:13:23):**  we think that's critical to ensure competition.  And they're going to be kind of key choices to be made around IP to prevent that oligopoly  type structure.  So I think the food or software model being distributed is kind of aligned a little bit  with meaning you're not going to necessarily see those big kind of oligopolies because  
**[0:13:41-0:13:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:13:41):**  the molecule development, microorganism design, distribution and food production is much closer  to kind of craft brewing industry.  And then because it's distributed, it means it's going to be very hard for any one company  to kind of dominate and difficult for those companies kind of providing a lesser quality  product to succeed as well.  
**[0:13:57-0:14:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:13:57):**  So you get the kind of the benefit of the distribution also adding to kind of higher  quality.  So really we advocate to allow companies patent production, but not of life or genes or molecules,  but perhaps around process rather than output focused.  And then also avoid following the pharmaceutical model where, you know, hopefully it should  
**[0:14:17-0:14:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:14:17):**  actually be the cost of the product development is much lower than pharmaceuticals as well.  And then just kind of supporting globally this creation, an open source, transparent  collaborative network, which should be international to really just accelerate the pace of development.  But you're right, there are a lot of questions and things to put in place that we do avoid  that big oligopoly structure.  
**[0:14:37-0:14:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:14:37):**  Yeah, because it tends to go there, unfortunately, even with now microbreweries being bought  up by the big ones that see that there's their margins and the market is changing there.  But at least for a while, it was very and it is still very distributed.  And I mean, if they can get into protein at some point and the fermentation isn't so hard  and difficult to control, which I don't know, it should hopefully prevent that.  
**[0:14:59-0:15:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:14:59):**  But it's going to I mean, it's it's also a plea for governments to get involved and set  certain structures and rules around this, because otherwise it will follow the model  we've unfortunately seen before.  Yeah, I mean, I think you're always going to have big food companies in play because  they are they do have those kind of networks and distribution now.  
**[0:15:18-0:15:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:15:18):**  And if say a Leslie or someone decided to take this technology and integrate it into  their system, they would kind of be a good place to do it.  But it may well, you know, they could then take it all in house, but equally, they may  say, actually, we're just going to go to localised production and perhaps the production becomes,  you know, not a few farms, it's actually done locally and closer to where Nestle's customers  
**[0:15:40-0:15:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:15:40):**  are, for example.  So you're kind of wiping out all that distribution that you need.  So I mean, there are a few models that could happen and it will depend a lot on the incumbents  and how they act as much as how these new companies come along as well.  Yeah, and if you would name like one or two examples that surprised you most in a report  
**[0:15:59-0:16:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:15:59):**  or something that came out that was actually closer to our food shelves than maybe five  to 10 years.  And what would you say?  I mean, I've wanted I got which was very interesting, but I'm curious about how close are we actually  already to this and what surprised you in that?  
**[0:16:14-0:16:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:16:14):**  I mean, this is already here, right?  I mean, possible have already producing these products.  I think I'm most excited about some of the products because we're kind of in terms of  the cost curve, just really on the cusp of becoming really cost competitive with bulk  proteins.  
**[0:16:30-0:16:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:16:30):**  But the ones I'm really excited about, I think are kind of driving forward and more actually  in the material space and the guilt or make collagen for use in cosmetics.  And apparently, it actually can reverse some damage because you're making human collagen.  You're not making pig or cow collagen or using marine collagen.  So you're actually making it's a very good example because you're making something that's  
**[0:16:53-0:16:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:16:53):**  better, right?  You're making something that we should be putting on our faces.  And they've actually just signed, I think, in the last month, a couple of weeks, assigned  an agreement to make gelatin, which is collagen's kind of one step on which is used, obviously,  in a lot of kind of food, sweet supplements.  
**[0:17:09-0:17:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:17:09):**  So that's amazing.  Essentially, you can make it.  And obviously, there are a lot of kind of gelatin like products that people use to mimic  gelatin and using the kind of vegetarian and vegan food space.  But if you can actually make pure gelatin and then whether it's human gelatin or some  
**[0:17:23-0:17:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:17:23):**  other gelatin, you're making the best protein that we could be consuming.  So I think that to me is like a sign that it's starting to really become competitive.  You've seen also companies making spider silk, which is also a protein, and they're making  it spy, but it's called a Japanese company.  And they make it into material, right?  
**[0:17:40-0:17:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:17:40):**  So it's not just in food.  You're seeing these kind of developments that are really on the market.  And that's just one order of magnitude away in terms of the cost.  So I think once you've seen those companies, which you are already with Geltol and gelatin,  moving into the food space, that's when it becomes really exciting.  
**[0:17:55-0:17:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:17:55):**  Because obviously, you've got to fall down that value cost curve.  And with food, it's quite difficult because meat is really very, very cheap.  We're very, I don't know, lucky.  I don't know if that's the right word.  And the whole movement has been towards making cheap meat.  
**[0:18:08-0:18:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:18:08):**  So it's quite hard to break into.  So I think once we start seeing these products being produced, and really breaking into specific  areas of the market, I think that's when it becomes really exciting.  You're basically unpacking the cow or the products coming out of the cow and taking  obviously the most interesting ones first.  
**[0:18:25-0:18:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:18:25):**  And that's not the meat part.  And another exciting, well, another interesting example, which I probably find is another  more than anyone, is the fact that the idea that for formula milk for babies, instead  of using cow proteins, you could use human proteins, which might sound a little bit icky,  I guess, in some ways.  
**[0:18:42-0:18:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:18:42):**  But if you had the choice, and everyone has a choice of how they feed their baby, but  if you decided to feed them formula milk, would you prefer them to have formula milk  with human proteins or cow proteins?  Would you like it to be more personalized to your baby or the other way around?  So I think there's interesting levels where actually you can offer something better for  
**[0:19:00-0:19:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:19:00):**  people, a superior protein product for people.  Yeah, and I was actually, I mean, that raises a lot of interesting questions, which we can  probably fill a whole podcast on that.  And I will for sure get responses.  But that's for another time, dear listeners.  
**[0:19:16-0:19:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:19:16):**  Another one I was actually surprised by was palm oil.  Like it can already be produced via PF at a lower cost than pre-produced palm oil.  Can you expand a bit on that?  Because that would revolutionize, especially deforestation rates that are just going up  basically.  
**[0:19:32-0:19:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:19:32):**  Yeah, so I mean, I'm not just limited to proteins.  You can make other products.  And one of them is palm oil.  There's actually a guy in Bath in the UK working on that.  I don't know if it's actually at lower cost yet.  
**[0:19:44-0:19:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:19:44):**  That's not something I'm aware of.  But you know, the idea that you're not limited to just protein, it's any molecule, right?  So it's really harnessing these microbes, the full abilities of what they can do and  what they can make.  So I mean, you can make anything, pretty much any molecule.  
**[0:19:59-0:20:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:19:59):**  I mean, obviously the ones that you make at the moment, a lot of biological drugs are  made this way.  But as we go down the cost curve, it's going to really open up kind of smaller molecules  as well.  So protein is probably the next level, I would say.  
**[0:20:12-0:20:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:20:12):**  You know, you're not going to make necessary commodity chemicals like this until the cost  really comes down.  But yeah, anything.  Like vanilla, there's just been an assigned agreement with a company that are making vanilla.  So there's a big, I don't know how much you know about vanilla, but actually 99% of vanilla  
**[0:20:28-0:20:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:20:28):**  is not made, is not natural in inverted commas.  It's actually made from wood or oil, but it's not quite vanilla, vanilla is the actual kind  of molecule.  But yeah, exactly.  It's not quite the real vanilla, but actually you can harness these microbes to make the  
**[0:20:44-0:20:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:20:44):**  actual vanilla that comes from a vanilla plant.  And obviously vanilla itself, natural vanilla is very intensive in terms of land, time,  effort.  You know, it's quite a difficult crop.  So if you can make the exact molecule this way, which is obviously better than from oil,  
**[0:21:00-0:21:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:21:00):**  then that's quite attractive.  And a lot of flavors and fragrances are made, already made, can be made like this as well.  And we've been looking at the consumer or our side of the equation.  What does this mean for, because you specifically looked at factory farms in the US, what does  this mean for, let's say the farmers and workers in these industries?  
**[0:21:21-0:21:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:21:21):**  Yeah.  I mean, obviously it's hugely disruptive.  And again, you know, we're not, I don't want to soften this.  If what we say is true, then essentially, you know, there'll be millions of jobs lost  because essentially if factory farmers, we know it won't exist.  
**[0:21:36-0:21:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:21:36):**  And just to put it, you're predicting by 2025 and 2030, what numbers in drops?  So 2030, it's about a million, I think, workers are going to be fewer in the US will be impacted  directly from this disruption.  However, we also anticipate there could be an extra million jobs created if, you know,  the US really takes on board this, just, you know, takes on board and becomes the leader,  
**[0:22:03-0:22:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:22:03):**  right?  Because part of this is this disruption is coming whether the US or anyone resists it  or not, and there's not going to be any geographical barriers to it.  So if the US say resists or fails to support it, then other countries will just step in  and capture the wealth and jobs and health benefits.  
**[0:22:20-0:22:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:22:20):**  So it's really a question here of whether the US can kind of step in and capture, or  any country can kind of capture the extraordinary value that's going to be created.  So it's much better to be at the beginning of a disruption in the end, because you don't  capture those kind of intellectual benefits.  So that's what we really kind of advocate for.  
**[0:22:40-0:22:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:22:40):**  We say, look, this disruption is coming, it's inevitable, and you need to get on top of  this and think about how you can support the farmers and workers.  Because we always say support, you know, support workers, not jobs.  So it's about supporting the people that might be affected rather than trying to protect  the jobs.  
**[0:22:56-0:23:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:22:56):**  And what does this mean for the farmers that are actually mostly growing, if you look on  average in the US, crops for animals?  So what does it mean for rural America?  Yeah, I mean, there are huge impacts.  We I think we forecast something like almost 500 million acres of land will not be needed  
**[0:23:16-0:23:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:23:16):**  in the way that it is now to produce crops.  So it's going to create these huge opportunities for farmers.  I mean, obviously, there's massive impacts such as land values could be decimated, right?  They're going to be disproportionately affected by this impact, probably a likely rapid collapse  in value.  
**[0:23:32-0:23:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:23:32):**  But, you know, which is something investors should take note of, because a lot of their  models are based actually on land always has like the real assets, they always have value.  Exactly.  And, you know, we've seen a precedent for that land drop as well, value drop by more  than 50%, I think, in the 20s and 30s, and then also another 40% in the 80s.  
**[0:23:54-0:23:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:23:54):**  So this has happened.  So you can see a kind of disproportionate effect of land values.  But then in terms of the farms themselves, I think, I know in the US isn't, you know,  actually a lot of if you take out the CAFOs, many of the farms are actually more kind of  across many different crops and products.  
**[0:24:11-0:24:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:24:11):**  And is that kind of a opportunity, I guess, to kind of switch the type of crops they use  or go to a more gentrified farming model?  There's a lot of choices to be made or go to crops that perhaps, you know, are needed  because there'll be other crops that are needed to support this disruption and also kind of  support just consumer changes in food as well.  
**[0:24:31-0:24:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:24:31):**  So I think there's still going to be crops needed, but it might require farmers to think  about what they're cropping and move from this mono cropping culture a little bit.  And that's ultimately better for the land.  But these are all choices that we need to be made.  Perhaps there's even choices to use the land for national parks or for solar panels for  
**[0:24:47-0:24:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:24:47):**  wilderness commercial industrial development.  There's kind of a lot of other choices just even outside of farming.  Now, you mentioned an interesting option in the report that the artisanal meat production,  let's hope they're mostly regenerative, but let's call them artisanal for now, that probably  in terms of price point, they will actually be it will be easier for them to compete as  
**[0:25:08-0:25:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:25:08):**  the meat prices will go up as the more profitable parts of the cow get disrupted first.  So maybe the regenerative farmers listening to this podcast will actually find themselves  in a position where it's actually easier to compete as meat prices of factory farmed meat  will rise over the next years.  And obviously the regenerative farmers still have their ecosystem services.  
**[0:25:30-0:25:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:25:30):**  And maybe this is actually a way to approach the discussion, should we eat animals or not?  Or what's the role of animals in the landscape?  And I think it's a separate discussion, the one should we eat animals or not, which will  resolve over the next years.  But there is a role.  
**[0:25:45-0:25:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:25:45):**  Is there a role for animals in landscape restoration?  Is there a role for animals in soil regeneration, which then suddenly becomes a whole different  discussion if the meat, if the pressure on the meat industry or producing the cheapest  way possible is taken away?  Yeah.  
**[0:26:00-0:26:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:26:00):**  And something we've looked at in the report or looked at as part of our report, I don't  know how much we can't, we touch on it a little bit is the idea that how we have used a cow  has changed so much from 10,000 years ago, even a hundred years ago.  A hundred years ago, a cow represented labor, energy, fertilizer, food storage, food value.  You'd use to give them as dowries and still doing some of the world.  
**[0:26:23-0:26:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:26:23):**  But the whole, the cow is really, every part of the cow would be used, right?  It'd be used for tools and the bones would be used.  Everything would be used.  And we've moved away from that really, and it's probably been the last 10, 20 years that  we just now really, really only use the cow for meat.  
**[0:26:39-0:26:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:26:39):**  We also do use leather and dairy as well, but a cow is not used for the whole, some  of its parts and what's really just used for one thing.  And that is definitely a role for the idea that if you can basically go back to a time  when the cow is being used as its whole rather than just for meat, it becomes a much more  useful part of the environment.  
**[0:26:58-0:27:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:26:58):**  And so we're not saying, look, the cow is bad or the cow is good.  We're just saying, look, how the cow as a technology to produce food has had its time.  And there's going to be a technology that's going to come in and it's going to be better  and cheaper and it's going to be replaced.  So it doesn't necessarily mean that there's never going to be cows again, but it's like,  
**[0:27:15-0:27:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:27:15):**  what is the role?  I guess there's some existential questions, but what is the role of a cow, right?  So to be had by people, but we try not to talk about it in terms of the cow being good  or bad.  We say, look, this is just a technology that's going to be disrupted and that's going to  
**[0:27:30-0:27:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:27:30):**  have implications.  No, I think you're absolutely right.  I think the holistic view often gets missed, especially as we go to one single solution  in this case, cow equals meat or equals a lot of products and not paying any attention  of what role has the cow before that, which I mean, like you mentioned, was energy, et  
**[0:27:48-0:27:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:27:48):**  cetera.  Not that we need to go back to putting cows in front of a plough, but there is something  to learn there, especially on the higher level.  Yeah, and the cow has been disrupted before, right?  The refrigerator arguably disrupted the point of storage of food in a cow.  
**[0:28:04-0:28:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:28:04):**  You can now raise a cow and just basically convert it to meat in the quickest amount  of time.  You don't have to worry about storing the food.  So I think we do need to move away a little bit and just think about that this is almost  the final disruption, which also makes it inevitable in our view, and this is why it's  
**[0:28:21-0:28:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:28:21):**  going to happen.  And in terms for investors listening to this, they might have positions in the space, they  are very interested in soil, they're very interested in food.  What would you tell them, apart from reading the report, what would you tell them, obviously  not giving investment advice, but what to look out for, what to watch out for, let's  
**[0:28:40-0:28:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:28:40):**  say over the next 10 years as this revolution is coming or this disruption is happening?  Yeah, and so I mean, for investors, I think we touched on land values a little bit about  how they could be disproportionately affected.  So if you're invested in areas of land, perhaps have a look.  I would say the one thing is I know I've mentioned it before that this is an inevitable thing.  
**[0:29:06-0:29:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:29:06):**  So it's really about positioning themselves, how do they take advantage of the upside but  mitigate the downside risk.  And we kind of do think about disruption as being, the disruption is going to happen to  the cows, so everything around the cow is going to be particularly impacted.  And then perhaps as you get out, as you move away from the cow and the distribution and  
**[0:29:23-0:29:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:29:23):**  supply chain, it's maybe less impacted.  So I guess it's about positioning themselves if they believe that this disruption is happening  in order to kind of allow their portfolio to accept that.  And what could go wrong in the sense of you're saying it's absolutely inevitable, but what's  the least likely scenario?  
**[0:29:45-0:29:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:29:45):**  Is it going to go a lot slower?  Is it going to be all taken up by the huge meat companies?  What do you fear in terms of this disruption?  I think it could be slower, but I think there can always be bits on the things that could  impact how fast some of this technology improves.  
**[0:30:02-0:30:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:30:02):**  Even if we're like two or three years out, or even five, I would argue it doesn't make  us wrong.  It's probably still happening a lot quicker than people expect.  And then I guess the adoption in terms of the investment and supply scale up.  We have seen examples of scale up happening extremely quickly, for example, in bioethanol  
**[0:30:18-0:30:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:30:18):**  fuels.  So we do believe that it can happen very quickly, but it may just take a bit longer than we  expect that we have in our estimates.  But as I said, I still think it's inevitable.  It's just like, does it happen in 2030 or 2035?  
**[0:30:32-0:30:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:30:32):**  The other kind of pattern we often see in disruptions is often the old industry has  a price spike before it kind of collapses.  So we may actually see a kind of – and that's often to do just with a mismatch of supply  and demand.  So we've seen it with the coal industry as well.  
**[0:30:47-0:30:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:30:47):**  You had peak before you had the trough.  We've seen it with Kodak had peak sales before they basically collapsed because of digital  film.  And so we may well see peak prices.  So I think even if you see the high prices in meat over the next few years, I wouldn't  
**[0:31:02-0:31:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:31:02):**  necessarily dismiss this theory.  I would just say it actually adds weight to it in some ways.  But I would say, yeah.  So can you explain that a bit?  How does that work?  
**[0:31:12-0:31:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:31:12):**  How could it play out in meat production?  Would there be higher prices in the supermarkets or higher stock prices of these CAFO operators  or CAFO companies or very good production numbers and profits announced by them?  Yeah, exactly.  So you may well see higher animal prices or cow prices, meat prices basically, which would  
**[0:31:35-0:31:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:31:35):**  not necessarily mean higher profits for Tyson because that's one of their cost of goods  sold.  But would actually almost kind of make Tyson perhaps double down and invest in this kind  of alternative production.  So yeah, you'd see higher prices for the farmers probably.  
**[0:31:51-0:31:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:31:51):**  But I don't – yeah, I mean, that's something we've seen in a lot of industries.  So it's definitely kind of almost this peak before the bust idea.  But Tyson themselves are investing in these alternatives.  So you are seeing I think some of the companies themselves are actually aware of this disruption  or keeping an eye on it.  
**[0:32:10-0:32:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:32:10):**  I think there's definitely been lessons learned from previous ones.  So it'll be interesting to see how they kind of play out, if it's something they're actually  committed to or whether they're kind of just doing it to keep an eye on the competition.  And aren't you afraid for the nutrition part of things?  I mean, it could be the acceptance of consumers because they might look differently at it,  
**[0:32:31-0:32:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:32:31):**  although it's a lot of ingredients we're talking about.  But any early scandals or something that might slip through some of the filters, etc., could  really disrupt this, as we've seen with a lot of new technologies in food.  Food is a very touchy subject, obviously.  Are you scared of any of those?  
**[0:32:49-0:32:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:32:49):**  Of course, we claim or you claim it's going to be exactly the same.  But whenever somebody said that, it usually triggers a lot of questions.  Do you see any potential anti disruption from the nutrition side of things?  Yeah, I mean, much like parenting, everyone has an opinion on food.  So I think, you know, you're right, it's a very, everyone has a very, is very subjective,  
**[0:33:10-0:33:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:33:10):**  everyone has their own opinion about food and rightly so.  People choose what they eat, right?  Most people are lucky enough to have that choice to choose what they eat.  And we're not trying to tell people what to eat from this disruption.  We're not saying you need to, we're just saying this is going to happen, it's going to be  
**[0:33:24-0:33:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:33:24):**  ingredients in these products.  It's just a change and that we just see it as a shift in the production, right, system.  So we're just saying it's a technology shift as opposed to kind of a consumer driven shift.  But I mean, nutrition wise, I think kind of separately, there are like movements, obviously,  about what is the correct nutrition.  
**[0:33:42-0:33:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:33:42):**  I am completely confident that this is going to be better.  I mean, the one way I think that there's been a bit of a move, I think, at the moment, the  idea of what's in meat, right?  So what's actually in the food or the food we eat.  So I think there has to be transparency, not only in kind of this technology, we do advocate  
**[0:33:56-0:34:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:33:56):**  for that nutritionally, for the food, and I think it will be over, it has to have this  regulation around it, it should have this regulation around it.  And there should be regulation in that, but also in the current industries, and they should  match up.  So I think that would be, that's my view of how I think, you know, these technologies  
**[0:34:13-0:34:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:34:13):**  need to be, it needs to be seen on a like for like basis across the whole food system.  I mean, there is just to be, you know, to be very transparent that a lot of these molecules  would be programmed.  And when I say programmed, I mean, they would use biotechnology, so gene editing.  And obviously, in some regions of the world, they don't approve that.  
**[0:34:31-0:34:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:34:31):**  So there are, you know, there are perhaps some kind of areas where just even how we  define biotechnology needs to be looked up from a regulatory point of view.  And I know, for example, Heem from Impossible has had some backlash as well of is it safe,  is it healthy?  So, you know, I think that that discussion needs to carry on, because it's really important,  
**[0:34:50-0:34:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:34:50):**  and there may be some proteins, you know, the technology itself, I think, is fine.  It's just like the products they produce from it.  So some proteins may or may not be good, but that doesn't make the technology bad.  So I think, you know, time will tell in terms of what's produced and how we produce it.  Yeah, I think there's going to be a lot of discussion.  
**[0:35:06-0:35:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:35:06):**  I mean, I see a lot of pushback on Impossible Burger for choosing GMO seeds and the glyphosate  that comes with that.  And actually Impossible both of when you take them apart nutritionally, there are a lot  of questions on the recipe and the level of salt and the level of and you see, especially  people in the region X, they're saying, this is not a replacement.  
**[0:35:23-0:35:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:35:23):**  Of course, you have to look at what it actually replaced in terms of a hamburger, which probably  comes for sure from a factory farm.  And like we said, we don't know what's in that.  And probably if we don't want to, we should, but we don't want to.  But if you compare it with, like you mentioned, artisanal grown or regenerative grown, it  
**[0:35:39-0:35:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:35:39):**  becomes a whole different discussion.  But 99.9% of meat isn't grown like that at the moment.  So it's but you get a text for that because it doesn't seem very healthy if you look at  the ingredient list and nutrition depth of it.  Yeah, we try not to get into the I mean, yeah, we try not to get into the discussion of what  
**[0:35:57-0:36:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:35:57):**  isn't healthy because that is a very divisive argument.  However, we are saying that there's a production system change, we can change how we produce  these to make it cheaper.  Ultimately, I mean, consumers can change our opinion.  And we see this as a software process.  
**[0:36:13-0:36:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:36:13):**  So the impossible 2.0 is better than the impossible 1.0.  And the impossible 20.0 will be better.  And when we say better, we mean in every way.  So nutritionally, more like meat.  So I think there's still movement to be made.  
**[0:36:28-0:36:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:36:28):**  But in terms of once that's almost a discussion to happen, I guess once the cow market is  completely disrupted as well.  Like if we don't even have animal meat anymore, what's the next discussion?  You know, it probably does become more about kind of health.  But again, we're not trying to if people don't want to eat an impossible because they don't  
**[0:36:44-0:36:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:36:44):**  think it's healthy, that's completely fine.  You know, that no one is trying to tell anyone what to eat.  And the impossible burger themselves say they are not trying to disrupt a vegetarian or  vegan.  They want to disrupt meat eaters.  
**[0:36:57-0:36:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:36:57):**  So that's how they say.  Yeah, and especially meat eaters that would traditionally get the KFO ones and arguably  any or not almost anything is better than that.  I mean, you don't have to try so hard to from a nutrition from animal welfare and from an  environmental point of view.  
**[0:37:15-0:37:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:37:15):**  It's not so easy to beat that.  I want to be conscious of your time and thank you so much for sharing the results of this  report your thinking behind it, and what it could mean for the egg space in general, but  also obviously the region egg and food space.  Very many thanks, Koun, and very many thanks to our listeners.  
**[0:37:33-0:37:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:37:33):**  I'm always interested and available to hear anyone's opinions and discussions on my email  address food at rethinkx.com.  Thank you so much.  If you found the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  
**[0:37:50-0:37:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:37:50):**  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  join my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  
**[0:38:12-0:38:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:38:12):**  You can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or in the description  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food, how to put money to work in regenerating  
**[0:38:40-0:38:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:38:40):**  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to put money  to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011 and recording  these podcasts since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  
**[0:38:59-0:39:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:38:59):**  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  What questions should you ask?  
**[0:39:11-0:39:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:39:11):**  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  
**[0:39:18-0:39:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:39:18):**  For whom is this course?  You, the soil builders and investors in this space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management consultants, etc.  
**[0:39:37-0:39:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:39:37):**  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  
**[0:39:53-0:39:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:39:53):**  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  
**[0:40:11-0:40:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:40:11):**  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to ride along.  
**[0:40:24-0:40:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:40:24):**  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in and what kind of co investors you could find or what kind of investors you could  find if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  
**[0:40:46-0:40:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:40:46):**  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  
**[0:41:00-0:41:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/10/catherine-tubb/#t=0:41:00):**  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  