### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2019-00-23)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  This interview is about talent and why it is such a crucial piece of the Regen ag revolution.  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture.  
**[0:00:25-0:00:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:00:25):**  Investing as if the planet mattered.  Today I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space to learn more on  how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities and ecosystems  while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  
**[0:00:43-0:00:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:00:43):**  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  In March last year we launched our Patreon community to make it easy for fans to support  
**[0:01:03-0:01:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:01:03):**  our work and so many of you have joined as a member.  We've launched different types of benefits, exclusive content, Q&A webinars with former  guests, ask me anything sessions plus so much more to come in the future.  For more information on the different tiers, benefits and how to become a member check  patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or find the link below.  
**[0:01:22-0:01:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:01:22):**  Thank you.  Welcome to another episode today with Locky Ritchie, farmland portfolio manager of Wide  Open Agriculture, co-founder of Ag Talent.  Ag Talent is a search engine for training jobs and experts in the sustainable and regenerative  agriculture industry.  
**[0:01:38-0:01:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:01:38):**  Welcome Locky.  Thanks Colin, pleasure.  So to start with the usual personal question, how did you end up founding an Ag Talent platform  but how did you end up in farming in Ag in regenerative agriculture and soil?  Sure mate.  
**[0:01:52-0:01:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:01:52):**  Well I grew up farming, so broad acre farming in a variety of different contexts but like  many young people growing up in the land, we sold up our farm when I was about 12 years  old, kept working in Ag right up until my early 20s but I guess at least in the region  where I grew up, if you're a young person working in farming and you don't stand a chance  to inherit a farm, you're not really actively encouraged to pursue Ag as a career.  
**[0:02:19-0:02:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:02:19):**  You're very much encouraged to head off to the city which is exactly what I did.  So yes, I basically left the farm early 20s, went to the city, went to university and I  found myself into the social enterprise pathway.  So ended up over a period of 10 years co-founding three different social enterprises, completely  unrelated to Ag and through…  
**[0:02:44-0:02:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:02:44):**  Everything is related to Ag.  I'm joking.  No, totally man.  Good point.  It is.  
**[0:02:49-0:02:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:02:49):**  It is in one way or another and look, especially when you start to look at social enterprise  and you start to think about making a positive impact on the world and it's like the further  you go up the chain, it always comes back to environment, climate change and then the  food we eat is one of the biggest impact areas in that.  So look, I guess after 10 years in the city and on this social enterprise pathway through  
**[0:03:12-0:03:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:03:12):**  a bit of serendipity and life's interesting journey, so my partner and I had the chance  to manage a small farm and it turns out the small farm was owned by two of Australia's  leading impact investors and our goal on that farm was to help to set up a small scale intensive  market garden with a couple of really talented growers and I guess over that two year period  that we spent on that time, I physically dove into the world of agriculture and regenerative  
**[0:03:42-0:03:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:03:42):**  agriculture in particular coming from my social enterprise background and realizing that from  an impact perspective, I now believe and understand quite clearly that I don't think there is  anywhere else dollar for dollar that you can have a greater impact on the world than the  food system, particularly when it comes to climate change.  So it really was two years spent physically diving into the soil and tangibly understanding  
**[0:04:10-0:04:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:04:10):**  it again and just I guess being reawakened to agriculture and the potential for agriculture.  It wasn't the ag I grew up with, which was large broad scale very conventional agriculture.  It was a real awakening for me and just understanding that I don't think there's anywhere you can  have greater impact than in agriculture.  And I want to unpack that a bit.  
**[0:04:37-0:04:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:04:37):**  You mentioned and I think the first sentence or second sentence, as many born on the land  but not in a position to inherit, we were definitely not encouraged to stay on the land  and encouraged to go to the city.  I see that in many, many places.  But how does that non encouragement or encouragement to go to the city and non encouragement to  
**[0:04:56-0:04:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:04:56):**  stay in farming?  How does that happen?  What should I as somebody that was born in the city should imagine basically the push  to please don't stay in farming and please move to the city?  It's really subtle from it's well, sometimes not so subtle when you're sitting in a careers  
**[0:05:14-0:05:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:05:14):**  council meeting at high school and they're just basically saying, you know, why on earth  would you want to be a farmer?  There's no money in that.  There's no future in that.  If you don't own that's not subtle at all.  
**[0:05:25-0:05:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:05:25):**  And look, to be honest, if you're quite good at school, the encouragement is, you know,  it's the classic, it's golf to university, become a lawyer, do medicine, become an engineer,  do something that's like, you know, guaranteed high paid job kind of thing.  So there's a lot of that kind of permeated through us, at least, at least, you know,  coming from my own personal experience in the school system to encourage that people  
**[0:05:47-0:05:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:05:47):**  go off to university and get, you know, the highest formal training they can and that  farming is, you know, potentially a backup.  And it's not, you know, it's just not painted as a big, sexy, high profile career in the  same way that a lot of other industries are painted.  You know, at least again, coming from my own personal experience.  
**[0:06:09-0:06:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:06:09):**  And that awakening moment, which happened over those two years in region ag, in this  case, in the market garden, that must have switched completely your idea of the sexy  job you maybe wanted to do the rest of your life.  Yeah, it was, it was huge, I think just, obviously, you know, my having spent 10 years in the  world of social impact and impact investment and understanding how that whole sector is  
**[0:06:37-0:06:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:06:37):**  working and evolving, and just suddenly realizing that, oh, wait, this like, this thing that  I grew up with and took for granted is, you know, it can, it can be hugely impactful.  It was, yeah, it was a really big turning point for me.  And what made you decide to take over and manage that farm?  Because you're working in social enterprises, but probably could have done that for a long  
**[0:06:59-0:07:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:06:59):**  time.  But what was your moment?  Where was one of the social enterprises involved in food?  And I mentioned actually not?  And how did you cut back to food and ag but very different ag and where you grew up?  
**[0:07:10-0:07:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:07:10):**  Because at some point, you had to leave the city and take over this farm?  Yeah, sure.  So it was a bit of so the love of my life, my now wife, Jess, she basically had the opportunity  to move over to the other side of the country for a new job opportunity.  It was outside of the cities and, you know, wanting to support her in that and interested  
**[0:07:31-0:07:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:07:31):**  in a change.  I went along for the ride, basically.  And then we found ourselves on the other side of the country, which was, you know, back  in the state where I where I grew up.  And yeah, just through a series of serendipitous events, we actually, it actually kind of happened  
**[0:07:50-0:07:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:07:50):**  because we went to a farm gate to buy some vegetables.  And I bumped in and I saw the guy who owned the farm who's Daniel McGaur and Barry Lieberman  who are the their family offices, small giants.  And I'd actually met Danny previously at a conference.  And I literally walking into his farm to buy some vegetables.  
**[0:08:10-0:08:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:08:10):**  And we bumped into each other.  And we knew we had that moment of recognition of like, how do we know?  Yeah, and then honestly, that sort of from then he took us on a tour of the farm.  And then a few weeks later, basically called and said, you know, what are you doing when  when are you moving over to you?  
**[0:08:29-0:08:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:08:29):**  You know, and he initially tried to recruit my wife.  Danny can be quite persuasive.  Yeah.  And look, you know, he tried to recruit my wife because she's trained in horticulture.  And I kind of just weaseled my way in there and said, well, you know, and the opportunity  
**[0:08:42-0:08:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:08:42):**  eventually added for me to be involved as well.  So we both basically took on the roles caretaker of the farm and then progressively were joined  by some really talented people.  And it was turned into an amazing little community of people that are working to make like the  farm what it is today, which is pretty impressive now.  
**[0:09:00-0:09:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:09:00):**  And it could have stopped there in a sense that you could have managed market gardens,  or you in plural, actually the rest of your life, but it didn't.  You moved on to a very different project.  I mean, still in the region, it's based with a very different scale, wide open egg, and  found co founding egg talent.  
**[0:09:17-0:09:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:09:17):**  Can you share a bit how that came about?  Yeah, sure.  And I think, you know, in that journey as well for that that few years, I really recognized  that my my skill and I guess my passion is more around the startup phase of businesses  and enterprises.  
**[0:09:33-0:09:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:09:33):**  And that's really where I've kind of honed my Yeah, my passion.  And on the farm, we're working with a couple of very skilled and talented growers.  So Mikey and Kez from Mossy Willow Farm, just to give a little bit of plug there.  They are amazing, are amazing growers.  And there's really that recognition that my space is helping with the start and there's  
**[0:09:52-0:09:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:09:52):**  no real need for me to carry on beyond that point.  But also within that journey of being on that farm, we hosted interns, and we started running  internship programs.  And there was these incredibly talented, skilled young people coming from the city who were  absolutely relishing in the chance to get involved in ag.  
**[0:10:16-0:10:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:10:16):**  And they were working hard.  So they kind of blew a few of these stereotypes apart, we would expect people coming from  the city to not be able to work hard and don't really know what working is.  And they just completely  I visit a farm and I stay with friends, etc.  
**[0:10:29-0:10:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:10:29):**  I always realize how hard it physically actually is.  I don't think most people in the city have an idea except for the ones that really dive  in, like, like the ones you mentioned, the interns that really spent two, three years,  and they know what they're talking about.  Most of us, I'm claiming us as a city city folks have no idea how physically it can be.  
**[0:10:48-0:10:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:10:48):**  Yeah, and this was, you know, this is a very small scale intensive market garden growing  on one acre.  So everything is manual, and they would work incredibly hard through the hot summer.  And they were just basically coming out of the end of this internship program and going  like, where to now?  
**[0:11:09-0:11:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:11:09):**  You know, what like, what are their options if they were loved the work loved the agriculture  love the potential impact of regenerative ag and really understood that mainly from  a climate change impact.  But there was just nowhere for them to go.  Like there was no structured pathway, you know, like, oh, next, you do this, and then  
**[0:11:27-0:11:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:11:27):**  you do this, and then you do that.  And then you get this training, and then these job opportunities open up.  So just realizing how fragmented and non existent that career path is, particularly in the niche  of regenerative ag.  So that was like the I guess, the intern and young person side of the story, which obviously  
**[0:11:48-0:11:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:11:48):**  really resonated with my personal experience growing up, just around it, you know, not  being credible, or structured career path, particularly, yeah, like I said, in this alternative  side of agriculture.  And then the other side of it was working with the small giants family office and realizing  that obviously, from an impact investors perspective, regenerative ag is climbing on the agenda  
**[0:12:17-0:12:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:12:17):**  of impact investment offices are now realized worldwide, and is a really hot topic.  Luckily, I mean, they're, they're starting to listen more and more to the podcast.  But yeah, it's been it's been a journey.  But I see a lot of investors coming from mainly from the climate change angle now coming to  the space into soil, and realizing it's one of those great potentials.  
**[0:12:35-0:12:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:12:35):**  Yeah, absolutely.  Realizing it's, you know, it could be huge.  And Danny and Barry from small giants were, you know, the whole time we're down on the  farm, there's just constant discussions and philosophy around how do we how do we grow  this movement?  
**[0:12:49-0:12:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:12:49):**  How do we see more investment flow in the right direction?  And I was realizing through those investor conversations, and with other groups as well,  that one of the big barriers to deals getting over the line often actually comes down to  talent.  So it was it was coming up as a repeat problem within the investment space of succession  
**[0:13:10-0:13:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:13:10):**  planning and finding appropriate farm managers.  So there was kind of I'm seeing these like two sides of the problem of, you know, the  group trying to hire people, and then the young people trying to get jobs, and they're  just being this big void of disconnect and fragmentation in between.  And it was kind of from that, that the idea for Ag talent was born.  
**[0:13:31-0:13:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:13:31):**  And can you describe a bit what is Ag talent?  I mean, I did it is a search engine, etc.  But I'm sure there are a few more lines and a few more structure of what Ag talent is  at the moment and what it wants to be or will be in the near future.  Sure.  
**[0:13:46-0:13:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:13:46):**  So yeah, basically, it is a search engine for jobs, training, and experts.  And so how that works from the training side of things, if you can imagine an Airbnb style  marketplace, where you can go to one website, and all the best training from all over the  world to do with sustainable regenerative Ag is all on the one place, you can buy tickets,  you can compare, you can see ratings and reviews.  
**[0:14:11-0:14:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:14:11):**  And then the extension of that is that if you participate in training, you can create  yourself a profile a little bit like an online CV.  And then you know, as we develop features in the platform, we'll be able to suggest  further training for you, potentially, you could rack up points and earn credits for  doing training.  
**[0:14:30-0:14:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:14:30):**  And then that obviously will give us as a platform, a big database of people who are  participating in training in the region Ag space.  And then we'll be able to match those people to jobs.  So then obviously, the job side of the platform is pretty straightforward at this point, it's  a jobs board.  
**[0:14:47-0:14:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:14:47):**  So we've got jobs coming up all over the world again, all focusing on sustainable region  Ag.  And then the third part of the platform, which is, which is quite interesting is this expert  marketplace.  So it's basically a place where experts either as individual independent consultants, or  
**[0:15:08-0:15:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:15:08):**  organizations, consultancies, training orgs, all have little business profiles and can  showcase their team, their talent, their skills, and also link through their training programs  as well.  The dream as well is to have online coaching available with some of these consultants worldwide.  And I guess just have a really tight delivery of training.  
**[0:15:29-0:15:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:15:29):**  I mean, it seems like you're almost finding three different businesses, but actually,  they're all very tightly connected.  How has it been going?  Because I think you've been active for not extremely long.  How has been the response?  
**[0:15:41-0:15:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:15:41):**  What are surprises?  How has it been with the launch of this talent platform?  Sure.  So look, we, we've been working on this for about 12 months now.  We received some startup funding about three, four months ago.  
**[0:15:54-0:15:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:15:54):**  And so we're really in the kind of final stages of developing what we'll call the platform  stage one.  And then then we really go into now just a validation stage.  And you know, can we get enough traffic and traction on the platform to make it make it  viable?  
**[0:16:10-0:16:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:16:10):**  Like early signs are incredibly encouraging.  Like you know, like I said, we still haven't released the completed version.  And I think we're three and a half thousand views in the last 28 days on the website.  So look, it's climbing like that's very encouraging for us.  Probably the biggest surprise is how readily training organizations and consultancies want  
**[0:16:34-0:16:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:16:34):**  to get on board.  So we're actually finding that, that yes, some leading training and consulting organizations  are keen to get on board and not only that, they want to promote and advocate for our  platform.  So it's been this real kind of almost, ah, finally someone's looking at this issue coming  
**[0:16:53-0:16:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:16:53):**  from the experts within the industry.  Yeah, because it's extremely fragmented until now.  And if you're, I mean, everybody can call themselves an expert.  And I'm imagining what the best one sees is the potential for the reviews and potential  for actually creating a name by something independent and not just themselves.  
**[0:17:12-0:17:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:17:12):**  And not just word of mouth is something that at least if you're in the business and ready  to scale and really to really grow out of, okay, I do extra innings a year and I've 10,  20 people and that's okay.  But if you're looking to really have an impact, you're going to need platforms like this to  reach people that will never hear about you otherwise.  
**[0:17:29-0:17:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:17:29):**  Yeah.  And that's the feedback we're getting is I was initially worried that our people might  be scared of the competition.  But what we're seeing is that really skilled advisors and agronomists are recognizing that  you and trainers that if you're trying to change behavior on a farm, one interaction  
**[0:17:49-0:17:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:17:49):**  or a few interactions with a farmer is not enough.  So the farmer can afford to attend a three or four day serious training program or have  a an agronomy consultation is what like what happens next?  How do you keep these people engaged and really what they're wanting and needing is long term  ongoing support.  
**[0:18:08-0:18:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:18:08):**  So there's a lot of interest for people within our platform to say, well, if we did an initial  consultation, what about the idea of online coaching groups?  And there's kind of other ways to keep people engaged on a long, long term basis.  And then the extension of that is obviously helping consultants and advisors to extend  their network reach international audiences easily, all this kind of thing.  
**[0:18:33-0:18:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:18:33):**  And you know, obviously drive quality with ratings and reviews.  And that will be something that you'll be actually be hosting these groups like I have  done a consultation with, I don't know, five farms here in Europe, five farmers here in  Europe and but I don't want to or I don't have the resources to set up my own digital  infrastructure to then do regular webinars with them or check ins, etc.  
**[0:18:57-0:19:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:18:57):**  That will be potentially something I can do through AgTalent.  Yeah, absolutely.  So that's what we're building is that that level of functionality.  I think our real value will be trying to get a lot of the physical real world content and  get it online and get it out to broader audiences.  
**[0:19:16-0:19:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:19:16):**  So that yeah, that notion of coaching groups, webinars, online training is big on our agenda.  Yeah, sounds extremely exciting.  And how has been the response, let's say, from the demand side?  I mean, the farmers looking for experts looking for training, looking for people to fill their  job options, opportunities, what has been the response there?  
**[0:19:39-0:19:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:19:39):**  Yeah, really, really encouraging.  So we've just in the last week or two, we've made our first kind of successful job postings  and placements, where people have had enough high quality applicants that they're really  satisfied with the service and are paying, which is incredibly encouraging from the job  side considering, you know, the jobs board really only went live properly a month or  
**[0:20:01-0:20:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:20:01):**  two ago, which is exciting.  And yeah, like we're just we're building an email list daily, we just launched some training  and job bulletins.  So we currently have a fortnightly email that goes out to US audiences, and also Australian  audiences.  
**[0:20:16-0:20:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:20:16):**  There's basically a calendar of events of all the upcoming courses and training opportunities  in each state.  And we're finding that one like bulletin service has is just getting a lot of traction, like  people are signing up all over the place.  So it's, yes, super encouraging.  
**[0:20:31-0:20:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:20:31):**  It's just, you know, I think the thing with regenerative ag is it's globally, even even  now, despite all the, you know, the excitement around the movement, it's a very small niche.  And I just am cognizant that for us as a business, this is going to be a slow, steady burn.  But yeah, it's incredibly exciting so far.  Just what you told your investors as well.  
**[0:20:53-0:20:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:20:53):**  Yeah, slow and steady burn.  Absolutely.  I'm kind of using the analogy that it's a bit like investing in farmland, you know,  things in ag just take time, and they're not going to explode overnight.  They're just going to be slow, steady, take it one step at a time.  
**[0:21:07-0:21:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:21:07):**  And they're fine with that, because it's actually something that comes back in the podcast quite  regularly.  Like we have to change the, say the timeline in the heads of investors, or it changes automatically  because the moment people invest in ag and food, everything takes longer than they are  used to in software.  
**[0:21:23-0:21:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:21:23):**  But it's something that holds back a lot of people because they somehow have this notion  of quick liquidity, quick exits, etc., which is just absolutely not the case if you want  to rebuild any soil or invest in, let's say, food companies on a regenerative path.  Are your investors comfortable with these timelines?  Yeah, absolutely.  
**[0:21:42-0:21:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:21:42):**  We're really fortunate at this early stage that the angel investors are supporting us  are completely aligned to the movement and really just say that the potential of this  platform is getting in early on the beginnings of what will hopefully be the norm for agriculture  in 10 years time.  And it's just kind of getting in very, very early on a new wave, which we're very fortunate  
**[0:22:11-0:22:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:22:11):**  for.  I think particularly as soon as you layer in a technology startup, people just automatically  start thinking unicorn mode and how quickly are we going to get 10x returns?  And I just think acknowledging that technology within agriculture is a very unique and interesting  space.  
**[0:22:31-0:22:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:22:31):**  So yes, patient capital is key.  And what do you see?  I mean, I want to spend some time on one of your investors in a minute, Wide Open Agriculture,  actually one of the groups you work with and for.  But I wanted to briefly spend some time on the 10 years you mentioned.  
**[0:22:48-0:22:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:22:48):**  What if RegenEgg is the norm in 10 years?  What needs to happen over the years?  What do you see in this case, specifically, maybe in the talent space?  What is the because you say we're getting very early, I think we all notice we are early  in this space.  
**[0:23:02-0:23:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:23:02):**  But in five years from now, would you have seen massive changes already?  Because if in 10 years it's the norm, we need to get going.  Yeah, absolutely.  Like it's yeah, it's it's huge.  And I think, you know, the interesting thing for me and the thing I hope is within the  
**[0:23:20-0:23:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:23:20):**  talent space.  Well, I guess a few things, but obviously, I'd like to see a lot more training a lot.  And I think as well, if there can be levers out there to bring the quality along for the  ride as well, so not like, you know, a lot more, but high quality training, you know,  clearer pathways.  
**[0:23:39-0:23:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:23:39):**  But I think, you know, I think the main cultural thing that would be amazing to see change  is just like recognizing agriculture as an incredibly challenging, interesting, exciting  career opportunity.  It needs to attract the best and brightest minds on the planet, like, and just how you  know, how we make that cultural shift.  
**[0:24:04-0:24:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:24:04):**  I think that's that's going to be huge.  And I think I think it has to happen.  And I think, you know, the more we start talking and understanding the links between agriculture  and climate change, and regenerative agriculture and nutrient density in food, and I guess  all the flow on impacts from region ag, I just think it's becoming more and more attractive  
**[0:24:26-0:24:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:24:26):**  as a career to younger generations that are really driven by having a positive impact  on the world.  So it's Yeah, all of that stuff is, you know, it's all unfolding and all very interesting.  And you know, there's a lot to go.  And what would you without giving investment advice, obviously, but as you have spent time  
**[0:24:47-0:24:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:24:47):**  in the investment world, the city impact investment world and also an egg, and imagine there are  quite a few investors listening to this podcast, and they're ready, they read the books, they  have visited the farms, but they haven't made investments yet, where would you advise them  to to look out for or where would you advise them to look at to start looking in terms  of this quite vast, but still very small, regenerative ag space?  
**[0:25:12-0:25:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:25:12):**  Well, you know, I think I wouldn't be telling astute investors anything new.  But I'd say investing in teams rather than individuals is huge.  I think agriculture is really interesting as an industry when you consider a farmer  and they have to be, you know, a laborer, an entrepreneur, a technician, a mechanic,  they're like, you know, 10 jobs all rolled up into one person.  
**[0:25:40-0:25:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:25:40):**  And inventor and inventor and a marketer and all of these things.  And that is, you know, incredibly hard for someone to be very good at all of those things,  to have the mindset, this, you know, the skill set to achieve that.  So I think, from an investment perspective is if you're making, yeah, making investments  and looking for the teams behind those investments.  
**[0:26:03-0:26:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:26:03):**  And I think if you are investing through either an asset manager or an existing agriculture  fund would be, yeah, like who are their teams, do they have people on the ground in the regions  that they're working?  And are they investing in succession planning?  I mean, you know, the average age of farmers in Australia is 60 years old.  
**[0:26:24-0:26:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:26:24):**  So if you're wanting to make a 10 to 20 year investment into regenerative agriculture,  then you need to make sure that succession planning is in place.  And you know, that your asset manager or fund have active career programs, and they're doing  something in this space to nurture and grow the next generation of talent, it's gonna  be absolutely vital.  
**[0:26:44-0:26:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:26:44):**  I think you make an excellent point on teams, we as an investor, you would never I mean,  most people even say I would not back a startup company where we just one founder, find a  co founder first or find a team first before I would even look at it as an investor, somehow  as a investor in ag that that until now was never an issue.  And obviously, it's extremely risky, because they can never be all like you mentioned before  
**[0:27:08-0:27:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:27:08):**  at the same time and can be amazing at all of them.  Yeah, exactly.  And look, you know, really good asset management companies have a really cognizant of that.  And they have specialists who help with all the different aspects, you know, and consultants  and advisors where needed.  
**[0:27:24-0:27:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:27:24):**  So yeah, it's crucial.  And this is a question that I didn't store, but I borrowed from john kent.  What do you believe to be true about region ag?  He says about ag in general, modern ag, but I would like to ask you about region ag.  So what do you believe to be true about region agriculture that others don't believe to be  
**[0:27:41-0:27:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:27:41):**  true?  Yeah, this is a super tough one.  I am a fan of john's podcast.  So I hear this question a lot.  And it always the answers are always really interesting.  
**[0:27:55-0:28:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:27:55):**  But I'm going to go out with a kind of potentially controversial one here and say, look, you  know, I do think regenerative ag is an incredibly exciting career opportunity for young people.  But I think we can keep young people in regenerative ag without farmland ownership.  I know, within Australia, we can, we can, I think we can, I think moving beyond the  notion of individual family scale ownership of farmland is not necessarily a bad thing.  
**[0:28:28-0:28:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:28:28):**  In Australia, it's really culturally ingrained.  And I'm not you know, I'm not saying family ownership of farmland is a bad thing, either.  What I'm just saying, contextually in Australia, like Western Australia, for example, the average  size of a profitable farm is $6 million worth of capital that you're sitting on, let alone  livestock machinery, working capital, that's just the land alone.  
**[0:28:53-0:29:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:28:53):**  So carrying that level of capital as a young person, if you don't stand the chance to inherit  a farm is near on impossible.  In no other industry on earth would your kind of starting point require that degree of capital.  So I think I think there's a lot of work that can be done, particularly in regenerative  ag around interesting and new ways of getting young people hooked in as land stewards, as  
**[0:29:22-0:29:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:29:22):**  opposed to owners.  There could be interesting things that can be done within investment funds, for example,  where the farm managers and farmers are incentivized with shareholdings in the fund.  So they're still kind of have skin in the game and still firmly attached to land, but  perhaps don't individually own the title as a family.  
**[0:29:43-0:29:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:29:43):**  I mean, I don't think it's controversial at all.  I mean, for sure, it's different.  But it comes back to the discussion we had before on we would never consider in, let's  say, startup investing or small company investing.  There are obviously ways to incentivize your crew and your staff and your team to be part  
**[0:30:04-0:30:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:30:04):**  of it and options, et cetera, are very, very normal.  And somehow in ag, we do everything different.  And I think the six million or even more is just a barrier that's impossible to enter,  because the moment you do that and you raise that kind of capital, you're forced into a  short term cash version of ag, which is definitely not regenerative.  
**[0:30:24-0:30:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:30:24):**  And I think there are so many different ways of steward ownership and other ways to figure  out to give young people that want to do that, and let's be very happy about that we have  a group of young people that actually want to get into farming and want to get into farming  completely differently, that we have to figure out ways to give them access and skin in the  game and tie them longer to the land, but maybe growing into it or the ownership is  
**[0:30:47-0:30:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:30:47):**  formally somewhere else.  But it's I think it's a huge investment opportunity, because there's only so much land you can  buy as an investor, and then lease out.  And I think we need all this, these different hybrid models to give access to two millions  and millions of young farmers on this.  
**[0:31:01-0:31:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:31:01):**  Yeah, absolutely.  And I think the particular opportunity with region ag as opposed to normal agriculture  is that I think people who are like people are going to be attracted to this space as  young farmers, purely for the impact potential alone, and for the sense of contributing to  positive change in the world.  
**[0:31:20-0:31:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:31:20):**  So I think like that carrot alone is enough to get people in that you you know, ownership  of land is not a requirement.  Now, I think a return on their time, I think we do need to have a discussion on sustainability,  financial sustainability of farms and the fact that I really have issues finding profitable  farms like commercially, chemically industrial driven farms that are profitable without any  
**[0:31:47-0:31:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:31:47):**  subsidies or without, I mean, EU, I think it's nearly impossible, I will probably get  emails of this but to find and the region ag farmers I meet, they are very different,  but they also have very different margins.  And actually, in some cases, are much more profitable, if you look at their timing, and  if you look at what they sell.  
**[0:32:04-0:32:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:32:04):**  So it's also, I speak to investors that see finally we see a way of making money in and  investing in ag because of region ag just approaches it completely different.  So I think there's a, there's going to be also a very interesting carrot there, not  that you're going to be a multibillionaire overnight, you can have your exits.  But there's good money to be made like honest good money in region ag.  
**[0:32:25-0:32:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:32:25):**  Yeah, absolutely.  And especially, you know, if we get into, you know, the eventual reality of farmers  being rewarded for ecosystem services, and I think, you know, tying in those positive  impacts where, you know, young farmers who are managing or supporting farmers as you  know, assistant managers or whatever are all tied into that long term ecological gain on  
**[0:32:48-0:32:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:32:48):**  the land.  I think if we can get some of those levers right and really incentivize people for being  stewards of land, and increasing the health of land, I think that's, you know, that's  an incredibly exciting space moving forward.  And it's one that supposedly gets better.  
**[0:33:04-0:33:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:33:04):**  It's like, it's not an asset.  I mean, it's not it's not in terms of these ecosystem payment services, we'll figure part  of them out over the next years.  Hopefully the nutrient density comes online as well, in a sense that we can have an honest  discussion about food as medicine.  
**[0:33:20-0:33:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:33:20):**  And that should mean that the farmers that are really good at that will be rewarded,  hopefully, I mean, we have to build systems for that for producing more nutrients.  So even if you can already, let's say out compete or compete at the current scale where  food is still just food and not medicine, and where there are hardly any payments for  ecosystem services, imagine in 10 years from now, I mean, you will be the one I mean, sitting  
**[0:33:43-0:33:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:33:43):**  on an asset or working with an asset that has actually became better because you hopefully  have rebuilt the soil, and maybe even getting a number of other rewards that others don't.  So I think it's in terms of long term perspective, whoever gets in now, the same with the Ag  Talent Platform, whoever gets in now and has the breath to keep going, probably gets get  some very interesting rewards in the future.  
**[0:34:05-0:34:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:34:05):**  Yeah, absolutely.  You know, it's like, I guess we've we've seen decades of agriculture effectively mining  nutrient value from soil and depleting the you know, the natural value of the land.  And to have that turned around, and then farmers potentially monetarily rewarded for what makes  sense anyway, it's Yeah, if we can get to that place, you know, I've got no doubt about  
**[0:34:28-0:34:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:34:28):**  the future of ag and you know, potentially life on the planet if we can get to that point.  And I mean, it's a bit it's a bit of a switch.  But can you spend a few words?  Well, at some point, I will interview definitely a wide open agriculture and maybe you and  spend a full episode on what you are doing in Australia.  
**[0:34:46-0:34:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:34:46):**  But can you spend a few words on it?  As we mentioned at the beginning, and also a few minutes ago, what is wide open agriculture?  Sure.  So wide open agriculture is a regenerative food and farming company based in Western  Australia.  
**[0:35:00-0:35:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:35:00):**  And really, we're working across the side of the business that I'm involved with is  wide open land, which is a farmland asset manager.  So obviously, tying in a lot of the work I'm focused on around talent, talent development  and managing teams is we basically seek out and pull together investment opportunities  in West Australian ag.  
**[0:35:20-0:35:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:35:20):**  And then we manage them ongoing on behalf of investors.  And then so wide open agriculture has a food brand called dirty clean food, which is just  launching.  Very nice name.  Yeah, it's a bit provocative.  
**[0:35:35-0:35:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:35:35):**  And it's designed just to make people kind of delve deeper and understand where their  foods come from and the soil story is absolutely central to the brand.  And look, so yeah, basically, we're bringing product online now.  We're currently selling regenerative grass fed beef and lamb through food service to  some of the best restaurants in Perth and looking to expand into export.  
**[0:36:00-0:36:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:36:00):**  And we have retail opportunities happening now as well.  So branded product on retail shelves and supermarkets.  So really, as a company, it's working right across the value chain from my side of the  business, which farmland right through to, you know, being able to generate a premium  for regenerative product.  
**[0:36:18-0:36:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:36:18):**  And they are one of the seed funders in act on.  Yeah, that's correct.  So basically, they made a seed investment in a talent along alongside with me joining  the company and starting to work there.  It's basically Ag talent now sits within my portfolio of responsibility.  
**[0:36:33-0:36:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:36:33):**  So it's, yeah, it's, you know, it's pretty amazing.  I get to work on new new farmland deals regularly.  And then also, you know, along the way, look at this whole talent development platform.  And I guess as a company, they really saw that talent was a key kind of barrier and  limitation to growing the farmland portfolio.  
**[0:36:54-0:36:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:36:54):**  So if we don't, you know, any asset manager out there who looks after farmland, if they  don't have a strategy for talent, and talent procurement, then, you know, they're going  to be in trouble long term.  So I think that, you know, they really recognize the value there.  And to bring it all under one roof is, yeah, pretty amazing.  
**[0:37:12-0:37:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:37:12):**  Extremely exciting.  I want to be conscious of your time.  And we can spend a lot of time on talent, a lot of time on wide open ag and a lot of  time on nutrient density and ecosystem payments.  But it will be for another time.  
**[0:37:26-0:37:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:37:26):**  So I want to be conscious of your time and wrapping up.  I want to thank you so much, Lucky for for this morning, this evening, actually for you.  And we'll be checking in soon.  Yeah, my pleasure.  Thank you.  
**[0:37:38-0:37:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:37:38):**  If you found the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  It's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  
**[0:37:58-0:38:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:37:58):**  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  join my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or in the description  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  
**[0:38:25-0:38:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:38:25):**  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food, how to put money to work in regenerating soils  at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to put money  
**[0:38:44-0:38:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:38:44):**  to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011 and recording  this podcast since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework, what to focus on with the podcast, how have  we picked interviewees, what questions should you ask, what is happening in the space, what  
**[0:39:06-0:39:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:39:06):**  should you read, what should you listen, what should you watch, how to approach this space.  For whom is this course?  You, the soil builders and investors in the space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  
**[0:39:26-0:39:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:39:26):**  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management, consultants, etc.  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  
**[0:39:46-0:39:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:39:46):**  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you.  And I'm very aware that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very  
**[0:39:59-0:40:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:39:59):**  different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  
**[0:40:10-0:40:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:40:10):**  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to write along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  
**[0:40:34-0:40:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:40:34):**  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  
**[0:40:50-0:40:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:40:50):**  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  
**[0:41:05-0:41:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/20/lachy-ritchie/#t=0:41:05):**  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  