### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2019-30-30)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  How do we scale agroforestry, plant millions of productive trees on farms and make it investable?  Listen to this check-in interview with Propagate Ventures and how far they have come in the  
**[0:00:23-0:00:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:00:23):**  last year and a half since our last interview.  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture, Investing as if the  Planet Mattered, a podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and  agriculture space to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil,  people, local communities and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  
**[0:00:47-0:00:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:00:47):**  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat and it's time that we as investors, big and small,  and consumers start paying much more attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  In March last year we launched our Patreon community to make it easy for fans to support  
**[0:01:09-0:01:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:01:09):**  our work and so many of you have joined as a member.  We've launched different types of benefits, exclusive content, Q&A webinars with former  guests, ask me anything sessions plus so much more to come in the future.  For more information on the different tiers, benefits and how to become a member, check  patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or find the link below.  
**[0:01:29-0:01:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:01:29):**  Thank you.  Welcome to the podcast.  Today I have Ethan and Jeremy of Propagate Ventures back for a check-in interview to  see where they're at since February 18 when we recorded our last podcast.  So welcome back Ethan and Jeremy.  
**[0:01:41-0:01:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:01:41):**  How's it going?  It's good to get a chance to catch up.  I'm extremely well and I'm looking forward to a long discussion.  Last time we clocked in I think one of the records of the podcast to discuss trees, farms,  agroforestry, retail investments and obviously chestnuts.  
**[0:01:57-0:02:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:01:57):**  But let's start with where Propagate Ventures is right now.  We're talking November 2019 compared to February 2018 which is more than a year and a half  ago.  Yeah.  In the world of a startup it feels like a lifetime which is all good and positive things.  
**[0:02:13-0:02:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:02:13):**  Over the course of the last roughly year and a half we've really focused on growing the  business and I think you've probably seen some of that growth in the industry as well  in terms of some maturity happening.  So with Propagate we have expanded our operations.  So we're now operating in about six states in the US.  
**[0:02:38-0:02:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:02:38):**  We are working on over 6,000 acres.  Now this is all the East Coast.  This is where the average size of the farm is a little bit smaller than what you see  on the West.  In the past year we've focused on really moving projects through to the point where we're  
**[0:02:59-0:03:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:02:59):**  planting trees.  What that looks like is we have the numbers behind that look like about 90,000, 90,000  trees that will be planted over the course of the next three years.  And that's just a little bit of the movement that we've been able to drive forward in agroforestry  systems over the course of the last year and a half.  
**[0:03:25-0:03:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:03:25):**  And then as a business we've also had a few other things go on which is we've joined the  Techstars Sustainability Cohort, their 2019 class which just finished up about two weeks  ago and then we also are part of Elemental Accelerators portfolio as well.  So it's been a fun and active time for the business both on the opportunities for us  to work on the business to see it grow and then to work in the business where we get  
**[0:03:57-0:04:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:03:57):**  to actually drive agroforestry projects and put those trees in the ground, certainly having  some of those chestnuts ready to be planted.  Sounds very good.  And I think the sector has been exploding or at least the discussion on trees and planting  trees and planting trees on farms and productive trees has just been a whole different level  
**[0:04:17-0:04:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:04:17):**  I think than when you started.  In terms of vision and practicality around Propagate Ventures, is that still the same?  And for the people who didn't listen to the previous interview I definitely recommend  it.  I will link it below.  
**[0:04:31-0:04:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:04:31):**  But can you give a short overview of Propagate Ventures right now and then we can dive a  bit into if that's very different from Propagate in 2018?  Sure.  I think overall the visions remain the same.  We stayed very focused and our team is extraordinarily passionate about what we're doing.  
**[0:04:50-0:04:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:04:50):**  I think some of the nuances of how we approach that and what that iteration of the business  looks like.  So today as we've moved forward since our last discussion, Propagate's focused on making  it easy for investors to fund low risk agroforestry projects.  Now we have analytics and project development tools that make that possible.  
**[0:05:18-0:05:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:05:18):**  And the goal really is designed around helping farmers increase their profitability with  agroforestry as the mechanism to do so.  That platform of analytics and product development tools is really meant to simplify some of  the operational know-how, workflow tools, and then investments that farmers need to  integrate fruit, nut, and timber trees with agriculture in row with their existing operations.  
**[0:05:48-0:05:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:05:48):**  So again, really designing for agroforestry.  What makes it interesting and fun for us as we think about this vision of where the investment  opportunities sit in the regenerative agriculture industry is a lot of that work that we do  on the analytics and project development side are meant to also serve as a sort of underwriting  process for due diligence to help quantify the risk and identify where the investment  
**[0:06:17-0:06:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:06:17):**  potential sits to make investments in agroforestry systems.  Now Propagate at the moment, we're very focused on the United States.  We're working in our own backyard.  We grew up here, so we're focused here.  But there's certainly a mentality in thinking that where we build tools and create some  
**[0:06:38-0:06:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:06:38):**  capacity in the United States, that there's opportunities internationally to provide resources  and create tools that support farmers in those places and really meets their holistic context  on the ground, on those farms, in places that may not be the Propagate team's backyard.  So am I hearing correctly you're thinking about licensing or somehow making your technology,  your software and your systems available for other groups that are not you basically outside  
**[0:07:13-0:07:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:07:13):**  the US?  I think at some point in the future, potentially, I think the goal today is to really have a  strong footing on what we do here in the United States and then be able to understand the  context of what's going on elsewhere in the world.  Agriculture of course has applications in many different climate types in many different  
**[0:07:39-0:07:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:07:39):**  countries and many different places all over the world.  And then the socio-cultural context that's associated with it is really important, particularly  as we talk about trees as assets that are long term and are providing sustenance and  economic value over time that they really need to match what goes on.  So it's certainly something we think about and it's definitely a fun exercise that we  
**[0:08:07-0:08:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:08:07):**  get to vision how the company grows and how we scale agroforestry as a really strategic  solution both on the profitability front for farmers across the United States and across  the world as well as as it relates to climate change and how agroforestry can work to create  profitable options for sequestering carbon, for mitigating nutrient runoff, for filtering  water, etc.  
**[0:08:42-0:08:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:08:42):**  And I'm imagining that dreaming or visioning, I wouldn't call it dreaming, actually visioning  of where the company could go is also something you were forced to do probably happily at  Techstars.  Can you explain a bit what that experience was?  How did it come about for people that don't know what Techstars actually is and basically  
**[0:09:02-0:09:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:09:02):**  your cohort of sustainable focused companies?  What was that experience like?  Yeah, overall just a great time.  The folks behind Techstars as well as the Nature Conservancy.  The Nature Conservancy and Techstars created a partnership to help support and build companies  
**[0:09:26-0:09:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:09:26):**  in the startups in the climate space that are providing solutions both around technology  and elsewise to solve the climate crisis.  And so the teams behind the program, both on Techstars and the Nature Conservancy, really  passionate and really driven and really, really intelligent.  It was such a pleasure for us to get to spend the time to work with them.  
**[0:09:54-0:10:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:09:54):**  And that's always an evolving process, so we'll continue to work with them.  The game plan for that program and our involvement specifically was really looking at how we  can increase the velocity of our business.  Being a startup and being about two years into the game with our company, really looking  forward to the next two or three years and beyond.  
**[0:10:23-0:10:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:10:23):**  And how do we increase the speed and capacity at which we make decisions and at which we  build our product to really have a velocity that solves very direct needs that sit within  the industry.  So one of those key things that we've been focused on as a business is the sort of problem  of what's keeping investors from feeling really comfortable to invest in agroforestry systems.  
**[0:10:51-0:10:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:10:51):**  So to boil that down a little bit, where is there risk?  And in project finance, there's risk across a series of different angles.  We've seen a lot of this in solar.  I believe we may have mentioned this at some point in our last discussion, but that really  sits around technology.  
**[0:11:07-0:11:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:11:07):**  Yeah, we did.  We were discussing PPAs and Wonder, the crowdfunding platform, crowd lending platform.  We definitely touched upon what we, I think, and I'm pretty sure you're still on that camp,  we can learn from the renewable energy space and how far, in a very different sector obviously  with different variables, et cetera, but how far they've brought the impact investing space  
**[0:11:31-0:11:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:11:31):**  or the investing space along and how easy it now is for, still you need significant  capital, usually more than a thousand dollars or euros, but actually the minimum came down  a lot and the potential of this sector to grow is just immense.  Absolutely.  And I think we're seeing that today with regenerative agriculture, slowly, but it's certainly happening.  
**[0:11:52-0:11:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:11:52):**  And so to relate it to Techstars, I'm glad you brought up Wonder.  Brian Bursik, who's the founder and CEO of Wonder, was one of our mentors that we spent  a chunk of time with during Techstars.  So Techstars is a very mentor driven accelerator program.  So we sat down with, we had five lead mentors who are high capacity, very strategic and  
**[0:12:22-0:12:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:12:22):**  intelligent people.  And the fact that they gave us their time of day to sit down with us and really plug  into the issues and challenges of our business was outstanding.  Brian being one of those folks to really get an understanding of what were some of the  challenges he faced in the early days of their business with Wonder and what are some of  
**[0:12:40-0:12:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:12:40):**  the parallels he sees with our business and his business and how we might think about  collaborating and being strategic around solving some of those issues so that we can drive  the process forward similar to, as you were saying, about moving regenerative agriculture  forward quickly to meet the scope of the problem similar to what took the solar industry 10  to 15 years to handle.  
**[0:13:10-0:13:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:13:10):**  And a lot of those components were around the risk in technology, risk in operations  and maintenance of these systems, risk in the offtake, so back to those purchase agreements,  and then risk in the supply.  Which sounds extremely similar to trees.  Yeah, exactly.  
**[0:13:32-0:13:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:13:32):**  So for that component, that's really what we've spent our time as a business really  thinking about how can we solve those challenges to make it really easy for investors to unlock  these massive markets, which is exactly what Wonder did for the solar industry and there's  other companies that have done similar work.  AngelList is one of them that did something similar for the startup in space.  
**[0:14:01-0:14:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:14:01):**  So we're really thinking about how we can build a product and solution that drives that  process forward.  And I know Jeremy spent the majority of his time among many, many other things, but to  really think about what the roadmap looks like for that product and the vision for making  the investments in agroforestry a clean and clear process.  
**[0:14:26-0:14:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:14:26):**  Jeremy, you want to lead us a bit through the roadmap and also what you learned or saw  in Techstars and working with these amazing mentors of that roadmap of, okay, how do we  first of all speed it up because we don't have 15 years and we need a lot of those trees  in the ground as soon as possible, but it's much easier said than done obviously from  behind a computer with a microphone.  
**[0:14:50-0:14:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:14:50):**  Yeah, absolutely.  It's a really tough problem to solve because you had to solve a lot of them all at the  same time.  So the challenge is looking at it from almost as a scalable technology problem as much as  a kind of project by project problem.  
**[0:15:08-0:15:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:15:08):**  You can take the approach from the ground up as well as from the top down and kind of  see where they meet.  And luckily on our end, we have an amazing group of customers as well as an amazing group  of potential customers that we've been working with for a long time.  And when you say customers, do you mean farmers or investors?  
**[0:15:29-0:15:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:15:29):**  We mean farmers as well as investors who have invested in farms through us.  So it's kind of a combination of both.  And those two groups have very different information requirements as well as very different knowledge  gaps that need to be built to help them kind of bridge their understanding and comfort  at different states of the projects development.  
**[0:15:54-0:16:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:15:54):**  And so really what we've built is a way of both tracking progress of the project as well  as building kind of a 20 year long outlook for what to expect through the lifetime of  that project from the perspective of both the manager and the operations manager as  well as the perspective of the investor.  And those meet in our platform to enable them to actually take action.  
**[0:16:23-0:16:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:16:23):**  So everything down to kind of the task level of what the farm needs to do throughout a  season to meet the benchmarks for actual expectations from an investment perspective, as well as  from an investor's perspective to track kind of where those benchmarks are being hit or  where we might be able to predict things being missed and how we can make viable adjustments  throughout the seasons to be able to actually succeed against what we're projecting.  
**[0:16:49-0:16:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:16:49):**  So yeah, I mean, I guess I can leave it there in terms of kind of the high level of what  the problem we're trying to solve is from both of those customers' perspectives.  But in terms of Techstars, really what they've helped us do is kind of view our business  in two life cycles, which is we have kind of the fast growing, being able to scale across  a lot of project life cycle where we are able to iterate much faster on the technology side  
**[0:17:15-0:17:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:17:15):**  of things, while on the kind of the project level kind of growth cycle, it's a little  bit more slow and we have to be very diligent around decisions that are being made.  This is agriculture, right?  So things move fairly slowly and yet they take it year by year to kind of make the adjustments.  And so for us, being able to kind of build internally the tools that we've needed to  
**[0:17:44-0:17:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:17:44):**  be able to kind of switch between that faster cycle, as well as the slower cycle of looking  at agricultural, agricultural cyclical nature, is something that we've institutionalized  throughout that program and that Techstars really helped us with.  I would love to go a bit more into detail on the following of the project.  I mean, I can understand if we're talking about a solar project, there are services  
**[0:18:05-0:18:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:18:05):**  that can adjust or can have a look at how my solar park on the roof, etc. is doing or  there's maintenance involved, etc.  In terms of agroforestry, trees on, let's say, my land as a farmer, how do you track  the progress?  How do you make sure the trees are doing fine?  
**[0:18:27-0:18:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:18:27):**  How do you make sure you can feed back this information to investors?  How does that process at the moment work?  Yeah, it's a great question.  So I'll kind of maybe to help answer the question, let me walk through how we go about all this.  What's the process that takes place that enables agroforestry to be a low-risk project finance  
**[0:18:53-0:18:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:18:53):**  opportunity?  And so the way we go about it, it's sort of the, it's kind of like the business stuff,  if you will, of the product.  So essentially, it starts with de-risking the projects.  So we make it really easy to access project development tools and economic insights that  
**[0:19:12-0:19:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:19:12):**  farmers need to confidently manage an agroforestry project.  On our side of things, we analyze everything.  So we look at costs and revenues.  We look at yield projections, as well as labor assumptions and other components like market  conditions.  
**[0:19:35-0:19:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:19:35):**  And what this allows us to do is it takes, it's a software approach to project diligence,  which allows Propagate to assess these projects faster and more accurately than some of the  other opportunities or folks in the business today.  And this is really around driving the process forward really efficiently so that investors  feel comfortable.  
**[0:19:59-0:20:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:19:59):**  And more importantly, the farmers who are essentially the managers of these investments  feel very confident that what they're doing in terms of their day-to-day operation is  going to be successful.  And so as we analyze these projects, we take the best of them.  We then group them into funds and we diversify across crop types and geographies.  
**[0:20:22-0:20:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:20:22):**  And how do these projects and slash farmers come to you?  Is that you going out to find them or is it farmers signing up and reaching out like,  hey, I would love to integrate trees into my operation.  Can you help me?  Yeah.  
**[0:20:37-0:20:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:20:37):**  So right now, a lot of the farms that have come into kind of our universe have been mostly  cold inbound.  About 50% of the farms that we work with have found us through Facebook, through just searching  online, believe it or not.  And the other half, a lot of that comes from conferences and strategic partners that make  
**[0:21:00-0:21:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:21:00):**  introductions.  And in terms of process, these are most of the folks that come to us are interested in  silvopasture.  They're interested in integrating trees into their operation, but they really don't know  where to start.  
**[0:21:14-0:21:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:21:14):**  And they're looking for a strategic partner to help them kind of guide that process forward  because it's a long-term process and they're looking for someone who can help them de-risk  it, help them bridge their knowledge gaps on how to manage these systems.  It's both a high need for them to have someone like us involved, but also the value that  we provide is exactly what they're looking for.  
**[0:21:39-0:21:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:21:39):**  So it's a really good fit at this stage for most of the farms that are interested in agroforestry.  And then, Ethan, you were mentioning you basically bundle them together and that's a step as  well in de-risking as you have different crops, different land types, different farms, meaning  that hopefully a higher amount of trees obviously survives and creates the yield you need.  How many should I imagine, what's the current size of a fund?  
**[0:22:06-0:22:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:22:06):**  Because a fund could be 5 million or 500.  What is your sweet spot at the moment?  Yeah, it's a good question.  So we're in the midst of bundling a lot of these projects together.  I think as Jeremy mentioned, as we get more of these project opportunities, these farmers  
**[0:22:24-0:22:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:22:24):**  that we're working with through the process, through that analysis phase, we really have  a better understanding of what is needed to make these projects successful.  Yeah.  What is the project size that I have to imagine?  Is it 50,000 or 500,000 or 5 million?  
**[0:22:43-0:22:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:22:43):**  I mean, it depends obviously, but what's the ones you're working with now more or less  when you say a project?  Right now it ranges between about 200,000 to a million is the size of the projects.  And those are just based on crop selection as well as size of farm.  Fruit is more capital intensive comparatively to timber.  
**[0:23:04-0:23:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:23:04):**  So it's a distribution across that dollar amount depending on the crops that are selected  for the farm as well as the size of the farm.  To follow up on that, one of the areas we're going as we move forward is we think about  crop types, so like a shrub fruit or a tree fruit, a tree nut, and then timber that to  have a diversity of those various crop types also gives us some flexibility in terms of  
**[0:23:33-0:23:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:23:33):**  what sits in to one of those funds.  It reduces the risk around the expectations of what we'll get from an economic perspective  when we have something like a shrub fruit, like a blueberry for example, which performs  very differently.  So it has different capex requirements, it has different apex requirements, and also  
**[0:23:57-0:24:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:23:57):**  has a different return profile than something like timber or something like a chestnut.  So as we start to blend those together, it really creates a very nice balance of a portfolio  that provides what we believe is a really attractive opportunity from an investment  perspective into agriculture and really looking at the productive assets on farmland that  are driving the value across the farm.  
**[0:24:23-0:24:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:24:23):**  And when you say blend, does that mean blend on a portfolio level or sort of on a farm  level?  It's both farm level and portfolio level.  So different farms, there's opportunities to do multiple crop types if the size is right  and the farmer has the right operations and management team in place to actually manage  
**[0:24:42-0:24:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:24:42):**  it.  So sometimes it does go down to the farm level where you're diversifying on the same piece  of ground as well.  Which could be very interesting from a risk perspective, cash flow on a farm farm level  obviously and a soil perspective.  
**[0:24:56-0:24:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:24:56):**  Yes, absolutely.  A good example of this is a black currant or elderberry and chestnut polyculture planting  where the black currant is machine harvested and the chestnut is also machine harvested,  ones harvested early in June, July, ones harvested in October.  So you're going to have that staging of cash flows as well through the year for that single  
**[0:25:23-0:25:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:25:23):**  project.  And I can imagine they are, let's say productive, not at the same moment.  It takes X years for the chestnut and X years for the black currant.  Yeah, that's absolutely right.  The easy principle to think about here is that as you move towards shrub fruit, the  
**[0:25:40-0:25:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:25:40):**  amount of time it takes to yield is shorter, the potential return is also higher, but it  has a lot more operations and management risk just because it's more intensive, more horticulturally  intensive.  Tree fruit similarly, tree nuts are kind of in the middle there.  And then as you move toward timber, it's a lot lower operations and management risk,  
**[0:26:00-0:26:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:26:00):**  but relative returns are also lower and it's more of a lump sum type cash flow comparatively  to an annual based operating income cash flow.  And do you see opportunities there as there's a lot of discussion, at least I see a bit  from the outside of the agroforestry space in terms of complex systems and not having  just timber or, I mean, you're saying in terms of management, obviously there's a whole different  
**[0:26:24-0:26:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:26:24):**  level needed if you're doing fruit trees, for example, as you mentioned.  Do you see developments there, interest from investors, interest from farmers to make these  systems more complex and thus, let's say more interesting in terms of a soil, from a soil  perspective or in terms from a carbon perspective?  Yeah.  
**[0:26:43-0:26:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:26:43):**  So, you know, everything we do is really from the project level up from the analysis perspective.  So when we're running through an analysis, we're looking at the context of the people  on the ground and their capacities to manage complexity.  And there's always a desire to increase complexity from a biological diversity perspective, but  from a economics perspective, there's kind of a tension there.  
**[0:27:08-0:27:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:27:08):**  So what we look to do is integrate as much diversity, especially in the areas that are  going to generally be underproductive.  These are like very wet areas on the farm or areas that would be better served as being  a buffer zone.  So about 10%, maybe sometimes between 5 and 15% of the planting typically goes into what  
**[0:27:28-0:27:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:27:28):**  we call biodiversity species, which are things that might have marketable yields, but are  fairly niche at this stage.  But from an ecological perspective, provide native pollinator habitat, as well as predatory  insects to provide the kind of ecological pest management infrastructure on a farm that  would otherwise not be there.  
**[0:27:53-0:27:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:27:53):**  So we're planning in those biodiversity kind of complexity pieces to it, but is weighted  depending on the capacity of the farm to be able to manage that much complexity.  Planting biomass in general is very labor intensive and takes a lot of diligence.  And so we just want to make sure everyone's prepared to do that when we plant it.  Yeah.  
**[0:28:13-0:28:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:28:13):**  And I'll kind of pick up on that as the decision gets made to move forward and to integrate  more biodiverse complexity, if you will, into these farm operations where propagate sits  and where we're really trying to continue to make this process really clean and easy  for both farmers and investors.  So to go back to projects have gone through, have been put into a fund.  
**[0:28:41-0:28:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:28:41):**  And then the next component is once an investor participates, then we're really focused on  brokering the trees that are needed for our farmers so that that farm can meet the investment  expectations and the operations and maintenance component that Jeremy's pointing to.  So we have essentially a group of vetted farm partners.  These are some of the folks that work hard on a day to day basis and fully understand  
**[0:29:08-0:29:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:29:08):**  regenerative systems, as well as understand the depths of what it means to be farming  and are very knowledgeable and smart people around how to manage their operation.  So we're working with this group of folks to ensure that maintenance is really top of  the class and where we go from there in terms of propagate's involvement is to start to  build contracts with commercial buyers for the harvested produce and timber so that we  
**[0:29:38-0:29:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:29:38):**  can generate profit shares for our farmers so they have access to the economic upside  of what they're managing on a day to day.  And a lot of this is to take some of the risk off the table of answering the question of  from a farmer's perspective, I'm interested in diversifying my system.  I'm happy to plant tree fruit.  
**[0:30:01-0:30:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:30:01):**  Who's going to buy those crops?  So starting to bring in those components earlier, which is some of the pre-purchase agreements  and some of those components to continue to drive that process forward.  And as we look at the harvested produce and timber that are coming out of a diversified  portfolio of projects, it gives us a little bit more wiggle room and capacity to have  
**[0:30:25-0:30:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:30:25):**  strong relationships on the commercial side.  And if you think about a biodiversity species like a shrub willow, which is really good  in riparian zone areas or wet areas, from a marketing perspective, it's a fairly difficult  to market niche crop that you would sell into flower shops.  But if there was, say, a florist that was working for a large company that wanted to  
**[0:30:52-0:30:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:30:52):**  procure really high quality willow stems for their ornamental arrangements, that's something  that we would love to be able to broker.  I think the tough part is at this stage, those types of crops are still very niche.  So we want to make sure that when we're planting those in, we're planting them in with the  idea that they might not make money.  
**[0:31:10-0:31:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:31:10):**  So they're a very small percentage of allocation, but still providing the ecological benefits  on the farm side of things.  And what would have to change if you look from an agroforestry perspective and a scale  up?  What would have to change to really make this scalable?  
**[0:31:26-0:31:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:31:26):**  Is it more attention for these niche products that have a huge biodiversity component?  Is it us eating a lot more chestnuts?  What would be, I mean, you can probably answer both of you in a different way.  What would be, according to you, the biggest potential breakthrough over the next years  that would really scale agroforestry?  
**[0:31:46-0:31:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:31:46):**  I think it's definitely everybody eating more chestnuts.  Yeah, there are a lot of barriers to entry in terms of the scale up.  So there's a lot of work happening on the research and development front to make sure  that the genetic development of some of these tree crops is moving forward in a way that  allows farmers to better utilize those crops in an economically viable way compared to  
**[0:32:17-0:32:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:32:17):**  certain grains or cereals that are used today.  I think in terms of the scale up thing, we're sitting in a bit of an interesting phase where  the R&D work is fairly strong and has happened over the course of time.  And so there's not much concern there.  There's always work to be done.  
**[0:32:36-0:32:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:32:36):**  But the next piece is really driving capital into more projects.  So this is moving beyond the sort of pilot phase.  I think there's a series of agroforestry projects across the world that can offer insight into  how these projects operate, what they look like, what the management and the operation  is that we can really build off of that and use that information and context to our advantage  
**[0:33:03-0:33:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:33:03):**  to continue to steward capital into more projects and create opportunities for young farmers  to be active in this space.  And I think we're starting to see some of that.  Certainly some of the foundations and family offices are getting involved.  And I think we're now moving more into the realm where the average investor is turning  
**[0:33:24-0:33:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:33:24):**  their head and thinking, hmm, maybe there is a really interesting opportunity in agriculture  that they may have ignored five years ago.  So I think that's where we are and where some of the pressures are in terms of what's happening  from a climate perspective.  I'll leave it there.  
**[0:33:42-0:33:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:33:42):**  And Jeremy, I'm sure you have another approach to answering that question.  Sure.  Yeah.  I mean, I'm happy to kind of add some color to that.  I mean, I think the key thing here is if you take the long view, if you take the 50-year  
**[0:33:56-0:34:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:33:56):**  view and just look back in history, permanent crop productions of fruit and nut crops, as  well as timber crops, have historically outperformed other asset classes.  And so the case for the types of crops that enable agroforestry to happen is actually  really well spelled out.  Doesn't it panic people that, I mean, there was in a time with not extremely rapid climate  
**[0:34:25-0:34:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:34:25):**  change or climate disruption, climate panic, and trees don't move in the sense that they  kind of walk away?  And especially as investors, if I say I'm going to take a 50-year view and having part  of my assets being ground bound, is it something that scares investors to put money to work  on agroforestry systems?  
**[0:34:45-0:34:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:34:45):**  I would say probably.  I think natural capital solutions in general are things that in a time of climate change,  there is this climate risk factor.  But if you look at that risk factor and you actually say, ask yourself the question, if  I had an option on these solutions for having some sort of benefit come back to me.  
**[0:35:13-0:35:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:35:13):**  So if you take a 50-year outlook and you say, I have a carbon option on these trees, and  they might return 10 percent to me over that 20 years just in terms of nut production or  timber production, having that option is also very attractive.  That's helping mitigate that climate risk piece.  And so I think the world is going down a direction where having the option to actually capitalize  
**[0:35:37-0:35:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:35:37):**  on that risk factor is something that is going to be increasingly attractive to investors,  even if it means you say increase some loss to a degree in the tree itself.  A good example of this might be something along the lines of if you look across the  entire sector of agriculture in terms of risk factors of a given species, trees as a species  in landscapes are relatively low risk from a production perspective comparatively to  
**[0:36:13-0:36:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:36:13):**  other crop types.  See, if you have three years of pretty bad drought in the Northeast and you lose a good  corn yield, you're going to be operating at a loss for all three of those years.  But in that same kind of climate zone, you still might be able to get a good yield out  of a permanent crop because they're more drought tolerant.  
**[0:36:37-0:36:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:36:37):**  I'm not talking about the Central Valley of California here.  That's a different scenario.  But from an ecological perspective, trees have some more resilience factors than many  other crop types do within agriculture.  And so I think you have to both compare it to the existing asset classes that are natural  
**[0:36:57-0:37:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:36:57):**  climate solutions, asset classes that we have today in and around agriculture, as well as  look at the options that might be on the table down the line.  No, I think it's a great answer.  And I want to be conscious of both of your time and end with a final question to both  of you, which I think is a question I started asking after I interviewed you.  
**[0:37:17-0:37:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:37:17):**  So not so long ago, but it is a question I like to ask to see unrelated in this case  to propagate.  If you could use a magic wand and change something overnight and tomorrow morning we wake up  and Jeremy or Ethan has changed something in the agriculture and let's say also the  forestry space, what would that be?  
**[0:37:35-0:37:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:37:35):**  That is a phenomenal question.  Wow.  I have to put my thinking cap on for that one.  My initial reaction and how I want to respond to that question is what I'd like to see is  fairly simple, is that the average person just has a much clearer, much more clear connection  
**[0:37:59-0:38:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:37:59):**  to where their food comes from.  If I think about my family and my close friends, I'm sort of in a lucky space where they've  heard me talk about this so much that they've changed their purchasing habits, which makes  dinner conversation certainly more interesting, but the food also tastes better.  I bet.  
**[0:38:20-0:38:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:38:20):**  It's these little changes of am I buying a pound of beef at the grocery store because  it's the cheapest option available or am I buying a pound of beef that comes from a ranch  that is running holistic plant grazing?  The latter option both taste better.  Sure, maybe it's a little bit more expensive today, but I think that will change as supply  
**[0:38:44-0:38:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:38:44):**  goes up.  My answer to the question is a sort of demand thing.  The one thing I would like to see to support farmers and to support ecological solutions  in the regenerative agriculture and then move that into the commodities space is a slight  change in purchasing habits, a little bit more care and passion for the type of food  
**[0:39:07-0:39:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:39:07):**  we're buying and where it comes from and really getting an understanding of who are the people  behind the farms that are making that food available to us, which is a little bit of  a mental cultural shift, I think.  Great answer.  I'm going to go down a little bit of a different route, which is I think that right now we  
**[0:39:34-0:39:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:39:34):**  kind of have a market where we're not pricing in risk appropriately from a macro perspective.  If you look at kind of the way in which agricultural landscapes are financed, you look at the way  in which they're valued.  There's generally a disconnect between the agricultural value of what can be produced  on a piece of land, how it's been treated for 40 years and the actual price of that  
**[0:40:02-0:40:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:40:02):**  landscape itself.  I think we're going to actually see this renaissance happen where the risk factors  that come as a part of certain practices in agriculture or certain practices within a  watershed that increase the risk of that watershed are accurately reflected in the pricing,  as well as the productivity of that landscape historically actually starts to get factored  
**[0:40:31-0:40:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:40:31):**  into that pricing.  That way, we start to get a little bit more of an accurate price discovery within agriculture  where we can actually see where the value is in a more transparent fashion.  I think right now it's a little bit more difficult, given the history of the last 40 to 50 years,  that has moved agricultural land values in a direction that are disconnected from the  
**[0:40:55-0:40:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:40:55):**  underlying fundamentals.  I think getting back to that is going to be a big change for moving agriculture in a direction  that will help regenerate landscapes.  It's going to be an enormous change to get some air out of that bubble and connect it  back to actually what a landscape or a farm can produce.  
**[0:41:16-0:41:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:41:16):**  Then the whole discussion obviously becomes how to regenerate it or how to improve that  asset, improve the soil, improve the landscape so it can actually produce more, which is  now completely disconnected from the land price.  Very interesting.  I want to thank you both so much for your time.  
**[0:41:31-0:41:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:41:31):**  Thank you for the check-in.  We'll be checking in hopefully earlier than another year and a half.  Thank you for also taking the time and for asking great questions.  We always enjoy spending the time to dig into these details with you.  Thank you for hosting the podcast and for inviting us again to be part of it.  
**[0:41:51-0:41:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:41:51):**  Thank you so much.  It's really appreciated.  I think we could probably go on for another hour here, but it's probably good to stop  us in our tracks.  If you found the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast valuable, there  
**[0:42:04-0:42:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:42:04):**  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few  seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  
**[0:42:20-0:42:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:42:20):**  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  join my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or in the description  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  
**[0:42:48-0:42:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:42:48):**  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to put money  
**[0:43:06-0:43:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:43:06):**  to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011 and recording  these podcasts since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  
**[0:43:23-0:43:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:43:23):**  How have we picked interviewees?  What questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  
**[0:43:31-0:43:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:43:31):**  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  You, the soil builders and investors in this space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  
**[0:43:43-0:43:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:43:43):**  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management consultants, etc.  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  
**[0:44:03-0:44:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:44:03):**  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  
**[0:44:18-0:44:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:44:18):**  that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  
**[0:44:33-0:44:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:44:33):**  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to ride along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in and what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could  
**[0:44:56-0:44:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:44:56):**  find if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  
**[0:45:12-0:45:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:45:12):**  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment please find professional investment advice.  
**[0:45:27-0:45:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/12/31/ethan-steinberg-and-jeremy-kaufman/#t=0:45:27):**  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  