### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2020-00-14)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com slash course, or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  This is a check-in interview with Thomas Rippel, where we discuss crowdfunding, stablecoins,  pensions for farmers, food pensions for city folks and land ownership, plus so much more.  
**[0:00:27-0:00:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:00:27):**  Welcome to another episode of investing in regenerative agriculture, investing as if  the planet mattered.  Podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  
**[0:00:47-0:00:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:00:47):**  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat, and it's time that we as investors, big and small  and consumers, start paying much more attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  In March last year, we launched our Patreon community to make it easy for fans to support  
**[0:01:09-0:01:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:01:09):**  our work.  And so many of you have joined as a member.  We've launched different types of benefits, exclusive content, Q&A webinars with former  guests, Ask Me Anything sessions, plus so much more to come in the future.  For more information on the different tiers, benefits and how to become a member, check  
**[0:01:24-0:01:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:01:24):**  patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or find the link below.  Thank you.  Welcome to a new interview.  And this time we have Thomas Ripold back on the show.  He's looking to create new forms of land ownership and community capital.  
**[0:01:37-0:01:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:01:37):**  Last time I interviewed him was on March 30th, 2018.  So it's definitely time to catch up.  Welcome back, Thomas.  Well, thanks for having me, Cohen.  So much has happened.  
**[0:01:47-0:01:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:01:47):**  I'm happy to tell you all about it.  Yeah, let's unpack.  I mean, what have you been up to?  Last time we talked was on blockchain technology, stable coins and big crowdfunding campaigns  that you were actually campaign singular that you were doing for farmland stewardship organizations.  
**[0:02:06-0:02:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:02:06):**  Where are you now as we're talking at the end of 2019 in December?  Well, I'm still working on the same things and we're just we just made real strides in  all those areas.  So let me start off with that crowd investing that you mentioned.  At that time, I was working for Kulturland-Gennorsenschaft in the capacity of this project, pilot project  
**[0:02:31-0:02:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:02:31):**  to raise capital for one farm to buy land.  So let me just give a quick overview of what Kulturland-Gennorsenschaft does.  So it's a cooperative where people can become members in the cooperative and buy shares.  And the cooperative then takes that capital and buys land with farms.  And I say with farms and not for farms because the cooperative makes a separate legal entity  
**[0:03:03-0:03:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:03:03):**  for each of the farms that the cooperative puts the capital into.  And the farm also becomes a partner in that legal entity and actually the executive party  in that legal entity.  So what Kulturland-Gennorsenschaft does is they just put the capital in and have a veto  right in that legal entity, which stipulates the conditions under which that land can be  
**[0:03:31-0:03:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:03:31):**  used so that the land can only be used for organic agriculture.  And the farm that is using the land has to have 10% of its total land area put aside  for ecological use.  And beyond that, the farm has to also engage in regional social activities, for example,  community supported farming, direct marketing of products, or working with disabled people,  
**[0:03:58-0:04:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:03:58):**  working with apprentices, working with school children, and so on.  So as long as the farms fulfill those criteria, they can then use that land in perpetuity.  So Kulturland is basically a tool for communities to come together to pull their money in order  to buy land long term and secure it from speculation, which is the big issue right now that land  prices have risen dramatically.  
**[0:04:28-0:04:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:04:28):**  Every year, last year, they went up 20% in some areas.  And farms that are producing food cannot afford to buy land anymore.  So it's all speculative investment capital that is moving in and buying this land and  then leasing it out to a lot of industrial monoculture farming, biogas, and so on.  And then the diverse little farms, they cannot afford to buy land.  
**[0:04:56-0:05:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:04:56):**  And oftentimes, this is land that they have been leasing maybe for generations.  And then when they lose this land, the existence of that farm is in jeopardy.  Yeah, because they've also spent generations building that soil and suddenly, their soil  is not, I mean, their soil between brackets is sold underneath them to some biogas operator,  biogas supplier.  
**[0:05:19-0:05:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:05:19):**  And so you're enabling with this tool to get the land, buy it, but then get it off the  market and as long as the farmer or the farmers or the team honours a certain set of principles,  they are free to farm how they want to.  Exactly.  So as you say, it's a tool.  
**[0:05:37-0:05:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:05:37):**  So it's a decentralised organisation.  And this has been a wonderful process that Kulturling and Ousenschaft has actually gone  through, where we have also redefined the vocabulary we're using.  So we're not talking about a lease that the farms are paying for using this land, but  rather a solidarity-based contribution, where we as an organisation, of course, we accrue  
**[0:06:03-0:06:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:06:03):**  some costs for staff and so on.  And then the farms which are taking advantage of the organisation as a tool, then pool the  money together and contribute to covering those costs.  So one of the farms that was in this situation where the owner of the land died and then  the heirs, they just wanted to sell the land to the highest bidder, that was Lucerne & Höf.  
**[0:06:30-0:06:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:06:30):**  And they needed to raise €900,000 to buy this land.  And at the time, a very generous person made that capital available as a loan with the  condition that over a period of some years, the community would come together and pool  their money and secure it long term.  And the farm wasn't able to raise the necessary capital, which is when I joined that farm  
**[0:06:57-0:07:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:06:57):**  and I had this idea of setting up a crowd investing campaign.  And at the time…  It was incredibly successful.  We talked just after that, I think you raised more than you actually asked for, so more  than a million euros for, we discussed it in the old interview, which I definitely linked  
**[0:07:14-0:07:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:07:14):**  below.  But obviously it wasn't on a monetary side of things, it wasn't an amazing investment  for the people investing.  Obviously they got the land of the market and they keep their farm going and where they  probably had their CSA, etc.  
**[0:07:28-0:07:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:07:28):**  But it wasn't an amazing return promised.  And it was quite surprising, I think, to me, maybe also to you that it went quite fast.  Like it raised that million in almost record time on a very basic website that you had  at the time.  Yeah, that's right.  
**[0:07:43-0:07:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:07:43):**  It was, I think, to everyone quite surprising how well it went.  And I think it just goes to show that there is a real shift in the consciousness in our  entire society going on.  And well, there is a lot of people who have money.  Well, and also a lot of people who don't have a lot of money, who don't want to put  
**[0:08:04-0:08:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:08:04):**  their money in, leave it at the bank where you don't know what's happening with that.  You're not getting any interest at the bank either.  Right?  So we have to take that capital and make it available for something that actually has  a positive impact.  
**[0:08:17-0:08:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:08:17):**  And so we cannot enable any kind of return or dividends from this because that's something  the farmer would have to pay.  And then, you know, that would put pressure on the land again and exploiting the land.  So people who become members of the cooperative and buy shares, they can get their money back,  of course, but with zero interest.  
**[0:08:37-0:08:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:08:37):**  And yeah, so we managed to raise that million euros.  And we actually didn't use a crowd investing platform because they were charging something  like 10% fee and that would have been a hundred thousand euros.  So we decided to build our own little website and it was really very basic.  In the front end, it looked quite nice, but the back end was, was very, very basic.  
**[0:08:57-0:09:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:08:57):**  And after this campaign ran so successfully, we realized what a potential this concept  really has and that the necessary tools for it aren't out there yet.  And we can't be working with commercial tools that are charging 10%.  So we decided to pursue this further, me and the two other people who put together the  initial website.  
**[0:09:19-0:09:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:09:19):**  So I wrote a concept for this and we asked for some funding, which we received and we  continued working on this and have been working on this now for the past two years and have  now finished developing the software, which is quite extensive and is now the basis of  the new Kulturland website, which really isn't the website, but rather a crowd investing  portal now where each farm has their own site and you can buy shares directly and invest  
**[0:09:53-0:09:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:09:53):**  in these farms.  And the back end is very extensive that it manages all of the investments in accordance  with financial regulatory requirements and data security requirements and so on.  And so now any kind of eco-social project, be it social housing, where you also need  to raise a lot of capital to buy real estate, be it purpose companies that need to raise  
**[0:10:16-0:10:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:10:16):**  capital to grow, they can now use this software to set up their own portal and to raise capital.  And I saw even some farms that are raising for their solar projects as well.  So they do a raise for the land and they do a raise for some solar energy projects they  want to develop on their land or on their roofs maybe.  That's right.  
**[0:10:40-0:10:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:10:40):**  So some of the farms, they're using this platform to also raise additional capital to invest  in infrastructure on the farm and on top of that, of course, to find new members for the  FCSA, which is very valuable.  So the publicity work that we're doing with the farms, it's a very close cooperation where  we then talk to the regional press and our experience has been that the regional press  
**[0:11:07-0:11:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:11:07):**  very much is very receptive to these projects and very much wants to talk about it.  And then the attention that these farms get, they can then also utilize to acquire new  members for their CSA.  So it really has a lot of value for the farms.  So we have now 17 farms that we have bought land with and we are currently raising capital  
**[0:11:32-0:11:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:11:32):**  for.  One of those farms, we have now raised more capital than was necessary and all of the  other farms are well on their way, some of them almost completely funded, a lot of them  more than halfway funded.  So in total, we as an organization have raised 4 million or 3.5, almost 4 million euros.  
**[0:11:52-0:11:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:11:52):**  There's 570 members who have invested and 200 hectares of land that has been secured.  And we're currently in talks with 20 farms actually to buy more land.  And I think there's the potential here to really go in a very broad scale and make this  tool, this infrastructure in terms of IT infrastructure, but also the legal infrastructure that we  have created in terms of this legal entity that really neutralizes the ownership of land  
**[0:12:24-0:12:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:12:24):**  and dedicates it to this purpose.  So this kind of steward ownership model of land where it cannot be sold and it has to  be used in an eco-social way.  I think this is something that a lot of farms, especially community supported farms, will  find very attractive.  
**[0:12:43-0:12:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:12:43):**  And actually more than half of the farms that we're working with are community supported  farms.  And now we're also in close cooperation with the Association of Community Supported Farms  in Germany, which now for me built the segue to the topic of cryptocurrencies and the project  of terra fina that we discussed last time, where that project under the label of terra  
**[0:13:06-0:13:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:13:06):**  fina has been shelved.  So the idea of terra fina was to kind of issue a cryptocurrency kind of as a virtual, let's  say, share in the organization.  So like Kultur and Grossenschaft issues shares in the cooperative and raises capital, the  cryptocurrency would have had the same mechanism of raising capital.  
**[0:13:31-0:13:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:13:31):**  But the people who would invest their money through this cryptocurrency rather than shares  in the cooperative would have a much more liquid investment.  So you could actually use it as a currency.  So it's like you're converting your euros to dollars or yen.  You're converting your euros to land tokens and can then use it potentially to purchase  
**[0:13:54-0:14:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:13:54):**  at your CSA or to pass it on to the next investor very easily.  So it's just a much more liquid and thus much more attractive form of investment.  And also because it's land backed, so it's backed by real value, this cryptocurrency  would be stable as opposed to a lot of other cryptocurrencies that are out there like Bitcoin  that is very volatile.  
**[0:14:19-0:14:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:14:19):**  So then it would solve another problem, which is this question of stable value cryptocurrencies.  So then it would be attractive to a whole new group of investors and would enable us  to raise a lot of capital to buy more land.  But unfortunately, the regulatory requirements and hurdles or the regulatory environment  is not there yet to implement this in reality.  
**[0:14:49-0:14:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:14:49):**  And that's all right.  You know, this is a new technology and a lot of things need to be figured out.  So the concept has been figured out with a lot of experts from the distributed ledger  technology space, from people from the University of Zurich, from experts in community currencies  and commons experts and so on.  
**[0:15:09-0:15:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:15:09):**  We had a roundtable and got together and really figured this out how it should work.  And once the time is ready, we will want to go into implementing this and connected to  this.  Yeah.  Now, very exciting.  
**[0:15:25-0:15:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:15:25):**  Interesting.  So it's the timing and obviously as it is touching currency, it needs to be done right  because otherwise you get yourself in a lot of trouble or actually in jail.  So it definitely needs the right timing.  But we probably we're so early in the crypto movement that it will come.  
**[0:15:48-0:15:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:15:48):**  It's just very difficult to predict when.  Yeah.  I think it's a question of time and it's a question of social acceptance.  We saw this with Facebook's Libra, the kind of pushback they were getting.  And so this, you know, I think that's good because what they were looking at doing was  
**[0:16:09-0:16:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:16:09):**  very questionable to say the least.  So we did get it on a lot of headlines.  I mean, that's a, and there's always a, I see that with some soil carbon projects that  sound way too good to be true, but at the same time they get it on CNBC or I mean, there  people are, that normally would never talk about it.  
**[0:16:29-0:16:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:16:29):**  At least would talk about it that, yeah, you would wish they would be a bit more informed  and, but you're not going to stop that.  So I'm sort of happy with the attention, but then the backslash obviously is a loss of  trust and people putting it in a corner and say, of course it's never going to work, et  cetera, et cetera, both on the crypto side of Libra and soil carbon.  
**[0:16:46-0:16:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:16:46):**  Yeah.  So yeah, the attention is, I think, good as we're still in such a small echo chamber,  especially on the soil carbon side.  Yeah.  Well, I think it's, it's, it's unavoidable that whatever innovation happens and Bitcoin  
**[0:17:01-0:17:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:17:01):**  or, you know, blockchain came from a very idealistic space and then it's of course,  then commercial players want to move in and maximize their profit from that.  So this is, I think this initiative that we came up with is something that can really  make good use of a technology, but we'll, we'll, we'll take it'll take time.  And so this is where now I'm talking to a couple of PhD students who are very excited  
**[0:17:34-0:17:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:17:34):**  about this, who will look into this further and connected to that.  The question of community currencies, where my idea is, and we developed also with another  farm a concept where community supported farms could issue their own community currency.  And this doesn't even have to be blockchain based.  I mean, you don't, you don't need blockchain for that.  
**[0:18:01-0:18:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:18:01):**  It could just be a voucher.  It could just be a voucher system.  So you issue this, this crypto, sorry, this community currency, maybe at the end of the  year for the, for the budget of next year.  So let's say the farm has a budget.  
**[0:18:14-0:18:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:18:14):**  Basically where we are running a farm and we need to pay a lot of costs upfront and  we do a budget and then we could actually issue our Thomas & Coon farm vouchers at just  before, just before Christmas.  I think it's a good time to do that.  That's right.  
**[0:18:31-0:18:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:18:31):**  And then the members of that cooperative or community supported farm could then purchase  those tokens so that the farm has the money secure for next year.  So that's the principle of community supported farming, that the farm is not selling its  products but rather has its production costs covered.  And then at the same time, the people who are purchasing those tokens, they can then  
**[0:18:55-0:19:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:18:55):**  use that throughout the year to acquire the produce from the farm directly.  And then you can create an internal supply and demand economy, which is completely separate  from the bigger food supply dynamics.  So it creates just an internal economy where the price of the produce would vary depending  on how well the farm produced that produce.  
**[0:19:26-0:19:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:19:26):**  Depending on the year, some products, some crops will grow better than expected and some  will grow worse than expected.  And the demand of the members will also vary throughout the year.  So then the price of the produce can adjust dynamically so that you have really the best  aspects of community supported farming where the farm has the security to produce.  
**[0:19:51-0:19:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:19:51):**  And at the same time, the members of the CSA are not stuck with a fixed basket of goods  every week, but rather have the freedom, the complete freedom to buy the products from  the farm that they want.  So that would work basically, I would get my, now I'm not a farmer anymore with you,  but you're the farmer and I'm the partner in this and I would buy, I don't know, a thousand  
**[0:20:14-0:20:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:20:14):**  vouchers at the beginning of the year and as you, the first crops come in spring and  I really want some of the lettuce, et cetera, and like an internal sort of auction system  or something would basically determine the price and I would use some of those vouchers,  but of course try to keep some of them for the potatoes later in the year and some of  the fruit and maybe some of the animal protein and try not to run out of my vouchers because  
**[0:20:38-0:20:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:20:38):**  then I have a problem in October when the last things come off the land.  Right.  Yeah.  You mentioned auction.  Yeah.  
**[0:20:46-0:20:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:20:46):**  So it would be basically a dynamic auction system and there are some questions, you know,  we still need to figure out, maybe the farm would only issue 70% of its tokens at the  beginning of the year and then 30% are in reserve for members who want to buy additional  tokens because maybe, you know, they used all of the tokens in September and they, you  know, they want to keep getting the produce.  
**[0:21:07-0:21:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:21:07):**  So these are some questions that will be figured out in the next few years with the studies  that we'll be doing with PhD students.  And since you already mentioned auctions, the idea would be that the tokens are not  sold to a fixed exchange rate, but rather in an auction system where people who can  afford to pay a higher exchange rate and people who cannot afford to pay a lower exchange  
**[0:21:34-0:21:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:21:34):**  rate.  And then each farm can decide on its own how they want to really manage this.  But from experience, I can tell you from Lutz-Anenhof where they have been doing this actually,  it works out quite well that, and the range is, if you want to look at it in terms of  an exchange rate, some people pay only something like 60% of the average sum.  
**[0:22:00-0:22:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:22:00):**  So if the average exchange rate token to Euro would be one to one, then some people only  pay 60 cents for the token and some people pay up to, I just checked, they pay up to  twice, right?  So they pay actually two euros per token.  Which is huge, the difference, I mean, that enables two and a half other people to pay  
**[0:22:21-0:22:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:22:21):**  60 or 0.6 or up to the Euro.  So there is a solidarity within the community as well, right?  So there's solidarity towards the farm in that the tokens, having the token sold at  the beginning of the year, secures the farm, its production for the entire year.  And at the same time, within the community, the members, they are considerate towards  
**[0:22:47-0:22:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:22:47):**  each other that not everyone has the same purchasing power.  And at the same time, you still have the complete freedom of demand and supply dynamics.  So I think...  Is it public in a sense that can I see or can other people see when I will be, let's  say the 2X, the twice amount or how does that work?  
**[0:23:12-0:23:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:23:12):**  In this case, it's one example of it, but how did they organize that?  Is that a public list or is that a private donation I'm basically making to the system?  It's a public list that is semi anonymized.  So each person, so the way it works is they don't have the IT infrastructure to have a  completely dynamic price, supply and demand system, but they record how much produce you  
**[0:23:40-0:23:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:23:40):**  basically consumed throughout the year in terms of a share of the total production,  which is quantified in these tokens.  And then at the end of the year, you basically get a feedback saying, well, your share of  the produce that you consumed maybe was 1% of the total.  And then there's 200 members.  
**[0:24:01-0:24:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:24:01):**  And then everyone can see how much each member paid in the past year effectively in terms  of how many tokens they purchased, so to say, and then how much produce they actually took.  So you can see the gap.  And then you can place a bid for how much you want to pay for next year.  And you know best for yourself how much your capacity financially is and also whether maybe  
**[0:24:32-0:24:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:24:32):**  you want to reduce your consumption or increase it.  Maybe you increased your household or maybe somebody left the household and so on.  So it's completely up to you to actually place a bid for next year.  And this is transparent to everyone.  You don't see the name, but you see exactly how much was paid last year.  
**[0:24:55-0:24:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:24:55):**  You see how much was consumed last year.  And you see how much basically their recommendation is for next year and how much is being bid  for next year.  Wow.  Yeah.  
**[0:25:05-0:25:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:25:05):**  So actually, I wanted to go back a bit because you mentioned and I can hear some of the investors  almost think in the audience, great organic agriculture.  What about the soil?  What about soil building?  I think since we talked last time and actually you have some experience in carbon credits  
**[0:25:23-0:25:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:25:23):**  based on soil, et cetera, that goes way, way back.  What has changed?  What is your vision?  What is your work at the moment on then taking those farms and actually maybe adding some  potential income streams to it, not just based on food, but actually based on some of the  
**[0:25:39-0:25:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:25:39):**  ecosystems they generate and also focusing some of their energy on making the system  even more complex, introducing trees, measuring their soil carbon, et cetera.  Well, I'm really glad you mentioned it because this is something I'm just extremely passionate  about and I'm so happy about how things have been developing.  So as you said, my history with that goes way back.  
**[0:26:02-0:26:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:26:02):**  Seven years ago, I started a nonprofit with the vision of enabling CO2 offset certificates  to soil fertility and that was before the Paris Agreement.  That was still at the time of the 1997 Kyoto Protocol and there in the Kyoto Protocol,  it was clearly stipulated explicitly that soil carbon cannot be, that soil carbon is  not a stable form of sequestered carbon and thus CO2 offset certificates cannot be issued  
**[0:26:39-0:26:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:26:39):**  for this.  It was very explicit.  And so the only way that this could have been done was in the voluntary CO2 offset market.  And to be honest, seven years ago, public consciousness with regards to the entire climate  catastrophe that we're having was not where it is today.  
**[0:27:00-0:27:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:27:00):**  So much has happened in the past year.  So I'm really excited that on the one hand, public awareness and consciousness has developed  so much that now there's real excitement about something like this.  And at the same time, with the Paris Agreement, with the four of the 1000 Initiative where  they were saying that we could sequester a lot of carbon through soil fertility by building  
**[0:27:25-0:27:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:27:25):**  up the humus content of soil by four over thousands per year.  So just now, a couple of months ago, the Soil Fertility Fund in Switzerland, which is an  initiative of the bio, the BIO Stiftung Schweiz, which I have also worked for and did a research  project with them and the University of St. Garland, where we explored this CO2 offset  market.  
**[0:27:57-0:28:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:27:57):**  They have now made a groundbreaking partnership with MyClimate in Switzerland, which is the  most established and respected player in the voluntary CO2 offset market.  And also globally speaking, I would say the most respected institution or maybe one of  the most.  And they have now made a partnership where people can actually purchase CO2 offset certificates  
**[0:28:27-0:28:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:28:27):**  through MyClimate and that money goes to those farms that the Soil Fertility Fund is working  with.  And that money goes to implementing measures such as composting, better crop rotation to  have soil coverage throughout the year, to plant trees and hedges and so on.  And this is going to be monitored on a yearly basis and in terms of soil fertility over  
**[0:28:59-0:29:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:28:59):**  a long period of time.  So I'm really, really excited about this.  And next year, we will, or I'm currently in talks with them and exploring a partnership.  And I want to include all of our farms in this and enable them to receive money for  the good work that they're doing with building up soil fertility and planting trees and hedges  
**[0:29:24-0:29:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:29:24):**  and so on.  Again, extremely exciting.  I think we're in a completely different space, especially seven years ago, but also a year  and a half with some announcements, a lot of attention for soil carbon, what we were  discussing before, and actually also some more ways to measure and make some of these  
**[0:29:41-0:29:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:29:41):**  certificates and make sure it actually delivers what it promises.  Yeah, we have really come a long way.  So I'm just so glad that we can now move forward and play a pioneering role here because me  and the people I work with here have been working on this for many, many years.  And so now that the time is right, we can really move ahead here at full speed.  
**[0:30:10-0:30:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:30:10):**  And I think that now that we, as a private initiative, show that these things are not  only possible, but that citizens want this to happen, then it moves into the political  space as well.  And we have seen this in the past few months here in Germany, that as a consequence of  the Fridays for Future protests, the government has decided on a climate action plan, which  
**[0:30:40-0:30:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:30:40):**  is completely insufficient.  They decided to put a price on carbon of 10 euros per tonne starting 2021 and increasing  that price to 35 euros in the year of 2025.  Switzerland has been much further ahead with this development, implementing a price on  CO2 in 2008, starting with 10 euros or 10 francs per tonne.  
**[0:31:09-0:31:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:31:09):**  And currently they are at 96 francs per tonne, which is about 90 euros and looking to increase  that price until the end of the 2020s.  So until 2030, that price should increase to 230 francs.  And that is actually the price that is needed.  That is the price that scientists have established is necessary to give carbon a fair price in  
**[0:31:37-0:31:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:31:37):**  order to tax the output of CO2 on the one hand and on the other hand to generate the  necessary capital to invest in carbon sequestration projects in order to really get to carbon  neutral and maybe even carbon negative by 2050, which is where we need to be.  We globally need to reduce our CO2 emissions by half in the next 10 years and go to net  zero by 2050.  
**[0:32:11-0:32:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:32:11):**  And if we don't manage that, we're going to be in big, big, big trouble.  A recent report by the IPCC shows that nine of the 15 tipping points, which is the Amazon  forest, the permafrost in Siberia and so on, that nine of these tipping points have gone  into motion.  And if we don't act quickly, they will get out of hand.  
**[0:32:39-0:32:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:32:39):**  And so we need a price on carbon.  We need to use market dynamics to redirect the capital in order to enable those regenerative  projects to flourish.  So we as Kulturenglaschauft, we want to take a pioneering role here and set a fair price  for carbon.  
**[0:33:04-0:33:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:33:04):**  And I would say we'll start at least 100 euros per ton.  And all of anyone private or any organization can then take responsibility and say they  will offset their CO2 footprint and that money will go to regional farms that will build  up soil fertility and plant trees and hedges and so on.  It's extremely urgent.  
**[0:33:30-0:33:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:33:30):**  And at the same time, even 10 euros or $10 a ton for many farmers actually would already  bring them to profitability instead of loss making at the moment.  So it's extremely interesting.  But at the same time, you see a lot of people waking up to that actually soil carbon because  of all the other benefits is one of the easiest between brackets, although we should definitely  
**[0:33:53-0:33:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:33:53):**  pay them way more than 10.  But to start that process, even smaller amounts as the engine is heating up basically is starting  to go faster and faster and we can do more and more acres and hectares.  Even smaller amounts are already interesting.  Of course, there's an annoying thing as a pioneer that you already have built so much  
**[0:34:16-0:34:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:34:16):**  soil carbon, let at least hope that there's less to gain.  And maybe you need like soil carbon stationary credits or something, not the building part  because a lot of the building part maybe has already been done.  And the ones that have been mostly depleting have the biggest potential here.  But it's I think from a global perspective, that doesn't really matter because we need  
**[0:34:38-0:34:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:34:38):**  to store as much as possible in many places as possible.  And I think it ties nicely to a question I like to ask and I didn't ask yet when we had  our first interview is what if you would wake up tomorrow and you're the head of a big investment  fund and let's put a crazy amount of money on that, like let's say a billion dollars  or a billion euros.  
**[0:35:00-0:35:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:35:00):**  And I'm asking those questions because I see that the interest in the space is growing  a lot and I think we're going to see a large influx or at least a potential influx of money  and that's going to try to get into this space.  And so I'm asking pioneers in this space like yourself, like what would you do if you put  in that position to build up, let's say a diversified portfolio, an investment portfolio.  
**[0:35:23-0:35:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:35:23):**  Obviously, you can do some grants out of it, but primarily an investment portfolio with  a large amount of money, in this case, a one with nine zeros.  What would you, what would your first days look like?  Well, I think what I would do with Ad Money is to make that available to, for land purchases  in this steward ownership model so that any farm that is willing to purchase land and  
**[0:35:52-0:36:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:35:52):**  put it into this steward ownership model can come to the fund and we'll have all the capital  necessary, but really only to use that as buffer capital so that we can act quickly  and make sure no more land has to go into speculative hands and in parallel do a lot  of lobbying work to make sure that laws are being implemented or rather enforced because  there is already laws in Germany that are not being enforced properly to stop speculative  
**[0:36:28-0:36:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:36:28):**  investment capital from purchasing agricultural land.  But as long as politics is moving slowly in getting a handle of this to make that money  available to buy all of the lands that is entering the market and securing it long term  and just to have sufficient capital and to put this into perspective in Germany, currently  we have 16 million hectares of land, of agricultural land with an average value currently at current  
**[0:37:00-0:37:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:37:00):**  market prices of about 30,000 euros.  So we're talking about about 500 billion euros of total value of agricultural land, which  is not that much money if you think about it.  That is a little bit more than 10% of the GDP of Germany.  And with a billion, because obviously not all of that is on the market and will come  
**[0:37:22-0:37:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:37:22):**  on the market, we'll get to a way that a lot of that is going to come on the market through  retirement.  But so with a billion, you probably have a nice starting point to you to like you said,  move quickly while the rest of the while you're doing your crowdfunding to then buy back from  the fund and the fund has the money back to do the next and the next and the next and  
**[0:37:43-0:37:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:37:43):**  the next farm.  That's right.  So not a lot of land is actually being sold.  So most of the land still gets passed on in terms of inheritance inheritances and land  that is being sold represents only 0.5% of the total land per year.  
**[0:38:01-0:38:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:38:01):**  So we're talking about two and a half billion euros per year that is actually exchanging  hands in the entire agricultural land market.  So with a billion euros, you could really, really do a lot.  I will tell everybody that's listening if they have it in their back pocket.  But definitely think about it.  
**[0:38:18-0:38:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:38:18):**  And actually, you you are we made a nice bridge to something that we don't discuss very often  in this in this podcast.  Sometimes we touch upon it when we discuss the age of the average farmer around the world.  But that's pensions.  And tell us a bit about what you're working on in terms of pensions, in this case, specifically  
**[0:38:37-0:38:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:38:37):**  for farmers.  And then we'll touch up on pensions for city folks.  All right.  Yeah, great that you bring that up, because we have now ventured into a new area as Kulturlanger  Nelsonschaft.  
**[0:38:50-0:38:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:38:50):**  Now that the foundation of this organization is so solid, we have decided we can take on  this pension question so that farmers who don't have heirs that want to take over the  farm, so children, either they don't have children or they have children who have decided  not to take over the farm.  And the farmer who has stewarded this farm, the animals, the land, the hedges and trees,  
**[0:39:19-0:39:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:39:19):**  the entire ecosystem of the farm for his entire life, who is deeply, deeply connected to this  farm and actually, I like to call a farm its own organism.  So each each each farm is its own being.  And there's a lot of farmers who are so deeply connected to this farm as a being that they  want to pass it on to the next good stewards.  
**[0:39:44-0:39:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:39:44):**  And that is very, very difficult because that's connected to the question of, well, how can  the farmer who passes on this farm at the same time be able to retire, so get the necessary  money and at the same time not put financial pressure on the people who are taking it over  so that they don't have to exploit it.  So what we have done in order to enable this is that we have created a separate nonprofit  
**[0:40:16-0:40:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:40:16):**  foundation, which is a part of our cooperative as an organ of our organization, so that we  get to go into a dialogue with farmers.  And to give you a specific example, we're talking to one farmer who has this farm with  70 hectares of land and buildings and machinery and so on with the value of two and a half  million euros.  
**[0:40:39-0:40:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:40:39):**  And he has calculated for himself that he needs 150,000 euros upfront in order to purchase  himself a little house in the countryside.  And then he would like to have 2,200 euros per month for his living costs for the rest  of his life.  And so he's 65 years old currently and according to the statistics, he will live on average  
**[0:41:04-0:41:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:41:04):**  20 years.  So if you calculate 2,200 euros over a period of 20 years, it's about half a million.  So what he's asking for is 650,000 euros rather than two and a half million.  So we can enable that in that we have a community that pulls their money together so we can  pay him this upfront money and then pay him the 2,200 euros per month, which comes from  
**[0:41:34-0:41:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:41:34):**  the money that the community pays and that includes the farms who pool the money every  year to cover the costs of operating the Kerturlandken-Ostenschaft.  And then we are able to then pass on the farm as a whole rather than just purchasing land.  We can then pass on the farm as a whole to the next generation.  So the way we've set it up is that we will put the land into this separate legal entity  
**[0:42:02-0:42:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:42:02):**  that I've discussed before and the buildings we actually sell to the new farmers but under  the condition that it is tied to actually farming the land.  So they get the buildings for very, very cheap, basically for free or very, very cheap, very  reasonable price and they can live there, they can use the stables and so on as long  as they farm that land.  
**[0:42:32-0:42:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:42:32):**  So they can't say, okay, so next year we stop farming, we got these wonderful buildings  here and now we're just going to lease out these buildings and generate revenue for ourselves.  They can't do that.  And did you find the farmers or the team, like the next generation, was that, how did  you find them?  
**[0:42:51-0:42:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:42:51):**  Did you already find them?  And if so, how did you find a team that is willing or is interested to take over the  70 hectare organism?  Yeah, the hectares actually.  And that's a big challenge.  
**[0:43:05-0:43:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:43:05):**  And I've talked to the people at Terre de lien in France.  They've been doing this now for a few years and they also say this is a big challenge.  So it's just going to take a human resource on our end.  And there is a biodynamic education that produces, so to say, 60 young farmers every year.  And so I'll go there to talk to them.  
**[0:43:30-0:43:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:43:30):**  I'm actually a teacher at the biodynamic education in Switzerland, where I teach them about marketing  and organisational structures.  And there I get to know all of these aspiring farmers.  And then, you know, a big issue actually for a lot of them is that they really, really  want to do farming, but they can't afford to buy a farm.  
**[0:43:54-0:43:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:43:54):**  Yeah, no, we discussed it in, I mean, you had that issue when you finished the four  year training as a biodynamic farmer, but you couldn't buy land in Switzerland.  So we discussed it in the last interview.  And I don't think much has changed in that respect, unfortunately.  It would be interesting, but of course, as a as the nonprofit and as also for the farmer  
**[0:44:14-0:44:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:44:14):**  or then the retired farmer, it's going to be key to find the right team.  Yes.  Just as it's key to find the right team to take over a family business and just as key  to find the right team in this case to farm it rightly, but also professionally, because  it's 70 hectares.  
**[0:44:30-0:44:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:44:30):**  That's not small.  It's an enterprise.  Very interesting.  And in terms of pension for for city folks, what are you I mean, this is more on the thinking  side and the planning side.  
**[0:44:43-0:44:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:44:43):**  But what are you thinking there?  Well, actually, we have implemented the pilot project with one of our farms here.  So it's not just in the thinking stage.  We've developed this over the past three years with one of the farms where private persons  can take a part of their retirement fund and in well, actually, we're not there yet with  
**[0:45:03-0:45:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:45:03):**  taking part of the retirement fund.  That is the next step because retirement funds are locked capital.  But to take a part of their liquid capital that is not locked into a pension fund, but  they consider part of their retirement money.  So to take that and to make that available for land purchase and then get a monthly payment.  
**[0:45:23-0:45:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:45:23):**  So that's what we have developed with one of the farms.  And we want to develop this much further in that we go into a much broader scale.  Sorry to interrupt the payment.  Is that in food or in money?  Currently, that is in money.  
**[0:45:38-0:45:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:45:38):**  So it's just in monetary terms.  It's only defined in monetary terms.  And the next step in this concept is to not define that in a fixed monetary sense with  euros, but rather to define a food basket, a basket of goods, and then to guarantee the  person who makes that capital available that they will receive that basket of goods for  
**[0:46:04-0:46:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:46:04):**  the rest of their life, either in direct goods from one of the CSAs as a membership for the  rest of their life, or they get paid out the monetary equivalent, whatever that may be,  even in 20 or 30 years when the euro might not exist anymore or who knows.  I mean, we all really don't know.  Just a few years ago, the entire euro project was on the verge of collapsing.  
**[0:46:28-0:46:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:46:28):**  We don't know what's going to happen in 20 years.  And so if we define these things in euro terms, that's a big point of insecurity.  So if we say, well, it's, let's say, three kilos of grains plus four kilos of potatoes  and milk products and this and that, and this is a basket of goods that has a value, then  we can guarantee that because the value that we have is that all our capital is in land  
**[0:46:54-0:46:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:46:54):**  and agriculture directly.  So that we actually have basically our internal economics and we can guarantee that the people  who are making the capital available now to buy land will then actually receive as a return  the produce that comes out of that land.  And do you get it when you reach pension age or do you get it, let's say, immediately and  
**[0:47:19-0:47:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:47:19):**  thus make it accessible for younger folks?  I see three avenues here.  So the one would be that you are already in pension age.  Currently, you have capital and you make some of that capital available, will calculate  the sum necessary, and then you'll receive the food for the rest of your life.  
**[0:47:40-0:47:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:47:40):**  The other avenue would be that you are currently under pension age and then you save a monthly  amount every, until you reach pension age.  And then when you reach pension age, you will receive the food or equivalent.  Or why not, if you have that kind of money available, then you could, even if you haven't  reached pension age, make that money, that capital available to purchase the land, and  
**[0:48:05-0:48:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:48:05):**  then you'll receive the food until the rest of your life.  Which is a great thing as well.  It sounds extremely interesting.  I think we've had a lot of discussions around food as pension, but very few experiments  unfortunately, but it seems like also there at a time, timing has come to look at pensions  
**[0:48:28-0:48:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:48:28):**  very differently and look at what you actually need.  Of course, mid-chintense food is high on that list, especially as you're getting older.  Yeah, I think most people are not quite aware that 80% of global investment capital comes  from retirement and insurance funds.  So retirement really is an insurance, right?  
**[0:48:52-0:48:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:48:52):**  So there's a lot of money available.  So there's a lot of money there, and most of that money is investing on purely extractive  mechanisms, right?  So we collectively are putting our money towards destroying this planet.  And we talk about a few evil investors or whatever and get very worked up about that.  
**[0:49:16-0:49:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:49:16):**  But actually most of the money is our collective money.  And we don't really have any democratic mechanisms in place to opt out of that in a good way.  And in fact, I know from Switzerland that pension funds have to, by law, generate certain  returns.  I think they have reduced it now and currently it's 1.5%.  
**[0:49:42-0:49:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:49:42):**  I think it used to be much higher.  But just think about that.  So if they want to invest in something regenerative and sustainable that is not offering returns,  then at the same time they have to invest in somewhere where the returns are higher  and probably more extractive.  
**[0:49:59-0:50:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:49:59):**  So it's illegal for pension funds to invest non-extractively.  I think there's going to be, I would definitely put part of the 1 billion as an advisor to  you as a fund manager of that 1 billion into specific lobbying on the insurance and the  pension system and model as they sit on so much cash that has to be returned in many  years down the road.  
**[0:50:26-0:50:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:50:26):**  But yeah, obviously that could be or should be coming in useful things because we don't  know what kind of monetary system we'll be living in in 20 years or what kind of climate,  honestly.  Yeah, so I believe that in pensions should be, I don't know the English term for this,  a direct payment from the young to the old generation so that it's not this kind of I'm  
**[0:50:48-0:50:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:50:48):**  saving money which is then working for me and money is working for me.  But rather, you know, you pay a fair amount now as long as you're working as maybe a percentage  of your income, which is paying people who are in retirement now, right?  And then it's a direct payment from the young to the old rather than this system where you  have this idea of the money actually generating returns because it's very much based on extractive  
**[0:51:22-0:51:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:51:22):**  mechanisms, especially in developing countries.  A lot of our retirement money is going into developing countries and exploiting people  over there.  In some places it's very much a continuation of a feudal system or a slave economy really  where people are trapped and have to work in very, very exploitative systems in order  
**[0:51:53-0:51:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:51:53):**  to enable our older generation here to have a comfortable retirement.  And there's something fundamentally wrong with this.  We need to completely rethink retirement money here.  And so if we set something up that in my view is fair, then let's have a system where you  can make your capital available for something that makes ecological and social sense and  
**[0:52:15-0:52:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:52:15):**  then the money that you get out in order to sustain yourself, well, that needs to come  in from the younger generation.  I think we're going to have a lot of discussions on the pension system as they're not generating  the returns they need to by law and they're starting to look around and they're starting  to look differently at returns, which I think is a fundamental discussion we need to have.  
**[0:52:39-0:52:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:52:39):**  I want to thank you so much, Stons, for this check-in interview.  Fascinating and exciting as ever.  And I definitely plan not to wait another year and a half or more than a year and a  half actually, but to do one a bit earlier to see where other projects have by then developed  into.  
**[0:52:54-0:52:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:52:54):**  Well, thank you so much.  It's been such a pleasure talking to you.  I'm so excited that your podcast has been taking off and being listened to by so many  people.  I love listening to it.  
**[0:53:05-0:53:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:53:05):**  You really have some of the most exciting people in the space of regenerative agriculture  and finance on your podcast.  I think your podcast is the place to go if you want to get to know this space.  And I've been recommending it to everyone.  So thank you so much for having me again.  
**[0:53:22-0:53:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:53:22):**  Thank you so much.  And thank you for the kind words.  I think everyone that made it until this end, we're about 50 plus minutes in, probably agrees  with you because they're the hardcore fans.  So to them, thank you so much for listening and see you next time.  
**[0:53:35-0:53:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:53:35):**  Take care.  If you found the investing in regenerative agriculture and food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast.  
**[0:53:49-0:53:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:53:49):**  And it only takes a few seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you, and if you have the means, please  join my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or in the description  
**[0:54:10-0:54:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:54:10):**  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  
**[0:54:37-0:54:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:54:37):**  Why are we doing this course?  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to put money  to work in regenerating soils, and I've been following the space since 2011 and recording  these podcasts since 2016.  We thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  
**[0:54:52-0:54:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:54:52):**  What have we seen in this space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  And what questions should you ask?  
**[0:55:03-0:55:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:55:03):**  What is happening in this space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  
**[0:55:11-0:55:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:55:11):**  For whom is this course you, the soil builders and investors in this space, the soil builders,  people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers, vehicle builders,  crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food companies, permaculture,  key line designers, holistic management consultants, etc, etc.  People that are building soil at scale, and the investors who are putting their own money  
**[0:55:34-0:55:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:55:34):**  to work through their family office or as private individuals, or people who are putting  other people's money to work through foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies,  etc.  Is this course free?  No.  
**[0:55:47-0:55:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:55:47):**  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning, I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you.  And I'm very aware that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very  different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you, and if you have the means to  
**[0:56:04-0:56:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:56:04):**  consider paying what you think it's worth, thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes, plus PDF slides,  so you don't have to ride along.  We're gonna look into why investing regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  
**[0:56:22-0:56:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:56:22):**  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find, or what kind of investors you could  find if you're a soy builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  
**[0:56:43-0:56:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:56:43):**  We're gonna look at nutrient density, landscape design, and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately, that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  
**[0:56:57-0:56:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/15/thomas-rippel-2/#t=0:56:57):**  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea, or whatever you're drinking, click on  the link below, sign up, and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  