### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2020-00-21)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  This interview is about short food supply change.  How do we get from a few cute and nice companies selling food directly from the farmer to a  
**[0:00:21-0:00:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:00:21):**  consumer to something which actually changes the food system radically and speeds up the  regenerative transition?  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture.  Investing as if the planet mattered.  Podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  
**[0:00:40-0:00:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:00:40):**  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  
**[0:00:58-0:01:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:00:58):**  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much  more attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  In March last year we launched our Patreon community to make it easy for fans to support  our work and so many of you have joined as a member.  We've launched different types of benefits, exclusive content, Q&A webinars with former  
**[0:01:19-0:01:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:01:19):**  guests, ask me anything sessions plus so much more to come in the future.  For more information on the different tiers, benefits and how to become a member check  patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or find the link below.  Thank you.  Welcome to another episode.  
**[0:01:35-0:01:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:01:35):**  Today an interview with Mark Frederikx, entrepreneur on Short Food Webs.  How to reconnect the consumer with the farmer and vice versa to change radically the food  system.  Welcome Mark.  Hello.  
**[0:01:46-0:01:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:01:46):**  To start with a personal question I always love to ask.  What brings you to the food system, to soil, to regenerative agriculture, to local food  webs and short food webs?  What is your story so far?  My story so far is that I have a background as a cook and I've been, I have a love for  
**[0:02:03-0:02:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:02:03):**  food for more than 40 years now.  I've been cooking from the age of 12 and I learned at a really early age that I should  visit the farmer to have a great fresh food, seasonal food and that seasonal food is something  that your body needs and it's cheap.  And in that journey I got a lot of friends within a farmer community here in my region  
**[0:02:28-0:02:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:02:28):**  in the city of Utrecht and I saw all kinds of problems and difficulties that they have  while creating this enormous value in growing our food, growing our crops, taking care of  the countryside and they're not able to make ends meet to get a fair share of money for  all the work that they deliver.  And at first I got really angry and after that I got really surprised from how can it  
**[0:02:53-0:02:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:02:53):**  happen that somebody that creates so much value is in a shithole.  And after that I got creative and I started working in changing this food system and learning  from it, looking at it from all kinds of angles and I have a lot of experience in marketing,  communication, internet solutions and gamification.  So I used all these skills to build several startups in establishing the reconnection  
**[0:03:20-0:03:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:03:20):**  between consumers and farmers and helping to fix this puzzle from how can we change  the system by reconnecting again and that's in the basics what I've been doing for the  last 10 years and I'm at the basis of several startups in short food supply chains where  the connection between farmers and consumers is made.  We're building logistics, telling the story of the farmer, doing all kinds of difficult  
**[0:03:46-0:03:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:03:46):**  things by getting the product to the local market and while learning that I think I have  some parts of the puzzle that are necessary for changing the system because it's not only  a problem of farmers and consumers, it's a systemic problem and for solving this systemic  problem we need a systemic solution.  And my vision is that the ecosystem of entrepreneurs working on changing the food system is at  
**[0:04:12-0:04:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:04:12):**  this moment so powerful but we need a new way of collaborating together to fix this  problem and I'm really confident that we can fix this problem by working as an ecosystem  together and using all these values that are not used at this moment for solving this enormous  problem where ecological problems, economical problems and social problems all come together  in feeding the city and reconnecting consumers, civilians with farmers, keepers of nature.  
**[0:04:48-0:04:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:04:48):**  There's so much to unpack there and we're definitely going to talk about the excitement  you have now and we were discussing it before starting recording on the tipping points especially  we seem to be close to that in the Netherlands and other parts of Europe.  But let's unpack a bit so you founded, co-founded a number of these short supply chain companies  but you didn't stop there, basically you took those lessons and you started looking at okay  
**[0:05:13-0:05:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:05:13):**  what's the next phase?  It's great that I'm connecting this group of local farmers with the city of Utrecht,  in the Netherlands in this case and I'm selling directly their products and hopefully paying  a bit more to the farmer and we've seen that in many many many different places.  I think we have had a number of discussions on this podcast on that and I know many of  
**[0:05:30-0:05:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:05:30):**  the listeners are either a customer or involved somehow in these local farmer to consumer  startups and it's very difficult, there's a lot of distribution, there's a lot of things  that are very very tricky to do.  What do you see as the next step?  You say we have such a strong group of entrepreneurs and we seem to be ready for the next phase  
**[0:05:51-0:05:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:05:51):**  almost as the model that you've been working on, the gaming model, I think it would be  great to see okay where are we now, where is this going in to five, ten years and how  can we really disrupt the current value chain which doesn't create a lot of value except  for a few people.  What I've learned, I started several box schemes on national level, on regional level, I started  
**[0:06:14-0:06:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:06:14):**  local corporations with farmers and what you see in the beginning you're really passionate  as an entrepreneur and I see this process, it's really common in all these regional startups  that want to work on changing the food system, they have to say almost the same journey.  They start passionate with a small group of people and they want to change the food system.  They get products from local farmers, they sell it to local groups and while doing that  
**[0:06:41-0:06:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:06:41):**  they create their own logistics, sometimes an online platform or a farmers market or  whatever a local restaurant and they start just doing it because they believe they can  change something.  After a while when they grow they create their own ecosystem of customers and companies that  they work with.  
**[0:07:02-0:07:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:07:02):**  I always call them the first line of believers.  In the middle you have this group of entrepreneurs or an entrepreneur that really believes that  he can change the system and after two or three years he has a group of companies and  customers that really support him.  But in the end if you look at what the impact is of these entrepreneurs, they are not changing  
**[0:07:25-0:07:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:07:25):**  the food system by themselves and if you look at the economics of these initiatives, you  see that they have really costly, challenging to say the least, the logistics costs are  high, the marketing spend is high, they pay a good fair price for the farmer, they don't  want to charge the customer too much because you have to be relevant and in the end if  you look at the business model, you can just roll a step out the road to bankruptcy.  
**[0:07:54-0:08:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:07:54):**  But all these entrepreneurs, they keep doing what they're doing and they run straight into  the trap of the valley of death and why are they doing it?  And I analyzed what really happens.  Yes I'm using a product from the current food system, so I have the economics, how that  works.  
**[0:08:14-0:08:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:08:14):**  I want to change the food system but if you look at all the value that you create by creating  this business, if you look at the data sets, the leadership, the online reach that they  create with their online platforms, their LinkedIn and Facebook networks, it's really  great.  If you look at their experiences and how social entrepreneurship works related to food, all  
**[0:08:41-0:08:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:08:41):**  these experiences are the real values of this entrepreneur and from my perspective and on  the group of entrepreneurs that are doing the same thing all over Europe, they're working  together and then you start at the first level with your own company, your own ideal, you  grow to the next level, you create this enormous group of stakeholders that is enthusiastic  about you and once you want to make the next step in your growth, you're being set back  
**[0:09:08-0:09:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:09:08):**  because you're in the old system and you cannot change the system by staying in that old system.  Then normal at the current market is a game model where just like an online shooter game,  I start playing a game, I grow, I grow, I grow and I kill everybody around me so I will  be the big monkey on top of the mountain and that's the system that we're in right now.  The system that we as a food chains movement want to adapt is I start doing something,  
**[0:09:42-0:09:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:09:42):**  I'm getting really powerful in my own region and I'm not looking for killing all my competitors,  I want to be more inclusive, I want to grow but I'm in the model of being the big monkey  on top of the mountain and if you look at multiplayer online games, our children, I  have two daughters, one of 11 and one of 14 years old, they are being brought up playing  multiplayer online games and I always visualize it as okay, how do these games work?  
**[0:10:13-0:10:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:10:13):**  At first, I start my own account, I build my own village and my startup, I grow and  I create a big city that's level two, a regional alliance of stakeholders and then I go to  the next level and I'm not able to really change the food system working by myself and  in the gamification, they have a solution for that, it's called a challenge room or  a dungeon.  
**[0:10:37-0:10:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:10:37):**  You have this big monster on level three changing the food system.  Because basically what you're saying is at some point, all these different let's say  startups, they get slightly more mature, they maybe are let's say close to break even, they  have a number of investors invested in them, they have a good set of clients like the early  adopters, the consumers, they have a good set of farmers but then what's next?  
**[0:11:00-0:11:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:11:00):**  How do you really start changing the food system?  You need this cooperation model with others like you but obviously there's this almost  animal instinct or there's this natural instinct of competition and you're saying this challenge  room, this learning from multiplayer games that maybe some of the audience are very aware  of because either they play it or their children and some others are not so I definitely urge  
**[0:11:24-0:11:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:11:24):**  you to dive deeper into that.  The solution that we know from the gaming world is a challenge room, like something where  you can leave behind your competitor jacket and put your cooperation jacket on and basically  get to work together, if I summarize it well.  How it works is after a while you realize that you are not able to come from level two  
**[0:11:46-0:11:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:11:46):**  to level three on your own.  Every time you want to challenge this big hairy monster at level three.  And what would be a hairy monster, like a concrete one that you run against when you're  running your company, your short supply chain company in Utrecht?  What is or was a big hairy monster that you felt you couldn't tackle by yourself?  
**[0:12:10-0:12:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:12:10):**  At the basics I'm not really changing the food system, I'm just selling a product and  give the farmer a small extra margin and I'm running a really complex small wholesaler  and that is the problem.  Small wholesaler in the same sentence is difficult.  So that's difficult but I started this company that I want to change the food system.  
**[0:12:36-0:12:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:12:36):**  I want to have a fair system where all values are used.  How can we pay a farmer not only for creating our food but also paying him for storing the  water in his soil?  How can we create a value-driven food system where I feel as a consumer, I feel myself  part of my own local food culture.  
**[0:13:03-0:13:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:13:03):**  Now it's all disconnected and you cannot solve that by only being a wholesaler selling some  local products from a current food system and pay the farmer much more.  So every time I'm at a level and I think okay now I have a good group of customers and now  I want to jump and grow and really have impact, I don't have enough margin to solve that problem  and it's not a problem that's only mine, it's a problem that we all have.  
**[0:13:34-0:13:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:13:34):**  So how do you solve this problem?  I've been working on a multiplayer online gamification model where at level two you  have this group of clients and local governments, universities that all work together.  How can we collaborate with other regions and solving for instance the logistical challenges  that we have?  
**[0:13:59-0:14:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:13:59):**  We pay a lot of money for this local distribution.  I collect products at a farm, I have my own small warehouse and I deliver it to a customer  and I have one truck driver, maybe two and if I'm lucky I have three.  I don't have a big margin to invest in really challenging for instance the logistical problem.  So I have to collaborate and in the multiplayer online game they use this challenge room because  
**[0:14:30-0:14:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:14:30):**  this big Harry Monster, you can call it a logistical problem or you can call it how  can we revalue food based on sustainable development goals.  For instance how can we store, how can we pay a farmer for storing carbon in his trees  or in his soil?  Now I can pay a cent extra per liter gasoline at a shell pump so they can compensate my  
**[0:14:54-0:15:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:14:54):**  CO2, my carbon footprint so why don't we pay a farmer for storing carbon in his soil?  Very good question.  I am not able as a starter because that is one thing that I want to achieve.  As a startup I'm not able to challenge this one myself because I don't have the money  to create evidence-based practices.  
**[0:15:15-0:15:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:15:15):**  I don't have the political power to really challenge the government and say well okay  this tax system that you have, can we change it based on real value?  I don't have the money to build the technical solutions to support this big challenge and  I call this a big Harry Monster.  And at the end of the time basically as an entrepreneur you're running around getting  
**[0:15:39-0:15:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:15:39):**  these products in boxes from the farmer in the truck of the one truck driver or two of  your lucky three and getting it to consumers.  You're running a logistic company basically and you don't have time.  I mean you would love to think about these big hairy problems.  You probably think about them but you don't have the space literally to tackle.  
**[0:15:58-0:16:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:15:58):**  And the funny thing is everybody believes that you're working on changing and challenging  this.  But if you're looking at the facts you're just running a really complex small wholesaling  company and it's really frustrating but everybody around you says go on I believe you, you can  do it but you can't.  
**[0:16:15-0:16:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:16:15):**  And if you look at how this solution is created by looking at how multiplayer online games  work you have this big hairy monster.  I have in Utrecht my own group of partners and my small wholesaler.  I have one in Amsterdam, friends of mine have one in Amsterdam, one in Rotterdam.  All over Europe you see these regional alliances bottom up pop up.  
**[0:16:39-0:16:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:16:39):**  They all have specific solutions, IT platforms that some are more like social inclusive,  others are working on really on SCG driven values like carbon or water storage or nutrients  or organic farming etc.  And if you combine all these resources together you have a really valuable base of knowledge  and capacity to make money.  
**[0:17:06-0:17:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:17:06):**  And how it works in for instance here in Utrecht I'm really working together with the University  of Utrecht so I have a specific piece of knowledge how you can create a community of students  around the short food supply chain.  And if I see that and I call this knowledge I call it the big hammer in the gaming.  There is a big hairy monster at level three, I have my big hammer, I run to the monster  
**[0:17:31-0:17:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:17:31):**  and I'm hitting him on the head and he just looks at me and says well is that all you  can bring to the table and he hits me and I get back to level two again or I go bankrupt.  Mostly they go bankrupt, you have one shot of fame and you go down.  In the gamification of multiplayer online games to go to level three you have to find  friends to collaborate.  
**[0:17:54-0:17:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:17:54):**  So I have to collaborate with Amsterdam or Rotterdam and Utrecht together because this  monster needs more than only a hammer.  It needs a jar of poison, it needs a hammer and a sharp knife.  The jar of poison, you throw the jar of poison, for instance Rotterdam has a jar of poison,  throws it in the face of the monster, he gets a bit dizzy.  
**[0:18:16-0:18:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:18:16):**  I have the big hammer, I hit him on the head, he goes down and the guy from Amsterdam he  has a really small cricket knife that can cut his veins just behind his helmet.  So the monster is dead.  We leave the dungeon and go on what we have been doing all by ourselves and creating our  own culture in Utrecht and having our own idea how it works.  
**[0:18:39-0:18:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:18:39):**  But we challenge this big thing.  I have a student community.  In Rotterdam they are working on evidence-based practices based on carbon storage and the  value of that in trees and in soil.  In Amsterdam they are collaborating with a network of banks and municipalities together.  
**[0:19:01-0:19:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:19:01):**  If you combine these, inventory I call it, the hammer is my student community, the sharp  knife is the knowledge of how the value of storing carbon in trees works and the jar  of poison can be my enormous network with governments that help me reestablish the value  underneath what we have been creating.  And bringing these together challenges the problem.  
**[0:19:31-0:19:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:19:31):**  And if you look at all the inventory that is available right now in the landscape of  all these regional cells of collaboration with their specific inventory, that can be  specific databases, it is the reach that we have with our social networks, some tools,  I have a food truck, a food festival, I have all these instruments that I can bring into  the table, the authority, the leadership of the individual entrepreneurs within that region,  
**[0:20:00-0:20:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:20:00):**  the expertise, specific expertise on SDGs and they also make money.  It's not a lot of money but it's more than enough if you combine it.  And bringing all these values together in a challenge room construction and combining  these regional alliances together creating eventually a market driven demand for food  based on real SDG goals but also included in a social network, I think if we are really  
**[0:20:34-0:20:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:20:34):**  aware of the value that we have next to the product that we sell, we can face these challenges  and I don't think it's very difficult, all we need is a strategy that works.  We can play this game together, we have some game rules and we have all these valuable  elements that are not used right now, we are not using the collective reach of our social  network and are not aware of the power that we have if we combine it.  
**[0:21:04-0:21:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:21:04):**  I made a small analysis of the ecosystem in the Netherlands of all these short food supply  chain entrepreneurs and I analyzed the combined LinkedIn lists of connections and we saw that  all these regional players have a national level playing field with stakeholders in government,  in healthcare, at universities, we know almost all relevant stakeholders but we ourselves  in our region are not able to provide the solutions to collaborate on a national level  
**[0:21:36-0:21:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:21:36):**  with them.  And that is in the essence the solution and the strategy that we within Local2Local and  AMT, my company, implemented within the Netherlands.  And so basically you're the coordinator because that's of course, I'm imagining everybody  in level 2 sees the value, sees the potential but then is also struck by limits of time  
**[0:22:00-0:22:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:22:00):**  as we discussed before, so you need someone or you need a team or you need an entity or  something that organizes this challenge room, calls the players together and also puts the  big hairy goal of this challenge, this specific challenge on the wall and says okay, bring  your tools, bring your inventory because we need to tackle this this year, this quarter  or whatever the challenge is.  
**[0:22:21-0:22:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:22:21):**  And that's what you're basically have been doing in the Netherlands.  And the trick is combining all these elements and these inventory parts, particles and facing  the challenges, creating a solution together without losing your own regional identity.  Because the clash here in Utrecht is a clash on itself.  In Rotterdam they have their own cultural challenges, creating the value about what  
**[0:22:53-0:22:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:22:53):**  they think food should be for them.  So they create their own culture.  Culture is a thing that serves you, that takes care of you and it takes care of you because  you have created it, you have fought for it.  Wars are being fought for being part of your own region, creating your own culture.  
**[0:23:14-0:23:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:23:14):**  The value that we are building right now is regional cultural heritage based on new values.  And so you have this process on level two where this clash of egos and all these entrepreneurs  they think okay, I'm doing what I'm doing and it's my challenge.  But you have to create a level three collaboration together based on values that are not used  because they just sell products and I think they have this solution.  
**[0:23:47-0:23:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:23:47):**  But you have to look at these added values together.  And within the Netherlands I had this idea for three years ago, this game solution.  I'm an entrepreneur, I'm selling products here in Utrecht and helping all kinds of other  short food supply chains as a service provider.  We provide software solutions and we help them with their business model as well.  
**[0:24:08-0:24:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:24:08):**  So I have two business models.  But we created a task force short food supply chain and it's really this military analogy  of a task force.  So we're going to do it and it's a force and we're going to use all these elements that  we don't use efficiently right now, efficient right now to face the challenges.  
**[0:24:29-0:24:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:24:29):**  So we started this task force with seven leaders in the Netherlands active for 10 years now  in the short food supply chains and we created this ecosystem of collaborating regions and  it's really speeding up momentum.  We're able to create solutions like blockchain solutions to really create a value based evidence  underneath carbon storage, water storage in soil.  
**[0:24:57-0:25:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:24:57):**  So we can make a business model for it for farmers and ask investors and consumers to  invest not only in a product but also in water storage or carbon storage or bee population  or for instance the real value of food because I believe that food if it's really healthy  it's a medicine and you don't get sick if you eat well.  You can get better by eating well and adjusting your lifestyle.  
**[0:25:27-0:25:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:25:27):**  But at the moment we are obviously not, let's say the goals of the system are not that food  as medicine and you mentioned a few times before like the current pioneers in direct  to consumer market are still selling the same product that the farmer is also selling in  other supply chains.  So there's not fundamentally anything different to the product.  
**[0:25:48-0:25:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:25:48):**  He or she as a farmer is just paid a bit better and probably it's a bit fresher so maybe it  is a bit better but the future big hairy goal is okay food as medicine great.  How do we measure, how do we prove, how do we fact check based on that and how do we  supply as a sector that to probably the first consumers which are hospitals, which are places  where people definitely need more food as medicine but you need to attack that almost  
**[0:26:16-0:26:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:26:16):**  as a group.  I mean that would be a challenge room but currently there's very few food as medicine  because it's the same apple that is also sold in supermarkets just that you pay a bit more  to the farmer which is great.  I mean don't get me wrong it's amazing that you pay more as a short food supply chain  
**[0:26:31-0:26:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:26:31):**  company.  But the next step would definitely be that discussion and that fundamental discussion  on okay what are nutrients and what needs to change on the farm to have food as medicine  more.  It's a systemic problem if you look at how can we get food the definition of a medicine  
**[0:26:53-0:27:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:26:53):**  and there is a protocol for that and all these pharmaceutical companies they have the, they  own the language calling something a medicine.  They have the structure and the processes and the procedures are tools of power to them  and the challenge is if we reestablish the connection with society we have this enormous  group of customers with a lot of money, with a lot of voting power, political power and  
**[0:27:24-0:27:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:27:24):**  we also create instruments to really make the evidence-based practice underneath.  For instance you can call honey, local honey is a medicine for how we call it hay fever,  what's the name of it?  Yeah hay fever yeah definitely some certain type of allergies.  A doctor is not allowed to prescribe honey against hay fever.  
**[0:27:59-0:28:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:27:59):**  If he does he gets a fine because in all books, in all facts honey is the best medicine against  hay fever.  So it is a super small example but yeah extremely powerful.  How do you, okay so how do we make sure as a test regional doctors are allowed and then  let's measure, let's properly get it as a medicine meaning that there's suddenly an  
**[0:28:27-0:28:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:28:27):**  enormous market for local properly made regenerative biodiversity rich honey and not just competing  with the honey in the supermarket.  That's very powerful.  And if you look at the price, the cost of a pill of reactinia, it's a medicine for against  allergies, it's an enormous market.  
**[0:28:48-0:28:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:28:48):**  If we only use the value of that and put it in the pockets of the farmers that has this  healthy bee population, we don't have a problem with paying our farmer taking care of a biodiversity.  And it's only an example of honey.  And you look at all these other values in food that were not used, well we don't have  a problem, we're looking at the wrong solutions.  
**[0:29:15-0:29:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:29:15):**  And Mark I want to be very conscious of your time, I want to end with a few questions.  This all sounds amazing, very interesting.  I think anybody that's active in the short food supply chains really needs to dive deeper  into the gamification model and I will definitely share some of that in the description below.  What does this mean for investors, for people that are listening hopefully to the show that  
**[0:29:38-0:29:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:29:38):**  are interested to put money to work?  What would you, without giving them investment advice, where would you point them as first  steps and what would you tell them if people come to your door, and I know they do, to  say okay how do I become part of this gigantic transition that we all see happening but we  all also have a sort of feeling of I don't really know or see where this is going.  
**[0:30:07-0:30:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:30:07):**  The first advice is if you look at startups that are challenging, for instance some parts  of food as a medicine, don't approach them as a product.  Approach them as part of an ecosystem with all these other added values that are necessary  to create something.  So look at it differently.  
**[0:30:27-0:30:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:30:27):**  If you see them challenging for instance the honey case, look at them as okay you're experimenting  on the real value of SEGs, they are not, for the most part they are not good entrepreneurs  but they have a good solution.  And the only thing that you have to do is analyze their ecosystem and look at all these  connections within the short food supply chain that are able to really create this A plus  
**[0:30:51-0:30:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:30:51):**  brand but also have a bright range of market share to help them creating this format, look  at the business model of that and implement it in this ecosystem of collaborating sales  organizations.  And that's a different approach than just okay we have honey, how much can you produce,  how large is the market, but challenge by collaboration.  
**[0:31:17-0:31:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:31:17):**  I think that is the best advice that I can give them.  Don't approach them like a single product, look at their ecosystem.  That's the best lesson and I think the momentum now in the market of organization clinging  together creating this momentum, the momentum is now to enhance the leaders in this movement,  invest in them but look at the other inventory parts than only the product.  
**[0:31:50-0:31:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:31:50):**  And I think if you invest right now the coming three to five years the revenues will come  because all is changing right now and you have to be in it to win it.  So don't invest in one, invest in more but look at their ecosystem.  And if there's one thing, let's say you have a magic wand and there's one thing you can  change overnight with just moving that wand and say okay tomorrow morning we'll wake up  
**[0:32:19-0:32:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:32:19):**  and Mark changed something in the food and agriculture system and if it could be anything  what would that be?  My challenge is and I started with that I have this ecosystem of students collaborating  with our farmers.  What I am changing is I reestablished the connection between universities and schools  
**[0:32:41-0:32:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:32:41):**  of applied science with the primary farmer.  So I create a future perspective for the farmers with the young and talented people with all  this new knowledge and that is my thing.  What is my, it's a product, that is what I'm doing.  I reestablished.  
**[0:32:58-0:32:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:32:58):**  The theory of change.  Yeah because it's not within the food system itself that the solution is.  It is within the cross-sectoral connections between healthcare and farming, education  and farming, logistic and farming.  It's on the crossroads of these sectors where the value is made.  
**[0:33:19-0:33:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:33:19):**  Food is a medicine, education is part of an ecosystem for creating culture.  It's not an institution, it's part of a local ecosystem and that is what we, what I'm doing  especially.  And what gets you excited.  I want to thank you so much for your time Mark and for trying to squeeze 10 years of  
**[0:33:41-0:33:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:33:41):**  knowledge and learning and doing into 33 minutes which is not easy at all.  I don't think it's the last time we talk, I have to check in and see how local to local  is going, how this coalition of pioneers in the Netherlands and in Europe, because  you're connected to most of the pioneers in this field in Europe.  And I think with the current momentum, the current tipping points we're getting closer  
**[0:34:04-0:34:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:34:04):**  to from farmers that are protesting in the street in Europe to a new Green Deal which  is coming and the focus on agri-food as part of, has to be part of the solution and not  just part of the problem.  It's going to be a very exciting next few years.  Yeah well, join the ride.  
**[0:34:23-0:34:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:34:23):**  Thank you so much.  Yes, fine, thank you as well.  If you found the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  
**[0:34:36-0:34:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:34:36):**  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  join my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or in the description  
**[0:34:59-0:35:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:34:59):**  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food.  How to put money to work in regenerating soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while  
**[0:35:25-0:35:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:35:25):**  doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After a hundred interviews and more than a hundred hours of audio asking the question  how to put money to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011  and recording these podcasts since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  
**[0:35:42-0:35:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:35:42):**  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  What questions should you ask?  
**[0:35:53-0:35:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:35:53):**  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  
**[0:36:00-0:36:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:36:00):**  For whom is this course?  You, the soil builders and investors in this space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management consultants, etc.  
**[0:36:19-0:36:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:36:19):**  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  
**[0:36:35-0:36:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:36:35):**  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  
**[0:36:53-0:36:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:36:53):**  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to ride along.  
**[0:37:07-0:37:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:37:07):**  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  
**[0:37:28-0:37:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:37:28):**  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately, that doesn't exist in this world.  
**[0:37:42-0:37:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/25/mark-frederiks/#t=0:37:42):**  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  