### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2020-00-28)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com slash course or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  Why is a 1.3 trillion dollar asset manager asking questions about soil health?  Find out in this interview.  
**[0:00:22-0:00:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:00:22):**  Welcome to another episode of investing in regenerative agriculture investing as if the  planet mattered.  Today I'm going to show you how to learn more about how to put money to work in regenerative  agriculture.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  
**[0:00:44-0:00:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:00:44):**  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small and consumers, start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  In March last year, we launched our Patreon community to make it easy for fans to support  
**[0:01:04-0:01:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:01:04):**  our work.  And so many of you have joined as a member.  We've launched different types of benefits, exclusive content, Q&A webinars with former  guests, ask me anything sessions plus so much more to come in the future.  For more information on the different tiers, benefits and how to become a member, check  
**[0:01:19-0:01:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:01:19):**  patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or find the link below.  Thank you.  Welcome to another episode of investing in regenerative agriculture.  Today I'm joined by Jasmine Swan, sustainability analyst at legal and general investment management,  one of the largest asset managers in Europe with over 1.3 trillion assets under management.  
**[0:01:41-0:01:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:01:41):**  And we're going to explore why a large asset manager is asking questions about soil health  and how they are trying to influence the companies they invest in.  Welcome Jasmine.  Thank you.  Thank you very much for having me.  
**[0:01:52-0:01:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:01:52):**  And could you describe a bit for the audience that's not so familiar with, let's say the  institutional finance world, what legal and general is and what they represent and how  they work or how you work?  Yeah, absolutely.  So Algym or legal and general investment management, we are the asset management arm of legal and  
**[0:02:11-0:02:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:02:11):**  general group, which is a FTSE 100 company based here in Europe.  We also have offices in US, Hong Kong and Tokyo.  And as you mentioned, we are one of the largest European asset managers and a global investor.  And we work with both institutional and retail clients offering them strategies across the  full spectrum of asset classes, including equities, bonds, real assets, as well as multi-alpha  
**[0:02:40-0:02:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:02:40):**  strategies and liability driven investments.  And I sit in the corporate governance team here at Algym, which is responsible for our  stewardship activities.  So essentially as a major shareholder, we have a responsibility to engage with companies  on behalf of our clients assets that we look after to engage with the companies in our  
**[0:03:01-0:03:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:03:01):**  portfolio to ensure that they are appropriately managing key material risks, such as climate  change.  And that takes up a big part of my role.  Yeah.  You mentioned climate change.  
**[0:03:12-0:03:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:03:12):**  I mean, I think, and I hope, and I imagine it's on the agenda of all asset managers,  all institutional players that are managing large portfolios.  But then we got introduced actually through Andrew of Soil Capital who mentioned there's  an asset manager that's actually asking questions about soil health.  So how did it come about that within your risk discussions, within the discussions you  
**[0:03:35-0:03:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:03:35):**  have with these companies that you're starting to ask questions about soil health, which  is very specific and very particular, obviously not on this podcast, but in, I think the asset  owner and the institutional world quite a bit.  It is.  And I've definitely had people say to me that it sounds like an investor getting a bit too  
**[0:03:54-0:03:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:03:54):**  far into the weeds.  No pun intended.  But the reason why we look at soil health is that, as I mentioned, we believe that climate  change is one of, if not the most significant risk facing the global economy.  And then in turn, our clients assets in the medium to long term.  
**[0:04:14-0:04:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:04:14):**  And why soil?  Because improving soil health is really one of the key levers that the world has to pull  in order to tackle climate change and reduce greenhouse gas emissions.  So when we look at climate change and the food companies in our portfolio, we see a  really big challenge for the industry, which is that in order to meet the demands of a  
**[0:04:37-0:04:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:04:37):**  1.5 degree Celsius trajectory by 2050, the world needs to be able to feed a population  ballooning to 10 billion people, all the while reducing our agricultural emissions by two  thirds and doing all of this without expanding agricultural land by even so much as a square  foot.  And linking all of this back to soil health, if you're a global food company, right now  
**[0:05:05-0:05:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:05:05):**  you have a problem in the sense that your supply chain is likely climate negative.  You'll be sourcing, though often indirectly of course, from farms which deforest and douse  the soil with chemicals.  And if you want to make sure that your company is actually aligning itself with a well below  two degree trajectory and that your supply chain is resilient in a world grappling with  
**[0:05:30-0:05:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:05:30):**  both the transitional and the physical risks and impact of climate change, which indeed  a lot of food companies have actually committed themselves to doing, then working with your  suppliers as a global food company to improve soil health should be really one of the key  components of your strategy.  So that's the why soil, essentially.  
**[0:05:50-0:05:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:05:50):**  No, I think it's great to hear that coming from one of the large asset owners, as I think  on this podcast and the people listening, they understand the why, but they haven't  seen it so well, let's say, structured and mentioned in the mainstream financial sector.  So how has been the response when you go to the major food companies that are in your  portfolios and in the different strategies and the different mandates you manage?  
**[0:06:16-0:06:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:06:16):**  How has been the response when you put your soil questions on the table?  So I'll start with giving some context around our engagement work.  So we do not engage on behalf of sort of a specific fund or a specific strategy, but  rather the engagement work that we do is run centralized from the corporate governance  team that I sit in.  
**[0:06:41-0:06:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:06:41):**  So our team is engaging on behalf of all of our 1.3 trillion in assets.  But the response and yeah, the response is a good question.  So it's really dependent on the companies that we speak with.  So we engage with about 10 to 15 of the world's largest global packaged food manufacturers.  And I will say in some meetings with food companies, they are already way ahead of us.  
**[0:07:13-0:07:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:07:13):**  They can explain to us exactly what they're doing and how they're thinking about this  and what they're investing and what the programs look like and how they're working with suppliers  and the kind of targets that they're setting themselves.  And it's very clear that they have a very sort of sophisticated, robust understanding  of this issue and the risks and that they have a robust plan in place to try and tackle  
**[0:07:38-0:07:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:07:38):**  it.  And then we speak with some companies where they've appreciated that soil health is a  key risk for them to manage and they're beginning to look at it and implement a strategy, but  it's much more sort of early days.  And then with other companies, it's much more early and it's viewed as a sort of, then on  
**[0:07:59-0:08:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:07:59):**  the other end of the spectrum for other companies, they've really not started looking at this  topic.  It doesn't seem like it's something that's yet on their radar.  And I think we've had some companies be quite surprised actually that we're going into so  much depth on this topic.  
**[0:08:18-0:08:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:08:18):**  So the range of responses has been quite varied to be honest.  And when you look at that group of, let's say the 15 largest food companies, like the  pioneers, is that a group of 10?  Is that a group of two or three?  Obviously you don't have to name them or mention them, but what is more or less the breakdown  
**[0:08:34-0:08:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:08:34):**  of the different responses we've seen so far from the pioneers, the interested ones and  the very surprised ones?  Is that a nice one, two, three, like a divided in three, or do you see quite a few pioneers  for instance?  I'd say it's a relatively even...  
**[0:08:49-0:08:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:08:49):**  So we have, I'd say there are about four or five companies that are really pioneering  this and already have robust strategies in place.  And then I'd say there's about maybe five or six, seven companies where it's much more  early days and they've really not started thinking about this in a holistic way yet.  And then the rest is somewhere in the middle on that journey, I would say.  
**[0:09:15-0:09:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:09:15):**  And when you engage and have those discussions, what do you ask from them?  Let's say they don't have this holistic view and they don't have this set of what they're  measuring, et cetera.  What do you ask from a company in this engagement, what they should report or would you like  to see from them?  
**[0:09:30-0:09:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:09:30):**  Sure.  So yeah, so we tend to couch it in this language that you just said that we want them to demonstrate  to us that they're looking at climate mitigation and resilience from a holistic perspective  and really recognizing that meeting the Paris Agreement will need to make significant changes  to the ways that we produce and source food.  
**[0:09:52-0:09:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:09:52):**  So the way this would manifest is that, for example, we'll look for companies and ask  companies that in their sustainability or in their annual reports, preferably, that  they should be discussing the risks to their business associated with soil health.  So for example, we look for them to discuss how deteriorating soil health threatens agricultural  resilience.  
**[0:10:16-0:10:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:10:16):**  It threatens the soil's resilience to drought and in turn crop productivity and then what  the implications of all of this is for the business and its supply chain.  And conversely, we also ask companies to also discuss the opportunities piece.  So on the flip side, looking for companies to also recognize that the opportunity that  improving soil health presents to them, because as I said before, currently their supply chains  
**[0:10:49-0:10:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:10:49):**  are very likely climate negative, whereas improving soil health provides a means for  your company and your wider supply chain to offer a climate solution in the sense that  improving soil health means improving the soil's capacity for agricultural carbon sequestration.  And since when have you, let me ask two questions in one, since when have you been asking or  having these dialogues and conversations and have you seen large shifts already, maybe  
**[0:11:19-0:11:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:11:19):**  in the responses, maybe also in disclosure?  Have you seen changes basically since the moment, maybe not all, obviously, your positive  impact because the whole world starts to slowly wake up to soil health, but definitely part  of that is your impact because you're discussing that with these companies.  Have you seen, since you started changes in responses, in disclosures, have you seen positive  
**[0:11:41-0:11:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:11:41):**  changes of the involvement you've made?  Let me just add one more thing to the other question that you asked, because I think it's  relevant and then I'll answer this question.  So another thing that we also ask companies for in our engagements with them is whether  they have a view on what percentage of their, at least their direct sourcing that is compliant  
**[0:12:05-0:12:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:12:05):**  with the standard laid out in the EU green taxonomy on agriculture, which of course lays  out measures to improve soil health.  And we're very open in our engagements with companies saying that we understand that the  EU taxonomy is very new.  It was only released this past summer, but over time, this is a metric that we would  
**[0:12:29-0:12:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:12:29):**  expect food companies to start to measure.  Yeah, I had a discussion with Andrew, I think just after the summer on, actually we did  a short interview on the taxonomy and why it matters, not only for European investors,  but actually for the whole sector and for investors all around the world.  It's very interesting.  
**[0:12:47-0:12:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:12:47):**  It's quite surprising how detailed and how far it goes on soil health and that it managed  to get into the taxonomy.  Absolutely.  And I think it's really encouraging because I think to date, there's not really been,  we've not really had sort of an official framework to define what good looks like in terms of  
**[0:13:07-0:13:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:13:07):**  agricultural sourcing.  So in that sense, I think it is very, very, very helpful.  All right.  Can you, sorry, can you remind me again what the next question was?  Yeah, sure.  
**[0:13:18-0:13:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:13:18):**  So since when have you been engaging on, I mean, on climate change obviously for a long  time, but on soil health specifically, and have you seen large or have you seen changes,  hopefully large, but have you seen changes, positive changes in that period until now  basically the beginning of 2020?  So we, in 2019, we did a review of the methodology that we use to assess food companies on climate  
**[0:13:46-0:13:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:13:46):**  change.  And as a part of that review, we met with a number of expert stakeholders including  Andrew from, from Soil Capital, but also other NGOs and external experts.  And so this summer we, on the back of that, we produced a new and revamp assessment framework,  which includes these new metrics on soil health.  
**[0:14:13-0:14:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:14:13):**  And then on the back of this assessment framework, we, for the 2019 engagement cycle with food  companies that is just coming to a close now that we've held the meetings that we've held  during the autumn.  This is.  It's super fresh basically.  
**[0:14:31-0:14:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:14:31):**  Yeah, exactly.  So, so yeah, so on the back of that assessment framework, we, we then set up meetings with  companies and have started introducing these metrics in our, in our conversations with  them and started to ask them to, to report against them.  So it's, it's very, very new.  
**[0:14:48-0:14:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:14:48):**  So I can't say credit for, for any, any new publications that we've seen or sort of any  new commitments that we've seen from, from companies because we've only just started  engaging on this topic in the past six months or so.  But I think certainly in the past year we have seen a change in the level of sophistication  in terms of climate reporting from food companies and in terms of how companies are reporting  
**[0:15:17-0:15:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:15:17):**  on the different aspects of their climate strategies, which certainly include soil health.  And I think that has a lot to do with the fact that investors, including Algem are simply  just expecting a higher standard from, from food companies.  It's, you know, I think previously the food industry has been able to fly a little bit  under the radar in terms of climate change because investors have been focused on oil  
**[0:15:43-0:15:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:15:43):**  and gas, electric utilities, coal, and so on.  And now I think both investors and food companies are coming to the realization that, you know,  food is, you know, I don't want to say food is the new oil and gas, but it certainly climate  change is a key material risk for the sector and as such we are seeing, I think an improvement  in disclosures in this area.  
**[0:16:08-0:16:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:16:08):**  Yes, I think a lot of the latest reports of the UN and of the climate committees, et cetera,  really, really showed that without food, obviously oil and gas and energy, but without food and  the agriculture sector, we're simply not going to make it.  We're not going to get to the one and a half degrees or stay under two.  And I think slowly that realization comes that there's this huge sector that, that needs  
**[0:16:32-0:16:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:16:32):**  to be changed and quite fundamentally, and it's a very complex and a very big one and  it's not going to be an easy journey, but there are interesting, let's say, streets  or angles to take to, and one of them obviously is improving soil health.  And are you planning, let's say for the outside world, maybe not people that maybe are not  directly customers, maybe indirectly they are clients.  
**[0:16:56-0:16:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:16:56):**  Maybe indirectly they are investing through you.  But are you planning to release certain things, reports, case studies of this engagement?  How does that work normally with the engagement?  I think it's not so public.  Are there certain pieces that are going to be public maybe in 2020?  
**[0:17:12-0:17:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:17:12):**  Are you planning to release something to the outside world on the work on soil health that  you've been doing?  Yeah.  So every year the way our engagements work is that we run our analysis on companies and  then we have meetings with them to discuss the areas that we have identified as being  
**[0:17:30-0:17:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:17:30):**  areas where they can go further or they could improve.  And then for those companies where after a significant period of engagement, we don't  really see action, we don't see the companies moving further on the areas that we have identified,  those companies are subject to a vote against their chair at the company's next AGM and  the company is also excluded from our ESG range of funds.  
**[0:17:55-0:17:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:17:55):**  And in conjunction with this announcement of the divested companies and the companies  where we're voting against, we always produce a report summarizing our engagements with  companies and the themes that we're seeing.  And we also make a point of while we're divesting companies and we're voting against the chair  if we don't see action on climate change, we also make a really big point of also naming  
**[0:18:19-0:18:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:18:19):**  and faming the companies that we see as setting best practice and setting an example for their  peers and being in the vanguard of climate change.  And so that report is a really good opportunity for us to highlight things like soil health,  to highlight the food companies that are working on measures to improve soil health, working  with their supply chain to really think holistically around the climate impact and the soil health  
**[0:18:49-0:18:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:18:49):**  impact of their supply chain.  Yeah, I want to wrap up this interview, I think to be conscious of your time as well.  And it's a subject we don't hear too much about normally, at least on this podcast,  as we mostly discuss farms and farmers and direct investments, et cetera.  But obviously there's a gigantic financial sector world and financial institution, institutional  
**[0:19:12-0:19:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:19:12):**  investor world out there that is slowly also starting to move after a lot of work you've  been doing on climate change, oil and gas, like you mentioned before, on energy.  And slowly soil health becomes more and more of a topic.  And I think it's extremely interesting to see that and to see the big oil tankers, pun  intended, to slowly start changing course slightly.  
**[0:19:32-0:19:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:19:32):**  And we see sometimes in the news, the big food companies that make certain claims and  statements, but it's good to see they're actually people trying to check if they're doing that  and to see and to get certain things disclosed as we have been doing with carbon and have  been doing with other things.  Slowly soil starts to become more important.  
**[0:19:49-0:19:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:19:49):**  So thank you for your work and thank you for taking the time to explain something quite  complicated to a podcast audience.  Great.  Thank you very much for having me.  My pleasure.  
**[0:19:58-0:20:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:19:58):**  If you found the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast.  And it only takes a few seconds.  
**[0:20:12-0:20:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:20:12):**  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you, and if you have the means, please  join my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or in the description  below.  
**[0:20:32-0:20:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:20:32):**  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  
**[0:21:00-0:21:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:21:00):**  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to put money  to work in regenerating soils, and I've been following the space since 2011 and recording  these podcasts since 2016.  We thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  
**[0:21:16-0:21:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:21:16):**  How have we built our decision making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  And what questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  
**[0:21:26-0:21:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:21:26):**  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course you, the soil builders and investors in this space, the soil builders,  
**[0:21:37-0:21:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:21:37):**  people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers, vehicle builders,  crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food companies, permaculture,  key line designers, holistic management consultants, etc, etc.  People that are building soil at scale, and the investors who are putting their own money  to work through their family office or as private individuals, or people who are putting  
**[0:22:00-0:22:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:22:00):**  other people's money to work through foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies,  etc.  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  
**[0:22:10-0:22:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:22:10):**  Meaning, I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you.  And I'm very aware that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very  different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you, and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth, thank you.  
**[0:22:29-0:22:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:22:29):**  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes, plus PDF slides,  so you don't have to ride along.  We're gonna look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  
**[0:22:49-0:22:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:22:49):**  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find, or what kind of investors you could  find if you're a soy builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're gonna look at nutrient density, landscape design, and a lot more.  
**[0:23:09-0:23:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:23:09):**  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately, that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  
**[0:23:20-0:23:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/01/31/yasmine-svan/#t=0:23:20):**  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea, or whatever you're drinking, click on  the link below, sign up, and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  