### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2020-00-17)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now on to the podcast.  Today in the podcast a deep dive into how to make agroforestry investable for institutional  investors.  
**[0:00:20-0:00:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:00:20):**  We will discuss how my guest raised 200 million from a German pension fund and has been investing  most of it in the past three years in large-scale sustainable agroforestry.  We will touch upon the fascinating world of aromatic cacao, coconuts, holistic thinking,  organic dates, nuts and reforestation.  I hope you enjoy this slightly longer interview as we had so much to unpack on how to put  
**[0:00:43-0:00:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:00:43):**  trillions to work in trees.  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture.  Investing as if the planet mattered.  This show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  
**[0:01:03-0:01:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:01:03):**  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much more  
**[0:01:21-0:01:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:01:21):**  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  In March last year we launched our Patreon community to make it easy for fans to support  our work and so many of you have joined as a member.  We've launched different types of benefits, exclusive content, Q&A webinars with former  guests, ask me anything sessions plus so much more to come in the future.  
**[0:01:41-0:01:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:01:41):**  For more information on the different tiers, benefits and how to become a member check  patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or find the link below.  Thank you.  My next guest is Chief Project Officer at 123, the pioneers in making sustainable forestry  and agriculture projects investable at a large scale.  
**[0:01:59-0:02:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:01:59):**  Welcome Oliver.  Hello Kun, how are you?  I'm very good.  I'm very much looking forward to this discussion.  I think we're going to have a lot to discuss, a lot to have a conversation about, about  
**[0:02:08-0:02:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:02:08):**  institutional investments in regenerative agriculture and forestry.  But first of all, a personal question.  What brings you to the space of large scale agroforestry projects and the investment side  of things?  Well, thank you for inviting me.  
**[0:02:22-0:02:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:02:22):**  First of all, it's a good question.  I mean, it's not like I've been in the space of agriculture and forestry all my life.  So if I look back at my career, I've actually, as people often say, have been on the dark  side.  So I've been involved in finance and private banking, started actually in real estate.  
**[0:02:42-0:02:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:02:42):**  And about 10 years ago, I'd say I decided to actually move away from that side, but  not entirely, obviously, it's still very much part of my daily job.  But to focus on the topic of sustainable asset management, on creating a value proposition,  obviously, with my colleagues, how sustainable or regenerative agriculture and sustainable  forestry models can be made investable at large scale by institutional investors.  
**[0:03:14-0:03:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:03:14):**  And that is, if you want, so the intellectual answer.  So I saw a real need for that.  And we think that one to tree provides an answer in that space that hasn't been yet  provided by many organizations.  It's the answer to the question, how can I invest considerable funds, let's say 50 million  
**[0:03:35-0:03:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:03:35):**  or 100 million dollars or more in projects that are operating according to sustainable  land use practices?  On a more emotional level, I think it's just the state of the world out there and to do  the best and to contribute as much as possible, basically be a net contributor rather than  to actually use up the resources.  
**[0:04:00-0:04:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:04:00):**  And that's what made me come into this space.  And in the last years, we did see the whole space to gain a lot of traction.  That's good to see.  And obviously, it's also positive for my personal life decisions to show that that was a good  decision to make.  
**[0:04:17-0:04:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:04:17):**  And I mean, there's a lot to unpack here, but we have time.  So we're going to do that.  So can you give a short, short overview?  I know one to three quite well, I feel and I will definitely share your impact report,  which you made public in the end of last year or somewhere, I think, in fall of last year,  
**[0:04:33-0:04:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:04:33):**  I will share that below.  And we can you share give a short intro into one, two, three.  What is it?  Are you not on that impact report?  So that what you saw was just the executive summary, basically the pre version.  
**[0:04:46-0:04:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:04:46):**  So I can happily announce that we just as per this week, we completed the full report.  I'm very happy to share that.  Wow.  Yeah, because I love the summary, very visual, very detailed for a summary, but I'm definitely  going to dive into the full report.  
**[0:05:01-0:05:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:05:01):**  Okay.  So to your question, what is one to three?  So one to three is based in Germany, is a German company.  Well, German company, we're an international company, of course.  And we focus on developing large scale agroforestry models mostly and forestry projects, predominantly  
**[0:05:24-0:05:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:05:24):**  in Latin America, but more and more so also in Africa, that combine traditional land use  practices, agroforestry practices, but at the same time, embrace modern research, modern  precision agriculture principles, and show or try to demonstrate that this type of agriculture  and forestry can be done at large scale, that it can be done in a profitable way, that it  can be done in a very socially responsible and ecological way.  
**[0:05:59-0:06:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:05:59):**  And to make this available to large institutional investors, such as pension funds, endowments,  foundations, asset managers, insurers, who are seeking to deploy considerable funds in  this kind of space, but are limited by the traditional impact investment industry, which  is doing great things, but it's doing it at a much smaller scale.  So if I want to invest 50 million euro into a project or several projects, then there's  
**[0:06:33-0:06:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:06:33):**  a real limitation in the market to do that.  So we are an investment advisor, we build a very efficient asset management platform  for that and very detailed investment process with a very good team based in Berlin.  But we're also a project developer, and we do the project supervision locally.  So we have a lot of people, experts on the ground, agronomists, foresters, technicians,  
**[0:07:04-0:07:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:07:04):**  who supervise the projects that we develop together with our local implementation partners.  And that's how we operate, basically.  It's a combination.  And I think in that sense, it is very rare still to have that strong asset management  capability and at the same time, very in-depth on the ground agricultural management expertise.  
**[0:07:26-0:07:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:07:26):**  So that's what we try to combine.  And that's what we're doing since we set up the company at the end of 2016.  Yeah, so basically, we're getting into the fourth year, which is exactly when I set up  the podcast, funny enough, which is the two of them are not connected, but the end of  16 was an interesting period.  
**[0:07:46-0:07:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:07:46):**  And you've done so with a lot of success so far, or at least success in terms of committed  capital and invested capital.  I think I saw in the summary of the impact report, you have 200 million committed and  130 million invested in the past three years.  Probably a lot of people in the podcast think, wow, that sounds like a lot of money, obviously,  
**[0:08:07-0:08:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:08:07):**  for institutional investment sizes.  That is not so much, but in the agroforestry space, that's enormous.  Can you walk us through or explain a bit how that happened and how in the last three years,  you've had so many commitments or commitments for so much money and also the investment  side of things?  
**[0:08:24-0:08:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:08:24):**  How do you deploy 130 million in three years?  Well, yeah, that's enough for three podcasts, I guess.  Well unpack, unpack.  So no, you're right.  That's exactly one of the key problems.  
**[0:08:37-0:08:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:08:37):**  So for the agroforestry space, this is a vast amount of money for institutional investors.  It's well, it still is a lot of money and considerable ticket.  But comparing it to the billions that, let's say, a pension fund has to invest, it's a  relatively small amount.  But yeah, how did we come about this?  
**[0:09:02-0:09:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:09:02):**  It's not something that happened overnight.  It was actually a very long process that went into it, a lot of pitching, a lot of education  also in the sense of explaining what is agroforestry, what is permaculture, what is regenerative  agriculture and why is this better than, let's say, a traditional timber investment into,  I don't know, pulp and paper.  
**[0:09:32-0:09:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:09:32):**  So it's not like pension funds or insurers, large asset managers haven't invested in forestry  before or also in agriculture, but obviously more in conventional projects and production.  And to explain and to convince them that this can be done in a very different way.  What do you say then to, like, imagine I'm a German pension fund or a Dutch pension fund  or let's say one of the pension funds that's not really known to be super pioneering because  
**[0:10:04-0:10:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:10:04):**  they shouldn't, they should be conservative with managing our pensions and they are used  to maybe some agriculture investments and timber investments, but they never combined  the two.  Maybe they have heard of agroforestry, but they're not really sure what that is.  How do you have that conversation about the returns are there, the future is going there,  
**[0:10:23-0:10:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:10:23):**  what is permaculture, what is soil, what's the starting point of how are those conversations  going?  Well, I mean, I guess you have to start with the topics that they care about most and that  is what are their objectives?  I mean, as you rightly say, they are responsible for the pension monies of thousands of people  
**[0:10:45-0:10:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:10:45):**  and rightly so you don't want them to play around with that.  So they are very risk averse.  At the same time, they have return objectives that they need to achieve in a world, in an  investment climate that since years is becoming more and more difficult.  So there has been a general move towards alternative investments, towards liquid investments, which  
**[0:11:12-0:11:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:11:12):**  were unthinkable at this scale for pension funds and in, let's say, large mandates some  years ago.  But now it's common practice that people invest in illiquid investments, that they invest  in, let's say, renewable energy projects, that they invest in emerging markets because  that's where they can still generate a return for their beneficiaries.  
**[0:11:39-0:11:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:11:39):**  Now keeping that in mind, so that should make it easier for our kind of topic because that's  all what we do.  Those are, if you look at a large agroforestry project, it is at its core, first of all,  it's an infrastructure project and it's typically in emerging markets.  It's agriculture, which in the case of our topics such as cacao and coffee and coconut  
**[0:12:11-0:12:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:12:11):**  palm oil production and things like that, it takes years before you actually have production.  So all these topics are, each piece of that are known elements to institutional investment  managers.  It's just maybe the combination plus the added pressure of converting to something more sustainable  to something climate positive than rather climate negative, if you want so.  
**[0:12:41-0:12:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:12:41):**  That is a new dimension to them.  But you also have to see that there's a lot of regulatory pressure coming now to the institutional  investment world to follow or to implement ESG principles, to properly assess impact  and to look into your climate risks, basically, and to make them transparent.  There will be a lot of additional regulation in this space.  
**[0:13:10-0:13:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:13:10):**  So there is a real interest to learn more about this and that's where you have to get  them.  And you're absolutely right, maybe the German market, as an example, isn't as advanced when  it comes to these topics as the UK, the Netherlands and the Nordics, to point them out.  And also Switzerland, let's say generally speaking, is quite at the forefront of sustainable  
**[0:13:40-0:13:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:13:40):**  asset management, not necessarily the institutional investors there.  So after a lot of education, probably a number of trips to interesting examples, because  you have a background in sustainable forestry management, you convinced this German pension  fund to commit 200 million and you get to work.  So what how does it look like?  
**[0:14:02-0:14:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:14:02):**  What kind of can you give an example of an agroforestry project that you bought, invested  in and how does the change look like basically since you came in?  Sure.  So as you said, it's for the agroforestry space, 200 million is a tremendous amount of  money as there aren't that many projects out there at large scale.  
**[0:14:23-0:14:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:14:23):**  And in our case, the kind of projects that we like to implement, they focus a lot on  on on cacao, which is one of our core competencies also on the on the technical group sites or  operations team has had has a lot of cacao management expertise, but also many other  tropical crops.  And typically the development of these projects is rather capital intensive.  
**[0:14:51-0:15:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:14:51):**  So tree orchards are to develop tree orchards is much more expensive than annual crop production.  And so we're talking about areas of let's say 1000 to 5000 hectares, and not necessarily  10s of 1000s of hectares that you may develop in other crops.  So how do you go about this?  I mean, the the value proposition is obviously to turn degraded land into highly productive  
**[0:15:26-0:15:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:15:26):**  land to bring it back into agricultural production ideally.  And the best circumstances we start with degraded cattle, cattle land if you want to.  So that not only we replace cattle raising with with an agroforestry system, but we also  bring highly compacted and degraded soil back into production.  So you need to find appropriate project areas or pieces of land.  
**[0:15:59-0:16:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:15:59):**  And that is where where it starts.  So you need people on the ground.  We are very focused on, let's say Central America and northern parts of Latin America.  And it starts with your pipeline of projects, you have to you have to do landscouting, you  have to find appropriate science, you have to build a network, you have to identify suitable  
**[0:16:24-0:16:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:16:24):**  markets that lend themselves to the business model that you have in mind.  You start acquiring them or establishing lease models.  So we're not very dogmatic about does land have to be acquired or should it be a lease  or use a fruit model, you know, it form follows function here, you do the best possible setup.  And so we established a project pipeline, we selected the best prospective sites to  
**[0:16:59-0:17:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:16:59):**  start with.  We focused obviously on countries where we already had teams in place, which was in in  Panama and in Colombia.  In particular, Colombia is obviously a vast country full of opportunity and a place that  we like a lot.  
**[0:17:16-0:17:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:17:16):**  And you start building from there.  So overall, we have now invested in seven countries and 12 projects that are now under  our belt, if you want so, ranging in size and investment.  So we started with some smaller ones and the biggest investment that we made was in the  range of 40 million US dollars.  
**[0:17:43-0:17:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:17:43):**  So quite a sizable investment.  And that was only possible by being very focused on the land scouting to have a dedicated project  development team to find good partners, trusted partners.  I always say without trusted partners, you're lost, you have no chance of success.  You cannot do everything yourself.  
**[0:18:07-0:18:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:18:07):**  You have to rely on local knowledge, expertise, you have to find these people who you can  partner with, who will develop new production with you.  And that was the starting point, to find the right suitable land.  Now we've done this for three years, which was a tremendous amount of work for the entire  organization.  
**[0:18:33-0:18:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:18:33):**  We're now almost 35 people, I think, say two thirds of them being in the project countries  and one third being at headquarters in Europe.  But now the real challenge starts, which is we have started to develop these projects,  we have bought farms and we convert them to more sustainable.  And how does that look like?  
**[0:18:56-0:19:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:18:56):**  Like you buy, I mean, you can do of course a concrete example or like a cattle farm rundown.  Like what's the change you see?  We're obviously in audio, so be as visual as you can be of what can we see the changes  that are already happening and that are happening in the future for somebody that probably hasn't  seen, let's say large scale agroforestry projects up close.  
**[0:19:18-0:19:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:19:18):**  Yeah, sure.  I give you two examples because we do two different things.  One thing is we buy farms that are running, doing conventional agriculture and they're  trying their best, but they're struggling.  So we find these sort of opportunities for conversion, to make them more socially responsible  
**[0:19:38-0:19:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:19:38):**  to bring up, just produce better quality and more of it, but to do it in a resource efficient  fashion.  Maybe I could give you one example on that.  And then the other is that we develop entirely new production.  So that's in a way that is almost easier for us because you start with a white sheet of  
**[0:20:00-0:20:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:20:00):**  paper or with a green field, so a green field project basically.  Yeah, basically the reforestation part versus the better forest management or better land  management as you mentioned.  But two examples would be great.  Yeah, both is important.  
**[0:20:14-0:20:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:20:14):**  So I give you one example for a farm conversion.  So we bought in 2018, we bought a cocoa farm in the north of Colombia.  Project is called Macan Cal.  And it's basically a monoculture that was planted in a way that wasn't bad, producing  CCM51, which is let's say bulk cocoa, so not particularly fine flavor type of cocoa, but  
**[0:20:46-0:20:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:20:46):**  it's yielding well.  And they installed it in a good way.  It was designed to be mechanized as well, in principle a good farm, but they ran into  real operational problems with changing climate patterns.  So more and more extended drought periods and during an extended El Nino period, basically  
**[0:21:08-0:21:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:21:08):**  the water concept failed.  They ran dry and a very large part of the plantation died.  There's just not enough water.  So there was an irrigation system, but there wasn't enough water to feed it.  Another contributor, funnily enough, this was in a farmer-fark conflict area in Colombia.  
**[0:21:29-0:21:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:21:29):**  And with the conflict being resolved largely and sort of peace coming back to the region,  there's also more and more agriculture happening again and basically more water being taken  out of the rivers that feed the farm.  So many reasons contributed to that.  So what did we do?  
**[0:21:50-0:21:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:21:50):**  So we bought this farm and how we typically approach this is that we have different phases  that we look at.  So the first phase, which is obviously the most important one, is to immediately stop  destructive practices.  That means introducing proper waste management, introducing recycling, obviously looking at  
**[0:22:11-0:22:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:22:11):**  work contracts, employment conditions.  So all of our workers have social insurance and health insurance.  So that is something that needs to happen immediately.  It's obviously about safety at work.  So we're looking as quickly as possible at health and safety procedures, issuing protective  
**[0:22:32-0:22:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:22:32):**  gear, looking at the machinery that is being used, starting with courses, education.  You may argue, well, all of that, which is good agricultural practice under a certified  operation.  Well, that is true.  But in practice, it often doesn't happen and it often even doesn't happen on certified  
**[0:22:52-0:22:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:22:52):**  farms.  And you know that as well.  So that is something that we immediately do.  We look at the workforce, we talk to them.  You may be surprised how much of an impact that had.  
**[0:23:05-0:23:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:23:05):**  Many of the workers who've been there for decades, they told us, this is the first time  actually a boss talks to us like an investor, an owner, asks me what I think, what could  be done better.  And that's what our regional managers did.  They went there, they opened a dialogue, they asked what can be done.  
**[0:23:32-0:23:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:23:32):**  We hired two HR personnel with a psychological background to work on various problems in  the farm, but also in the families, in the communities surrounding.  And I didn't even talk yet about the agriculture.  That's just the social work that needs to be done immediately.  When it comes to agriculture, then it's a bit more difficult.  
**[0:23:59-0:24:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:23:59):**  So here we had a massive water problem and we needed to replant some area.  So first thing was to obtain construction permit to build a large rainwater catchment  area and a reservoir, which we did.  And so we stabilized the water situation by basically investing quite a considerable amount  of money into a large reservoir, improving the efficiency of the installed irrigation  
**[0:24:29-0:24:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:24:29):**  systems and just improving the way water is used and how to catch it and to store it.  And now that we have completed that, we can actually focus on changing the production  system itself.  So I mentioned at the beginning, it's a monoculture, but they're good trees.  They've been stressed, of course, but they are yielding.  
**[0:24:55-0:24:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:24:55):**  They're not yet that old that we need to rip them out.  So we're focusing on gradual improvement rather than radical change.  So we focused a lot on the health of the trees.  We focus, generally speaking, a lot on the health of the soil.  So to implement very precise fertilization programs and work a lot with soil analysis  
**[0:25:21-0:25:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:25:21):**  to really have a precise nutrition plan for the farm.  And that is currently what we're doing.  So there's a lot of quality work going in at the moment to bring up the quality of the  crop.  We build a lot of infrastructure when it comes to post-harvest.  
**[0:25:39-0:25:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:25:39):**  So basically to dry or to ferment and dry the cocoa in a controlled environment rather  than just on the ground as it was done before, or it was even sold wet to local traders.  So we always focus on premium because the way we produce is more expensive, maybe.  So we focus on producing premium products that can be exported.  And those are the things that are currently on the way at this particular farm.  
**[0:26:13-0:26:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:26:13):**  So you can imagine it's quite a lot of work.  We kept the original management team.  It was a very good management team, I have to say.  They just didn't have the opportunity to actually implement the suggestions that they were making  themselves with the old owners.  
**[0:26:32-0:26:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:26:32):**  So given the right support, consultants, advice, access to resources and knowledge, they turned  this around rather quickly.  And it's already a model case, I would say, for a conversion.  And where do you see that going?  Because you mentioned it's currently a monoculture.  
**[0:26:53-0:26:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:26:53):**  It's not a very... it was focused on much more of a bulk cocoa.  Do you see this going much more complex, less of a monoculture?  I mean, a number of the trees died, so you are replanting.  And what do you see this going in like five to 10 years?  Well that's our opportunity.  
**[0:27:10-0:27:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:27:10):**  So as I said, I'm not going to start rip out thousands of trees just because I want a biodiverse  system.  But whenever we get the opportunity, and here we do have an opportunity because many of  the trees died or were severely stressed so that they stopped producing, we get a chance  to replant.  
**[0:27:32-0:27:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:27:32):**  And we're replanting with aromatic cocoa.  We're introducing shade trees.  What is aromatic cocoa?  It's for a non-chocolate... because I've been in the office, just a bit of background.  I've been in the office of 123 and they know a lot about chocolate.  
**[0:27:48-0:27:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:27:48):**  Like a lot of flavors.  They can test chocolate in very interesting ways.  But I also, I'm aware that maybe not everyone on the broadcast is a chocolate... maybe a  chocolate fan, but not a chocolate expert.  So what is aromatic cocoa?  
**[0:28:00-0:28:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:28:00):**  Yeah, sure.  No, I mean, we tend to forget that not everyone is fanatic about chocolate and cacao.  So well, I mean, obviously there is the cacao industry or the chocolate industry is full  of flaws.  And I mean, we could talk about that for hours as well.  
**[0:28:20-0:28:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:28:20):**  But let's say there's a bulk market which produces the kind of cocoa that goes into  your mass market products, is mixed with a lot of milk and sugar.  And there the flavor doesn't actually matter that much.  So if you eat your typical Mars bar, Snickers, that kind of thing, yes, there's chocolate  in there, there's cocoa in there, but the cocoa content is very low.  
**[0:28:45-0:28:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:28:45):**  So how that cacao actually... what the flavor profile of that is, it doesn't matter.  To these producers, the majority of the product is more important than the actual flavor.  There's a different segment which is called fine flavor cocoa or aromatic cocoa, which  is what people get passionate about.  So you have a lot of cocoa varieties that... well, cocoa comes originally from the Amazon  
**[0:29:18-0:29:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:29:18):**  rainforest.  And as with most crops, people pick the ones that are most sturdy and the high yielding,  but don't necessarily have the best flavor profile that went into Mars production.  But if you're passionate about cocoa, then you have a lot of single origins and very  different types of flavors.  
**[0:29:39-0:29:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:29:39):**  And we always compare it to wine.  It's as complex as wine.  You can talk about it for hours.  So people talk about single domain, if you want so, or single estate cocoa that comes  from one particular farm.  
**[0:29:55-0:30:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:29:55):**  And there are a lot of different clones and so-called criollos, basically wild varieties  that are grown somewhere, which can have real... create real flavor explosions in your mouth.  So it's quite interesting.  As with anything, if you dig into it, there is a world to be explored.  So it's just as interesting as wine production or coffee.  
**[0:30:22-0:30:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:30:22):**  Some people...  I was going to say, I mean, definitely are passionate about coffee and it's very similar  here.  So that's the market.  I think that's your opportunity, right?  
**[0:30:32-0:30:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:30:32):**  You see this, the cocoa market is moving.  Yes.  Probably, I don't know, many years, but a bit behind coffee that has seen an explosion  in single origin, extreme special roasting, a lot of very, very enthusiastic people.  And you see sort of the chocolate market moving after that as well, the cacao market.  
**[0:30:51-0:30:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:30:51):**  But on the production side, I'm imagining that's your gap.  That's where you're stepping in, that there's not a lot of this aromatic cacao at a large  scale to be sold to the single bar or bean to bar makers around the world.  Well, that's the thing.  So, I mean, first of all, these single, let's say, bean to bar makers are basically controlling  
**[0:31:10-0:31:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:31:10):**  the whole process from the bean to the final chocolate bar.  There are obviously a lot of these, let's say, very motivated and great companies who  produce, but they need a couple of tons a year to produce their chocolate.  And that's typically then dark chocolate.  So they don't mix it with a lot of sugar and milk.  
**[0:31:32-0:31:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:31:32):**  It goes up to 100%, which is, to be honest, 100% cocoa content.  That's a bit too tough for me.  That's interesting.  I've done a tasting and you could see, I think half of the room really couldn't, there was  too much.  
**[0:31:45-0:31:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:31:45):**  I liked it, but it stays with you for, I think, half an hour after you tasted it.  It stays with you for a while.  But so there's a lot of people who produce these amazing products.  And yes, we're producing for them.  But there's also a segment, and that's really what we're focusing on, where the large and  
**[0:32:01-0:32:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:32:01):**  medium sized chocolate makers are coming in and they also produce great products, you  know, great dark chocolates, single origin chocolates.  And they need something else.  They need, let's say, the same interesting flavor profile, but they need a very consistent  quality and the same sort of flavor profile year on year on year.  
**[0:32:24-0:32:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:32:24):**  Whereas if you're a sort of small manufacturer, well, you buy an amazing harvest from this  one estate.  And if that particular estate doesn't produce the same quality next year, then you buy it  from somewhere else, basically.  And then your products taste a bit different.  
**[0:32:38-0:32:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:32:38):**  And you can, you know, there's a lot of storytelling and you can explain what you're doing.  If you are, I don't know, one of the big chocolate companies, I don't want to even start naming  them here, then you need very consistent products that, you know, can be sourced from, ideally,  from a single partner such as us.  And the same for investors, I think, because if you're a state owner and one year you're  
**[0:33:05-0:33:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:33:05):**  great and you sell to this amazing bean to bar in Germany company and the next year it's  not great, that just doesn't work for institutional investors because you need the stability also  there.  That's exactly it.  So you have a lot of different factors.  
**[0:33:19-0:33:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:33:19):**  And maybe, you know, if you look at the prices in the fine flavor or aromatic cocoa world,  just to give you a reference.  So let's say the bulk traded cocoa, it trades at two and a half thousand dollars per ton  of cocoa.  The most sought after cocoa varieties, which may, we have a farm that only produces one  
**[0:33:42-0:33:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:33:42):**  ton maybe a year or so, or a small holder program, you know, that only produces one  ton of cocoa a year, that can sell up to 20, 30,000 dollars for that particular ton.  Wow.  There are people who pay that much and there are some people who pay more than that.  That's not the segment that we're focusing on.  
**[0:34:02-0:34:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:34:02):**  You know, that's like wine where you have these amazing bottles where there's only very  few of them and people pay a fortune for that.  What we're focusing on is this premium, very aromatic, very quality segment, but that can,  you know, where there's volume to actually turn that into a consistent production line  where you build long lasting partnerships with buyers who are looking exactly for that.  
**[0:34:31-0:34:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:34:31):**  They give you the quality specifications and the flavor profile that they're after.  And we have the team and the experts to implement that and to maintain it.  And that you cannot expect from, let's say, the small, very passionate farmer who's doing  an amazing job on his few hectares and he'll turn out an amazing product one year and the  next year, well, I don't know, something went wrong in this process.  
**[0:34:57-0:35:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:34:57):**  And so that's the idea with the better forest management is to slowly transition this farm,  but the other ones you've bought or at least for a long time towards this mass and quality.  Doesn't mean you're going to slowly replace the monoculture trees or the, let's say, the  bulk variety that's mainly done this farm so far, mainly has been on this farm so far.  Is that a gradual process that will take over the full landscape?  
**[0:35:20-0:35:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:35:20):**  Well, it's a gradual process, but also you can do a lot with what you have.  I mean, 80%, don't quote me on this, but let's say 80% of the actual flavor actually comes  out in the processing.  Wow.  So after what you were mentioning, some, they were used to be selling it wet and you're  
**[0:35:40-0:35:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:35:40):**  actually processing it on the farm in a consistent way.  So quality matters in the way how you ferment it, how you dry it, you know, how you take  care of it.  And then later how you, what you do with that, how you process it.  That really matters.  
**[0:35:55-0:36:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:35:55):**  So you start with good genetic material, yes, but then the quality kicks in basically.  It comes from the process as with many things.  And so you can still improve even with the, let's say, bulk cocoa quality, you can do  great things, you know, you can improve that.  And there are producers out there who pay for quality also in the bulk market.  
**[0:36:21-0:36:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:36:21):**  And that's what we're aiming for with this farm.  And in terms of monoculture, you mentioned obviously introducing other trees on the cocoa  side of things.  Are you planning to, or already did, introduce other, let's say other crops to make the system  also less drought prone, more complex, et cetera?  
**[0:36:38-0:36:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:36:38):**  Absolutely.  So we are, I mean, it's a process that is currently still undergoing.  So the first thing we did was massively prune everything back, work on the water installation.  And now we built up the nursery and we got all of this in there to, first of all, introduce  shade trees to the cocoa.  
**[0:36:57-0:37:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:36:57):**  So we're planting some gliricidia, which helps fixing nitrogen into the soil.  And we planted a plantain plot, basically, which is for use of the farm workers and their  families.  So we're not necessarily doing that for commercial reasons, that has more of a social aspect  to it.  
**[0:37:25-0:37:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:37:25):**  And the areas that died off, they'll be replanted with a cocoa cover tree model, but focusing  on, as I mentioned, the fine flavor or aromatic varieties which come from that area of Colombia.  For that farm, we're not going to introduce other crops, because it's already a mature  production system as such.  But when it is about time to rejuvenate and replace the trees, then we will completely  
**[0:37:57-0:38:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:37:57):**  revamp the entire production model.  But it's not at this age yet.  So we're trying to maintain it, improve it and work more on the social side of things  for this particular farm.  And these kind of projects, what's the, I wouldn't say life cycle, but what's the horizon  
**[0:38:18-0:38:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:38:18):**  you're thinking at?  Is it 10, 20 years?  How long do you plan to be owners of a plantation like that?  And thus, how many cycles can you do?  Or how long can you actually think and plan when it comes to, in this case, this farm,  
**[0:38:32-0:38:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:38:32):**  but let's say the farms in general?  Yeah, well, there's a bit of dispute around that.  But we can certainly say that a well-maintained cocoa plant can produce at high levels for  30 years, possibly longer, up to 50 years.  And if you rejuvenate it well and you maintain it well, then that could be much, much longer.  
**[0:39:02-0:39:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:39:02):**  But we'll probably replace it after 30 years.  Since February 2019, more than 40 people from all over the world have joined our Patreon  community.  If you're one of them, thank you for your support.  Without people like you, the stories of Regen Egg and Food could not be told.  
**[0:39:20-0:39:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:39:20):**  Discover the tiers and exclusive benefits of joining our Patreon community, like Q&A  webinars and a dedicated Slack channel and much more on patreon.com slash regenerative  agriculture, or in the link below.  And you as an investor, what's your horizon as a fund, as the asset manager?  Well, it depends what your objective is.  
**[0:39:38-0:39:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:39:38):**  So I mean, basically, once you've made planting cocoa is quite capital intensive, in particular,  if you do it like we do it with irrigation and a lot of sort of mechanization as well,  to focus on the quality, as I said, then that comes at a considerable cost.  So you could say that a hectare of cocoa development will cost you, let's say, $12,000 to $15,000.  Now, most of that investment happens upfront in the first two years or so.  
**[0:40:18-0:40:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:40:18):**  So once you've made that investment, then you have a productive system after three,  four years, the cocoa starts producing.  And then if you maintain it well, it will yield for, let's say, another 25 years or  so, at least.  So you can stay in there and that's going to be profitable and attractive.  
**[0:40:38-0:40:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:40:38):**  But there's also a market of buyers who are looking to invest in established, sustainable,  high yielding production systems.  And there aren't that many out there.  There are a few and some of them we bought and others we decided against.  But generally speaking, the cocoa market is still a very medieval kind of market dominated  
**[0:41:07-0:41:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:41:07):**  by small producers who are working on two, three hectares of land.  So you have six million small farmers and very few processors who actually buy the products.  So very unjust market.  But that's not the topic here.  That's for another podcast.  
**[0:41:26-0:41:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:41:26):**  For another podcast.  Yes.  I'm making a list of follow up ones.  Definitely let me know in the comments below.  Should we do another one on a deep dive into cocoa on the unjustness?  
**[0:41:35-0:41:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:41:35):**  I think it's extremely interesting.  But let's keep that for another time.  So what I wanted to talk about here more is more you could either seek an exit.  So typically you have either investors who like to develop new projects, you know, be  it in real estate, be it in agriculture, whatever.  
**[0:41:54-0:41:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:41:54):**  Or renewable energy, because it sounds very similar to where the market was, I think,  a number of years ago.  You build these projects, a solar farm, wind farm, etc.  You build them and hold them for a long time.  That could be your model.  
**[0:42:08-0:42:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:42:08):**  Or you build and sell once they're up and running and the big risk is done.  And you might sell them actually, too.  We come back to that the institutional investors either things that want assets that are yielding  over a long 25 year period.  Obviously ag is different than energy and but different in real estate as well.  
**[0:42:26-0:42:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:42:26):**  But it's very similar, I think, in terms of mechanics.  Well, I think the mechanics you're describing it very well.  I think the mechanics of investment are the same in all these real assets projects.  You know, you have someone who takes a developer risk and that person expects to be remunerated  for that risk basically to achieve a premium.  
**[0:42:49-0:42:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:42:49):**  And very few sort of develop from scratch and then I stay in there for 20, 30 years.  I think most, at least from an investor point of view, they do that.  They expect that premium and they seek an exit after a number of years.  And in our space, we identified sort of five to seven years as a good time to exit and  to maximize value basically once you have a fully productive system there.  
**[0:43:15-0:43:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:43:15):**  But then there are others who don't want that kind of profile.  They're more, let's say, annuity oriented.  So they're maybe not looking for the high returns or the very high returns that a development  premium would give you.  They're more looking for stable returns, dividend payout every year.  
**[0:43:38-0:43:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:43:38):**  And that is what a farm gives you.  If you have a stable farm that is well maintained using the best technology and monitoring out  there, having good processes, then you have a very stable production system.  Now, if you pair that with a good offtake agreement that gives you stability on the  price, then you have a fairly de-risked investment.  
**[0:44:03-0:44:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:44:03):**  So if you buy such a farm or invest in such a farm, then that gives you an annual return.  That is, well, it's obviously not the same.  I mean, we are still in agriculture and there's weather and things such as that.  But generally speaking, you have something that is relatively predictable.  And that is something that many investors are looking for.  
**[0:44:29-0:44:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:44:29):**  And that would be the typical market for the developer to basically sell a fully functioning,  well maintained and productive system to someone who is more interested in that second part  of the cash flow.  And the German pension fund, your large investor, with them, are you more on the develop and  sell or the develop and hold model?  
**[0:44:51-0:44:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:44:51):**  If you can share that.  We do both.  That's maybe not a very satisfactory answer, but it's fair enough.  It's a mix the risk and the return.  Basically.  
**[0:45:03-0:45:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:45:03):**  And what kind of return targets are you in generally focusing on?  Because I think it's something we talked in the pre-conversation.  Is that for a lot of people, it's difficult to imagine you can have, quote unquote, good  returns in a sustainable way or in a regenerative way, both in the social and obviously on the  environmental side of things.  
**[0:45:22-0:45:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:45:22):**  So just to have to return question out of the hand, because if I don't ask it, I'm sure  I'm going to get some comments.  What kind of returns in a well managed and we're going to get to the reforestation site  later.  Let's say on the well managed or good well managed forest, farm, agroforestry system.  
**[0:45:40-0:45:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:45:40):**  What kind of returns in the cocoa market, obviously, depending on weather, et cetera,  et cetera.  What kind of return should we think about or consider?  OK, sure.  Well, first of all, let me say the question of profit is not a dirty one.  
**[0:45:55-0:46:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:45:55):**  It's not something that people should be ashamed of when talking about sustainable land use.  I think part of sustainability is also that you have a viable business that generates  a profit that can pay good salaries for its workers and that doesn't rely on on grounds  or such on donors, basically, because that will not change the world.  You know, you need profitable farming if you want to convince trillions of assets to be  
**[0:46:27-0:46:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:46:27):**  moved into the space.  And that is the objective, I guess, because agriculture needs to change and it doesn't  only need to change in small cocoa farms, it needs to change on the massive scale and  everywhere.  And so we believe that we need to demonstrate that sustainable farming practices are profitable.  
**[0:46:51-0:46:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:46:51):**  And so the investor answer or the right answer to your question would be, it's always a question  of return and risk.  So you have to you have to look at that not in isolation.  So a typical return and that obviously depends on the crop.  So we don't only produce cocoa.  
**[0:47:12-0:47:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:47:12):**  We also, for example, have one of the largest coconut plantations in the world now, which  we're currently rehabilitating.  So there are a lot of different markets that we are in and so there's also different different  properties.  And so let's say if you develop a new system, you can expect a return, which is largely  
**[0:47:37-0:47:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:47:37):**  exit driven because the first years you don't have production yet.  You can have a return of, let's say, 12 to 20 percent.  It could even be more.  So that's really the build, build from scratch and exit.  When you hold it, when you buy it, let's say I'm the buyer of that exit and I'm on the  
**[0:47:57-0:48:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:47:57):**  other side and then you hold it for, let's say, 25 years.  So if you hold it, then in that space, you probably have a net investor return of six,  eight, up to 10 percent.  It depends how you produce, where you produce, what you produce.  But sounds very similar to the renewable energy space a few years ago.  
**[0:48:16-0:48:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:48:16):**  I think now it's depending on where you are, as this as well, on your crop, your sunshine  and wind.  But it sounds very similar to those type of returns.  Very interesting.  No, it is.  
**[0:48:27-0:48:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:48:27):**  I think it is quite comparable, to be honest.  And the risks may be different and the market is obviously different because in the renewable  space, at least you got, you know, well, first of all, you got subsidies, which you don't  really have here that much, at least not in the countries where we are active.  But they're risky as well.  
**[0:48:44-0:48:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:48:44):**  They can change overnight, as many renewable energy investors in Spain found out where  they retrospectively changed.  But there are still lawsuits being filed over that.  So it's I mean, I think the weather risk and the subsidy risk maybe are quite comparable.  Yeah, no, that's true.  
**[0:48:58-0:49:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:48:58):**  OK, so but that gives you an indication of how this looks like.  So the good thing is obviously if you have annual dividend distributions of five, six,  seven percent and you are a pension fund or an insurer or an asset manager with certain  return objectives, then this may be just the thing for you to buy yourself into an established  or converted farm portfolio.  
**[0:49:25-0:49:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:49:25):**  And you have massive non-financial returns.  I think the impact returns and I mean, the amount of carbon being stored, the amount  of work you provide or projects like this provide and obviously the amount of food.  And you can discuss if cocoa, just like wine, that's an absolute necessity in terms of food.  But it's another I think coconut oil already becomes a different product there.  
**[0:49:45-0:49:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:49:45):**  But it's something we consume in large, large quantities and most of it is produced in a  very extractive way.  So replacing that with this providing a huge change on the non-financial return side.  No, no, I fully agree.  I mean, first of all, all our product, all our projects are, let's say, net carbon positive,  
**[0:50:06-0:50:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:50:06):**  which is not a given in agriculture, of course.  Secondly, you made the point that, yes, obviously, fine flavor chocolate is a luxury product.  It's not a staple food.  We're aware of that.  But that's the great thing about agroforest.  
**[0:50:27-0:50:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:50:27):**  If you combine different components, and we do that in other projects than the one I described,  then you can do both.  You can produce staple foods for the local market, be it plantain, be it peas, be it  corn.  And you can combine that with luxury products that pay a premium and generate a higher income,  
**[0:50:56-0:51:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:50:56):**  be it coffee, be it cocoa, be it rubber, trees.  What else do we produce?  We produce carchole, coconut oil, many other things, you know, and it's that combination  that makes it so attractive because you can actually produce more and maybe also more  meaningful with less on the same piece of land.  
**[0:51:19-0:51:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:51:19):**  That's the core of agriculture that has to change.  And I think also in the mind of people, it is possible to layer, it is possible to produce  a lot more.  And the current, let's say, production numbers and yields we see in any crop are by definition  not the ultimate.  
**[0:51:34-0:51:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:51:34):**  There's a lot more beyond that.  And we see now examples in many, many different crops where people in a regenerative way,  or at least a sustainable way, getting a lot more yield of different crops, have a more  complex system of the same piece of land.  And I think that's something that's very, as long as we don't see that, that at least  
**[0:51:51-0:51:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:51:51):**  there's the opportunity or the possibility of that, it's very difficult to sell, between  brackets, sustainable agriculture, regenerative agriculture to investors, because if they  don't believe that it's possible to go beyond monoculture cornfield, which they think is  the most productive thing ever, then it's very difficult to get in between their ears  that there's something beyond that, or there are many opportunities beyond.  
**[0:52:12-0:52:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:52:12):**  But this is a great bridge to the reforestation example you were mentioning before.  Can you paint a picture of what happens if you really start from scratch?  Yeah, okay.  So I'll give you another example.  I mean, we also have projects that focus on pure forestry, you know, where it's not about  
**[0:52:30-0:52:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:52:30):**  producing a crop or anything like that.  But I wanted to give you another example, which I think is a real showcase for how to  bring degraded areas back into production and make them meaningful again.  So this is a project, Hacienda Ambrosia, which is in the Dominican Republic, in the north  of the Dominican Republic.  
**[0:52:50-0:52:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:52:50):**  I just came back from there.  And what this is, is basically a degraded coconut plantation.  So someone assembled 30 years ago and planted and combined coconut production, and it wasn't  a fashionable product at the time.  So nowadays, coconut oil, everyone knows it has got health benefits, and it's turned into  
**[0:53:19-0:53:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:53:19):**  a superfood.  At the time, that was just a cheap source of fat, basically.  So that farm was developed.  The market didn't turn out to be very attractive, and the owners more or less let it degrade  because it wasn't worth continuing to produce.  
**[0:53:40-0:53:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:53:40):**  So that coconut plantation was forgotten, and we found it when we were land scouting  in the Dominican Republic.  What do you mean, forgotten?  Like people just forgot about that it existed?  Well, the market wasn't attractive, so it wasn't worth farming it in a sort of intensive  
**[0:54:01-0:54:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:54:01):**  way.  And it didn't make sense to change it to another product?  Yeah, it didn't make sense to change it.  It's quite remote in that sense.  So road access wasn't good at the time.  
**[0:54:11-0:54:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:54:11):**  It's improved since.  But it wasn't easy to get to that.  And so they had other investments that they were looking at that were more promising,  and they didn't forget about it, but they didn't do anything with it, basically.  So it overgrew.  
**[0:54:26-0:54:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:54:26):**  It's situated beautifully at the end of a valley nestled into the hills adjacent to  a research reserve.  There's a lot of water coming down the hills, basically.  So you have to imagine this beautiful forest area with coconut palms and with 12 riverlets,  12 streams crossing the farm, water rushing down.  
**[0:54:53-0:54:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:54:53):**  It's raining a lot there.  So it's beautifully situated, but it's remote.  There aren't many people there.  And it just wasn't worth developing it from their point of view, I think.  So we were looking for an interesting area to be used for developing a cacao plantation,  
**[0:55:16-0:55:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:55:16):**  cocoa plantation.  And we talked a lot about that already.  So let me talk about something differently, maybe a little bit.  But that was the objective.  And we were told that this exists.  
**[0:55:29-0:55:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:55:29):**  We looked at it, and we looked at the palms, and they were not really producing anymore.  And we thought, OK, well, what are we going to do?  So we brought in some coconut experts, because we weren't.  And it was interesting, because they said, well, listen, despite these palms being 30  years old, they have the potential to be brought back into production.  
**[0:55:53-0:55:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:55:53):**  You need to get rid of some pests.  You need to get rid of some diseases.  So generally speaking, they are in good shape.  But they've never been fertilized.  They've never been really treated for anything.  
**[0:56:12-0:56:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:56:12):**  And that's what we started doing.  And so we are actually bringing something that stopped producing back into full production.  And they will not last forever.  We need to replace the palms gradually with new palms, different varieties also, to an  extent.  
**[0:56:33-0:56:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:56:33):**  And we'll plant an extensive cocoa system underneath.  Maybe I say cacao here, because cocoa and cacao is very confusing sometimes.  So this will be the largest, I can say that already, the largest cacao and coconut production  system in the world.  It is already organic certified.  
**[0:56:54-0:56:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:56:54):**  That was easy to prove that nothing happened.  For the last 30 years, yeah.  For the last 30 years there, that was very easy to prove.  So that already happened.  And we started developing this project this year.  
**[0:57:06-0:57:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:57:06):**  It's a massive effort, clearing the whole undergrowth, treating the palms.  We already employed 190 people, which is a massive thing for that remote area.  So people are coming there to work there from quite a distance.  The second phase then we'll see, which is starting now, see the development of the cacao  system underneath the palms.  
**[0:57:35-0:57:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:57:35):**  It's not only that.  We introduced apiculture.  So we're going to have 60 million bees on this farm.  It's huge.  It's more than 2,000 hectares.  
**[0:57:45-0:57:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:57:45):**  Half of it is forest.  And then the third phase will be the processing.  So we'll focus on producing coconut oil, virgin coconut oil, which is a very attractive product,  coconut sugar, coconut water, of course, then the cacao itself producing honey.  And we'll do that with the partners that we found and who are already doing that to an  
**[0:58:11-0:58:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:58:11):**  extent in the Dominican Republic.  We do that exclusively with single mothers.  So that is a key social objective to provide work opportunity for single mothers who do  not have any support system in the Dominican Republic.  There's very little chance for them to enter the formal work market or employment market,  
**[0:58:35-0:58:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:58:35):**  and particularly in this sort of remote rural area where there isn't much.  And so that will be a real game changer.  And the partners that we're working with, they've already done this in the past, the  small scale.  And together we're basically developing this.  
**[0:58:53-0:58:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:58:53):**  So it's a whole value chain with so many facets, which are great.  So it's an amazing project.  And as I said, we have 12 projects, and each of them has a unique angle and something really  special about it.  Be it a different product, be it in a country like, I don't know, like Guatemala, which  
**[0:59:15-0:59:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:59:15):**  is very different in terms of culture than some of the other countries that we're working  in.  So that's what makes it so interesting.  And maybe just let me say three words on that portfolio part, just because I touched upon  it.  
**[0:59:34-0:59:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=0:59:34):**  There's real value in having a portfolio of different but similar types of projects.  So we're working a lot on creating a farm manager exchange, real partnership where people  openly discuss problems that they face in the farm, and to learn from each other.  So we're in that sense, our main objective is also to be a platform, and in this case,  a knowledge exchange platform, where we enable dialogue between, let's say, a farm manager  
**[1:00:08-1:00:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:00:08):**  in Colombia, let's say the project Macancala I talked about, Adriana, to talk to the farm  managers in the Dominican Republic, Daniel and Mario, and to exchange issues that they  face, problems that they encounter.  And to visit and see.  To visit, to learn also.  
**[1:00:30-1:00:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:00:30):**  Obviously, these people have all done something different with other companies before, so  they bring expertise, which may be useful to other farms that have a specific problem  or something.  So that is a very valuable component in a portfolio, apart from the obvious diversification  and risk management aspects that a portfolio brings.  
**[1:00:54-1:00:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:00:54):**  And where are you going next?  Obviously, you're going to do a lot more in cacao, coffee, coconut.  What are, from a portfolio perspective, but also from a company perspective, what are  other crops within large agroforestry systems that you would like to, or are already working  on to expand that portfolio and basically invest more of that committed money that obviously  
**[1:01:17-1:01:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:01:17):**  needs to be put to work?  Yes.  No pressure.  And to find new money, of course, as well.  Okay, a couple of questions.  
**[1:01:27-1:01:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:01:27):**  But okay, so first, with the established projects, we are entering a new phase now.  As I said, we have invested in seven countries in 12 projects.  And now our objective is twofold.  One is to expand, to create economies of scale.  We have set up management teams, companies and so on, and we want to leverage that, optimize  
**[1:01:53-1:01:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:01:53):**  that.  But the second aspect is to introduce the smallholder and also reforestation work that  maybe has not so much of a profit objective, and which is very much part of our value proposition.  So what we develop are typically what we call nucleus plasma models.  So we build large nucleus farms, but then we surround them with smallholder activity  
**[1:02:25-1:02:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:02:25):**  and technical assistance programs that allow the surrounding communities to benefit from  what the farm is doing, providing planting material, knowledge, technology, access to  capital, but also access to world markets.  So we buy the product at good prices from them.  And that is the objective at each farm.  
**[1:02:52-1:02:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:02:52):**  But phase one was to find and build these farms.  Phase two is to surround them, basically.  And then the long term work of working on biodiversity, working on changing the social  mesh in the rural landscape, that is something obviously that doesn't change overnight.  It's something that we need to work on for decades.  
**[1:03:17-1:03:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:03:17):**  When it comes to new crops, we already started looking beyond tropical agriculture, if you  want so.  So what I talked about so far was mostly tropical crops, such as cacao, coffee, rubber, and  bananas, plantains, all the good things that we produce.  Now, I also just came back from Morocco, where we're starting a new project in the desert  
**[1:03:50-1:03:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:03:50):**  almost, which is going to develop, which is going to produce dates.  So it's a date palm system.  And there obviously we have very different challenges.  It's very much about efficiency of water usage, as we are in a very arid environment there.  And it's basically the first stepping stone into developing a portfolio in the dry fruits  
**[1:04:20-1:04:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:04:20):**  and nuts area, which we think is very promising.  So the dates that we are going to produce, it's a very profitable market, actually.  It's a very interesting product.  We're going to be the only organic dates producer in Morocco at this scale.  And we're planning to diversify that also into other dry fruits and nut production,  
**[1:04:52-1:04:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:04:52):**  basically, be it almonds, be it pistachios.  There's a lot of interesting models out there.  And that is something that we're very actively pursuing at the moment.  And then obviously, we want to do more.  We see a lot of potential in what I always call the climate action dialogues.  
**[1:05:12-1:05:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:05:12):**  I think that the Paris Accord has really enabled a dialogue with large corporates.  We see a lot of large corporates who are signing up to or committing to climate action.  But I'm convinced they don't really know yet what that means, other than obviously, changing  the whole supply chain, the way they do business.  And we see a lot of demand for high conservation value projects, for carbon forestry.  
**[1:05:49-1:05:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:05:49):**  A lot of companies, as you know, the carbon markets have seen a renaissance.  Many companies seek to compensate their carbon emissions.  So in that space, we have something to offer.  And that is something that we're currently developing.  And on the other side, you see a lot of, well, I mentioned the confectionery makers, but  
**[1:06:19-1:06:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:06:19):**  also other groups, corporate groups who are seeking to secure, directly secure their supply  chain.  And we're working on partnerships, direct partnerships to create new sustainable production  together with these corporates.  So they are willing not only to buy product, but to do more than that, to become invested  
**[1:06:44-1:06:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:06:44):**  in a partner.  And that is something we see more and more and that we want to develop.  And then of course, beyond that, to find more institutional investors to fund these kinds  of projects and to co-invest with those partners that we bring together.  So it's quite an ambitious agenda, but it's obviously also a lot of fun.  
**[1:07:05-1:07:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:07:05):**  And that's what we're currently working on.  And definitely very necessary.  I think that I normally always ask, or in the last number of episodes, ask a question,  what would you do if you're in charge of a big portfolio?  Why ask the question?  
**[1:07:18-1:07:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:07:18):**  Because I think the sector needs to be getting ready to deal with larger numbers and more  zeros and be ready for large investors to be active in the space that, like you said,  want to put 50 million or a hundred million or 200 million to work.  But in this case, I think you are managing a large portfolio and obviously not as large  as you want to, but you have the experience of dealing with larger numbers.  
**[1:07:41-1:07:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:07:41):**  So I don't think that question is too relevant.  But I would like to ask if you could change one thing in the agriculture and food sector,  including the forestry, including the say land use overnight.  If you could wave a magic wand and tomorrow morning we wake up and all of us change one  thing, what would that be?  
**[1:07:58-1:08:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:07:58):**  Well, that is a very good question.  So I think the other question would have been easier.  Apart from that, everybody should eat quality chocolate, obviously, but it's an easy thing.  Yeah, that's something.  No, I mean, we really believe in trees.  
**[1:08:14-1:08:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:08:14):**  That's why we put it in the name of our company, Want2Tree.  And that's not just a fad, but there's a true belief that there is real value in agroforests  and in combining, let's say generally speaking, intercropping and combining permanent tree  cultures with annual crops.  And I would really wish, because I think that is the solution to many problems, be it creating  
**[1:08:44-1:08:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:08:44):**  systems that are more climate resilient, creating systems that have more soil health and thus  more sustainable, and to create systems that can produce different things more efficiently  on the same piece of land.  So I think trees are the answer to many of these points.  And I would wish that every hectare of agricultural production would somehow be optimised in that  
**[1:09:16-1:09:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:09:16):**  regard, because there's a lot of pressure on forests.  Everyone knows that deforestation is continuing.  And a large driver of that is agriculture, be it the small farmers who don't know any  better, or be it the large cattle ranchers who should know better.  And that is a massive driver of deforestation, unless we don't find ways to stop that.  
**[1:09:43-1:09:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:09:43):**  And I think agroforestry systems, I mean, they obviously cannot replace a primary forest  that grew over hundreds of years.  But they can take over some of the much needed function that these systems have.  And so that's what I would wish that really the concept of agroforestry would be embraced  worldwide by all sectors that are active in agriculture, because I think it can.  
**[1:10:10-1:10:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:10:10):**  It can even be part of the corn production that you mentioned.  Why not?  And where should investors go to learn more about this in the sense like what books to  read, what websites to visit, what places to visit for investors that are listening  and thinking, yeah, of course, I'm focusing on soil, but I haven't really dove deeper  
**[1:10:30-1:10:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:10:30):**  into trees and their function and their role within ecosystems and thus also agriculture.  What would be a good place to start?  Well, the best website is obviously our own, which is...  Which I will link below, yeah.  One, two, three, but no, jokes aside.  
**[1:10:46-1:10:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:10:46):**  Well, I think an excellent source of anything to do with agroforestry is the website of  the World Agroforestry Center, which provides on their website so many examples and acting  globally what can be done in this space.  And for me, it's an inspiration, all the projects that they're doing and all the research and  work that they're providing.  
**[1:11:12-1:11:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:11:12):**  So that's something.  And generally speaking, and I do see, to be honest, if you talk about large institutional  investors, they know where to go.  They come to, let's say, the big conferences in the impact investment space, they go to  the GIN conferences, Global Impact Investment Network.  
**[1:11:39-1:11:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:11:39):**  And it's interesting to see.  I mean, if you went to these conferences five years ago, it was basically dominated by,  let's say, high conviction impact managers, owners of projects who are doing amazing things  out there, and then private individuals who would fund that, foundations or NGOs.  What you see now is a completely dialogue.  
**[1:12:11-1:12:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:12:11):**  First of all, you see these events now have thousands of participants, and I wouldn't  say dominated, but there's been a massive influx of large banks, pension funds, sustainable  investment funds, obviously, all of them managing billions and trillions of assets who are going  there to learn, to share, and that is currently happening.  So I see that scale is coming into the impact investment space.  
**[1:12:48-1:12:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:12:48):**  It's much needed.  And what is needed to translate that into real dollars and euros on the ground?  What's holding them back so far?  Because they've been visiting for a number of years, and they made big statements in  some pension funds cases.  
**[1:13:01-1:13:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:13:01):**  But then if you really, I mean, the really translation into concrete investments, obviously,  you've one pension fund on board, but you've probably had discussions with 50, 100.  What is needed over the next year is to really unlock that institutional capital?  Yes.  Well, I mean, first of all, I would say, I got the statistics in front of me on that  
**[1:13:22-1:13:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:13:22):**  particular topic, that growth is happening.  So I mean, if you look at what is considered assets under sustainable investment, then  as per end of 2018, we're talking about some 31 billion dollars invested in that space.  Sorry, trillion, 31 trillion.  Now that is a lot of screening and such going on.  
**[1:13:46-1:13:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:13:46):**  So that's not necessarily what we are about.  But you also see a tremendous growth rate in the topic of impact and sustainably themed  investing.  So it is happening, but it's not happening at the scale that you may want.  But is a question also if that industry is ready to do that.  
**[1:14:06-1:14:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:14:06):**  So to scale up, as I said, you need to have those or provide those opportunities to actually  deploy a 50 million dollar ticket.  And ideally, not only one, because obviously, these kind of investors don't like to be 100%  owner.  More than 20% of the fund.  
**[1:14:26-1:14:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:14:26):**  So you need to create opportunities that are 300, 500 million dollars in size, and that  are diversified and so on.  So let's say create large portfolios doesn't necessarily have to be a fund.  That's one thing.  The other is transparency.  
**[1:14:45-1:14:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:14:45):**  And you need to be able to measure impact.  So and that is a complicated thing.  It's not yet fully standardized.  I mean, there's a lot of good tools out there.  But what happens more and more is that investors are asking, OK, I know this has a good positive  
**[1:15:03-1:15:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:15:03):**  impact, but how good is it?  How good is your project in comparison to this other project?  So you need to be able to make it comparable.  And so it's all about standardization, about reporting, which are tools that may sound  boring to some, but they are important to create.  
**[1:15:23-1:15:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:15:23):**  Definitely not the most sexy thing.  But that's why we're recording this.  That's because we need that to build the infrastructure, to build the pipes.  You need certain standards because those institutional investors, they need to report, they need  to explain and justify what they're doing.  
**[1:15:38-1:15:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:15:38):**  And that means they need to be able to demonstrate the impact, which is becoming more and more  important to them as a reporting grid as well, to be able to demonstrate that in a tangible  and trusted way, basically, so that it becomes comparable.  So that is one aspect.  It's, as you say, is maybe not the most sexy aspect for someone who's developing in the  
**[1:16:03-1:16:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:16:03):**  field project, but it's something that is important.  And you do see that just to give you one example, SDG investing.  They are always saying the sustainable development goals of the United Nations, the way they  designed them and present them, it's genius.  And it's catchy.  
**[1:16:26-1:16:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:16:26):**  It's simplifying.  I'm not saying there's no greenwashing happening with that, but people can relate to those  different objectives.  And there's a lot of association of activities, investment activities, with various SDG objectives  happening.  
**[1:16:45-1:16:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:16:45):**  And that makes it very clear and simple, a simple message to relay.  This project supports these kind of objectives, be it hunger, be it education, be it climate  action, it can be very different kind of things.  And that's a way where standardization works in transporting the message.  No, I think it makes a lot of sense.  
**[1:17:07-1:17:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:17:07):**  It made it a very simplified to do list, but actually underneath some very detailed objectives,  which many people, I definitely would urge anybody to dive into it.  It's not an investment list, but it's definitely, it's a very concrete to do list we have with  very concrete targets on almost everything.  Of course, a few things are missing and there's a lot of discussion about that, but it's a  
**[1:17:30-1:17:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:17:30):**  great start for a simplified language and also visual language because everybody knows  the 17 tiles basically.  You see them popping up on every investment presentation and deck, et cetera, which means  it's sort of working.  And obviously ask your questions, dive deeper.  
**[1:17:45-1:17:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:17:45):**  That's what I meant with greenwashing.  Of course, I mean, it's dive deeper and ask your questions because most of it is noise,  but there are interesting people developing very interesting things.  And to end with a final question, I used a lot, we used a lot of time, but I think it  was extremely interesting, but I want to end with the reforestation because we touched  
**[1:18:04-1:18:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:18:04):**  upon it with the coconut part.  But if you would have a blank slate, can you paint a picture of how an ideal agroforestry  system for you would look like?  Could be theoretical, could be based on a current project you have invested in, bought,  et cetera.  
**[1:18:20-1:18:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:18:20):**  How would an ideal agroforestry system for an investor just to imagine if they close  their eyes and they're listening to this audio, how would that look like?  Well, that's not an easy question.  I mean, obviously I could say this particular project that we're currently developing is  the ideal project, but maybe I start with the ideal objectives that it would fulfill  
**[1:18:39-1:18:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:18:39):**  from my point of view, and then we see how that could be done and I'll try to keep it  short.  So for me, it's not only about the production system that you install.  And yes, that needs to be more biodiverse and it needs to create healthy soil whilst  you're producing and basically maintaining it.  
**[1:19:00-1:19:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:19:00):**  And there's a lot of good research out there how to do that and how to combine different  crops to have a sort of stable system that can be maintained in a healthy way with as  little inputs, additional inputs as possible.  And by the way, I'm not an expert on that.  So I'm sure there's many people out there who know an awful lot more than me about this.  
**[1:19:23-1:19:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:19:23):**  I'm more concerned about the additional objectives that this creates, how to integrate these  projects into a landscape, into a community, into societal makeup and the positive impacts  that this can have.  So on the one hand, you have a producing agricultural system or a forestry project, it doesn't matter  in that regard.  
**[1:19:48-1:19:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:19:48):**  But think about all the good things that you can achieve with it in terms of formal employment  on the farm, which creates a lot of opportunity.  Then also when it comes to education and so on for future generations, it keeps people  where they are so they don't have to migrate to urban centers and then ultimately end up  at the borders of Europe or the US.  
**[1:20:11-1:20:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:20:11):**  And all this sort of migration pressure ultimately stems from the lack of opportunity in rural  areas in poor countries.  Deforestation, you can actively fight there by introducing trees into your system and  then beyond that supporting the maintenance and reinvigoration of biodiversity in the  surrounding forests and habitats that you have there.  
**[1:20:39-1:20:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:20:39):**  And of course, social work in the communities themselves and to really strengthen that and  of course locally, sell locally, so don't only sort of buy machinery from Europe, produce  there and then export back to Europe, but actually try to become part of the local regional  value chain so that you create beyond the farm, you're creating jobs in supply chains  and restaurants, etc.  
**[1:21:09-1:21:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:21:09):**  So that's all the things that can happen if you are designing a project in a good way,  that it interacts with its environment basically.  And it's just, as I always say, it's not just an alien spaceship that landed somewhere,  it does precision agriculture and then after a while disappears again and it takes off  again.  
**[1:21:30-1:21:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:21:30):**  So that is super important.  How the system itself looks?  Well, obviously there is a trade-off.  The trade-off lies between efficient production and producing as many different things on  the same piece of land as possible.  
**[1:21:45-1:21:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:21:45):**  So if people think about agroforestry, they may think of like a farmer garden, you know,  with like lots of great things and flowers and I don't know.  That's not how we can produce, you know, I mean, that's not how I can run a large, several  thousand hectares large production system.  It needs to be efficient.  
**[1:22:05-1:22:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:22:05):**  Design needs to use mechanization machinery to an extent, obviously as low impact as possible.  And a lot of design needs to go into that and a lot of additional research.  So for me, the ideal system is one that actually achieves that.  On the one hand, I have what I would say is sufficient biodiversity in the production  system that allows, you know, insects and birds and all sorts of wildlife to actually  
**[1:22:43-1:22:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:22:43):**  also find a habitat in the farm, you know, and use the farm as a stepping stone between  forest areas, say, to have a healthy soil that is well maintained and taken care of  by an experienced farm management team, because, you know, the healthy soil is something that  you don't really see, it's not as easy as showing, hey, we got jaguars on our farm,  you know, that's nice.  
**[1:23:11-1:23:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:23:11):**  But that jaguar actually doesn't contribute that much, it's more an indicator of a healthy  system.  Whereas the healthy soil, you know, it also has a real benefit to your production system,  it stops diseases from spreading, and obviously maintains the production system for decades  to come.  
**[1:23:28-1:23:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:23:28):**  And so I cannot give you a specific, this is how the perfect system should look like.  But those are the kind of topics that it needs to solve and address.  And then it is a perfect system in my view.  I think it's a really good answer, because the perfect system doesn't exist.  So, as you describe it, it really comes to mind holistic decision making, the framework  
**[1:23:48-1:23:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:23:48):**  that holistic management uses, in many cases in grazing and livestock, but it's really,  it's place based.  So the perfect system exists in one place, because and even they are perfect, doesn't  mean anything because as you mentioned, there's still so much research needed and to see where  these systems could go.  
**[1:24:04-1:24:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:24:04):**  I just released an interview on Syntropic Agroforestry.  And there's these people experimenting, in some cases for many years, but experimenting  of where agroforestry could go.  And obviously, they're also the big question is of how complex can it be while it's still  manageable and what kind of mechanization tools we actually need.  
**[1:24:22-1:24:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:24:22):**  And so we're just scratching, pun intended, the surface of what is possible with land  use and agriculture and also in sea, obviously.  And I think that's what makes it so exciting.  So I want to thank you so much for taking the time.  We took a lot of time, but I think there was a lot to discuss.  
**[1:24:36-1:24:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:24:36):**  And as we're taking a list there are so many other podcasts to dive deeper into this, but  I will be, we'll keep that for another time.  Thank you so much, Oliver, for taking the time this Friday morning.  And I'm very much looking forward to keep checking in with you and how 123 is doing.  Well, thank you very much.  
**[1:24:54-1:24:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:24:54):**  Thank you for giving me this opportunity.  And I hope you do a good editing job to bring this down from two hours.  We don't do a lot of editing, so it's going to be a full release.  But I think we're going to do a summary as well, which is going to be a challenge to  cut because it's always difficult to cut it down to 10 minutes or 15 minutes.  
**[1:25:11-1:25:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:25:11):**  It was a real pleasure.  Thank you.  Thank you so much.  If you found the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  
**[1:25:20-1:25:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:25:20):**  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few  seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  
**[1:25:37-1:25:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:25:37):**  join my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on Patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or in the description  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  
**[1:26:06-1:26:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:26:06):**  Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After a hundred interviews and more than a hundred hours of audio asking the question  how to put money to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011  
**[1:26:24-1:26:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:26:24):**  and recording this podcast since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  
**[1:26:39-1:26:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:26:39):**  What questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  
**[1:26:46-1:26:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:26:46):**  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  You, the soil builders and investors in the space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  
**[1:27:02-1:27:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:27:02):**  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management consultants, etc.  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  
**[1:27:22-1:27:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:27:22):**  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  that among the listeners of this podcast we have people with very different means.  
**[1:27:36-1:27:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:27:36):**  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  
**[1:27:53-1:27:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:27:53):**  so you don't have to ride along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  if you're a soil builder.  
**[1:28:11-1:28:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:28:11):**  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  
**[1:28:28-1:28:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:28:28):**  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  
**[1:28:45-1:29:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/20/oliver-hanke/#t=1:28:45):**  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  