### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2020-00-05)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  Dear listeners, you might remember that in July last year we interviewed Angela Karp  of Rothamsted Research, one of the oldest agricultural research institutes in the world,  
**[0:00:23-0:00:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:00:23):**  which I was very lucky to visit last June and have an absolutely amazing soil sample  collection.  Their Shake Climate Change program, aiming at making agriculture part of the solution,  is back for the second cohort.  The deadline is May 15, so does your agtech business tackle climate change?  
**[0:00:39-0:00:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:00:39):**  Or do you know someone?  The Shake Climate Change program is again looking for early-stage ventures targeting  the carbon footprint of agriculture or food production.  Up to 140,000 pounds sterling in startup funds and three years of mentoring are available.  All details are in the links below or in shakeclimate.org.  
**[0:00:57-0:01:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:00:57):**  I repeat, shakeclimate.org.  In this interview we discuss how to pay farmers for the carbon they remove when going regenerative.  We discuss the issues with carbon offsets and why carbon removal credits are the future.  And why regenerative agriculture is by far the most interesting place to start carbon  removal and storage now, but it isn't enough.  
**[0:01:21-0:01:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:01:21):**  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture, Investing as if  the Planet Mattered.  A podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  
**[0:01:41-0:01:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:01:41):**  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  
**[0:01:58-0:02:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:01:58):**  In March last year we launched our membership community to make it easy for fans to support  our work and so many of you have joined as a member.  We've launched different types of benefits, exclusive content, Q&A webinars with former  guests, ask me anything sessions plus so much more to come in the future.  For more information on the different tiers, benefits and how to become a member, check  
**[0:02:18-0:02:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:02:18):**  gumroad.com slash investing region egg or find the link below.  Thank you.  This is an update with Shamik of Farmazon who we interviewed two years ago.  So much has happened but their mission is still the same, providing high quality organic  produce from zero budget natural farms to people living in the larger Indian cities.  
**[0:02:37-0:02:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:02:37):**  Join me in this episode where we discuss the status of zero budget natural farming in India,  the issues and opportunities of organic and the appetite of investors for this type of  farming.  So welcome to this update.  Welcome Shamik back on the show after two years actually because when we recorded our  
**[0:02:55-0:02:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:02:55):**  first interview it was November 2017.  So I'm super interested to hear what has happened at Farmazon, what has happened in the region  egg space in India and what has happened in general with you.  Right.  So great to hear from you, Koen and happy to be back here.  
**[0:03:12-0:03:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:03:12):**  So yeah, it's been quite a bit of time but it's also passed by very fast for us.  So I think in November when we had spoken we had just like launched our second farm  or something like that if I remember correctly.  And then we went ahead and launched several partner farms just to refresh the model that  we had started with would let consumers to contract farming.  
**[0:03:36-0:03:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:03:36):**  A group of consumers could basically have a farmer grow all of their food for them.  And we used to divide each farm into small mini farms and each mini farm would be allocated  to a particular person.  That's how it used to operate.  So we went ahead and launched several mini farms.  
**[0:03:55-0:04:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:03:55):**  We also launched in outside Bangalore as well because one of the concerns that we always  had was is this something which is very specific to the agro climatic zone in Bangalore.  And Bangalore has a very moderate sort of a climate compared to a lot of parts of India  which lets us grow stuff pretty much all throughout the year, lots of variety.  So we were worried how is this going to work out in more harsher climate for example with  
**[0:04:20-0:04:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:04:20):**  the water work.  So we really wanted to try North India because North India does have much harsher climate  in certain areas in places like Delhi for example.  But that would have been quite far right.  We wanted to do it in an area which has a different climate but which was still nearby.  
**[0:04:36-0:04:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:04:36):**  So we chose Hyderabad to do that.  So we have some farms running in Hyderabad as well now.  I think we have about 25 or farms now running across Bangalore and Hyderabad.  So we learned a bunch of different things.  So I think one of the things that we learned was that this sort of a model can work in  
**[0:04:55-0:05:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:04:55):**  other sort of geographies as well because what happens is that even in places which  has slightly harsher weather or where the varieties that could grow are smaller in number,  agriculture has still kind of taken care that there is enough nutrition in stuff that grows  seasonally and locally there.  Yeah of course somebody who's in Bangalore might have access to more variety right.  
**[0:05:20-0:05:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:05:20):**  But somebody in Hyderabad still has a lot of different vegetables that they could get  which grow in that particular area, that particular season and so on and so forth.  So the model works across multiple geographies.  That's something that we learned right.  However, having said that, I think we also, so that was a good part of it.  
**[0:05:37-0:05:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:05:37):**  The second thing that we realized was that we kind of, we have now made it a very standardized  playbook.  So once we identify a partner by basically visiting his farm, seeing the location, how  near and accessible is it from the city, it takes a very little time to actually get started.  Having said that, I think I just mentioned that being near to the city is important and  
**[0:06:03-0:06:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:06:03):**  this is something that we saw happen as well that the nearer it is to the city, the more  interest from consumers.  So that's something to keep in mind.  Now I think the third thing that we have learned is that, so we made some changes to the model  also right.  
**[0:06:22-0:06:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:06:22):**  So there are two or three different flavors which are available right now.  So one of the changes that we did to the model was we said, okay, what if, so right now in  our original model, every consumer gets a 600 feet mini farm where they do all of their  stuff.  What if instead of that, we let the farmer manage everything right?  
**[0:06:47-0:06:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:06:47):**  Because we saw that a lot of consumers as part of the learning process in farming were  making mistakes in terms of what they should be growing, how they should be planning right.  So although we build some stuff into the app to help with that planning etc.  Yeah, the gamification we discussed.  Yeah, so consumers would make mistakes like, for example, the system would recommend, hey,  
**[0:07:08-0:07:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:07:08):**  do crop rotation, don't put that same crop in.  And you would see consumers still go ahead and put another crop of the same family in  right and some of those sort of things.  So what we said was, let's do a method where, let's try out in at least one farm, let's  try out a model where the farmer does everything for you right and you basically have a common  
**[0:07:30-0:07:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:07:30):**  pool completely right.  So the entire farm still supplies people but the way it works is that consumers kind of  vote with their preferences.  So consumers say that I like these veggies, I hate these veggies right.  So they basically put a love list and a hate list okay.  
**[0:07:49-0:07:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:07:49):**  And the farmer basically in his app, he sees all of these different votes from people on  an ongoing basis and he uses that information to decide his crop planning right.  And he actually does the entire crop planning in the entire farm.  This is of course more efficient from a labor perspective.  But what we saw was that in that model, although the overall yield etc. were better and the  
**[0:08:12-0:08:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:08:12):**  farmers effort was lower right because it's less labor intensive, it's more optimized.  But very few consumers were actually visiting the farm.  So which kind of like see along with giving consumers access to safe traceable food, one  of the things that you really want to achieve with this business is to get people back in  touch with their roots, understand farming from both its ups and downs perspective right.  
**[0:08:38-0:08:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:08:38):**  And that was getting missed out a lot because very few people would actually go ahead and  visit those farms.  So we call this the shared farm model.  So on one extreme was mini farm, another extreme was shared farms where you still have 600  square feet, but it is not one particular area of the land.  
**[0:08:56-0:08:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:08:56):**  And why do you think that is?  Why didn't they visit anymore?  Yeah because I think somehow this sense that this particular patch really belongs to me  right, is appeals more to people than saying okay there is this whole commons which belongs  to everybody.  
**[0:09:13-0:09:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:09:13):**  You know I mean it's a interesting human psychology at play here at least in the segments that  we work in.  So that's what we saw because I guess it's like this right, if you come and work on your  patch of the land right.  It's actually very interesting to think about this because this is kind of like you know  
**[0:09:36-0:09:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:09:36):**  I mean I can think of how this has similarities with various different types of economic systems  in the world for example right.  Absolutely.  Maybe this is like capitalism versus socialism right.  In terms of you know everybody owns the resource so nobody is really responsible for it or  
**[0:09:53-0:09:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:09:53):**  nobody keeps very proud about if something does very well whereas if you have your own  thing you feel like oh this is my own thing let me go and put in some more effort in it.  You know maybe show off how good it is and things like that.  So I think some of these interesting dynamics I'm not a good human psychology specialist  so I don't really can't really articulate on that but that's what we see.  
**[0:10:18-0:10:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:10:18):**  So we then also came up with a third model where we said okay you know what let us try  if there's the best of both worlds approach that we could do right.  Where we said we call that model the half and half model and so far this seems to be  the best from consumer reviews everything perspective this seems to be the best which  is that basically you have half of the patch of land you control your own patch that you  
**[0:10:48-0:10:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:10:48):**  have six beds and the remaining pieces as a part of a large common area that the farmer  manages.  So you get the benefit of good yield etc right and you don't really end up messing up everything  in your patch of land by making wrong decisions.  At the same time you have enough place to learn experiment make mistakes and learn from  
**[0:11:08-0:11:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:11:08):**  it right.  So that's kind of like a so the half and half model is very interesting because it helps  you basically make sure that you are getting enough vegetables enough variety at the same  time you have this whole thing about you know the actions that you are taking on the app  has some real implications right.  
**[0:11:27-0:11:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:11:27):**  So based on what we have seen so far the half and half model is the best right.  So this has been one side of the story but two years is quite a long time.  So the other thing that we also realized was that while this model is quite interesting  and we are seeing a bunch of subscribers sign up etc when we talk to a lot of our subscribers  right and you ask them why did you sign up right what is your expectation.  
**[0:11:54-0:12:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:11:54):**  So what it turns out is that out of all of the subscribers maybe 10 to 20 percent of  them have signed up because of this experience because they can build up connect with a farmer  and all of those things.  80 percent plus consumers have actually signed up because they found this a trustworthy source  of food.  
**[0:12:15-0:12:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:12:15):**  That's pretty much it.  They are not really looking at let me learn a little bit more about farming or let me  you know contribute something back to the soil that's not the reason it's basically  I am getting food which I can trust which I know has been grown without chemicals the  other options that are there in the market for whatever reason I'm not able to trust.  
**[0:12:37-0:12:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:12:37):**  So that was one reason.  The second reason is because of the very low very short supply chain our produce is usually  a much more fresher than most of the other things that you find in the market right because  these are farmed extremely near the city they are harvested on the same day and it gets  delivered to you like within just a few hours of harvest right within five six hours of  
**[0:12:58-0:12:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:12:58):**  harvest you get it.  So it's much fresher than if I were to go to let's say you know Amazon Fresh or whatever  there's a e-grosser here called Big Basket if you go to all of those places typically  the supply chain is much longer because it's an inventory led model right.  I mean you will harvest your produce the day before that will come from let's say 100 200  
**[0:13:20-0:13:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:13:20):**  kilometers away it will stay in your warehouses get distributed to different hubs.  So a lot of it changes a lot of hands number one.  Number two it also have there's quite a bit of time which has elapsed before you actually  get your so the produce is not as fresh as people would like to have it right.  So what we saw was the two main reasons why 80 percent people are actually signed up is  
**[0:13:41-0:13:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:13:41):**  because a they get access to very very fresh food and b the food that they have access  to has full traceability and hence they can trust it.  Okay very interesting dynamic came into the picture which I don't know whether we talked  about it last time or not is that when you talk about trust and traceability there are  two aspects to it one aspect is what the let's say you are dealing with a company right and  
**[0:14:07-0:14:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:14:07):**  what the company says to you which helps you build trust right.  It could be the brand it could be the communication it could be some of the information that you  share saying it's from this farm etc right.  The other way to build trust is basically where consumers end up trusting what others  are telling them right.  
**[0:14:28-0:14:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:14:28):**  That's another way of building trust and that seems to be a little more powerful than a  company going ahead and trying to build trust.  So let me take an example and say so when we one of the very important mechanisms that  we saw work really well at farmism was that not all of our consumers would visit the farms  as much as we want them to right.  
**[0:14:52-0:14:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:14:52):**  There will be several consumers who would not visit for three four months as well right  but they would all always engage in the community group inside there's a chat group inside our  app so people would be pretty engaged there right and a very common interaction there  would be somebody who has gone to the farm this weekend right they would take a lot of  photos pictures from the farm and post it right and this turned out to be a very good  
**[0:15:18-0:15:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:15:18):**  trust building mechanism because consumers would basically they are now trusting somebody  else who's visited that so it's almost like your organic inspection or inspection of an  organic farm is being done by crowdsourced audit you know rather than you trying to go  ahead and take a showing a certificate saying hey this guy came in and and he inspected  and this seems to be a lot more powerful in people's minds that somebody or the other  
**[0:15:47-0:15:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:15:47):**  is all continuously going there I have a way to find out information from them even if  I cannot visit myself right.  So it's like a continuous crowdsource audit so that mechanism is something which has played  out very well in terms of so people find us a very good trusted source and which is why  a lot of our consumer subscribers are people who for example some of them have lifestyle  
**[0:16:13-0:16:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:16:13):**  diseases like cancer etc and for them it's extremely critical to go and find sources  of food that they can absolutely trust right because they have been medically advised to  have food without grown without any chemicals.  So anyway so what we basically saw was that we have built a solution which a lot of people  are using but it is originally it was actually built for 10-15 percent of those people if  
**[0:16:42-0:16:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:16:42):**  people who would come to the farm at times and things like that others are using it just  because they do not have a suitable alternative which gives them safe healthy food which they  can trust and trace right that does not exist for them.  So basically what we said was okay so there are two choices one choice is that we could  continue to expand into multiple cities in this particular more go deeper or based on  
**[0:17:09-0:17:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:17:09):**  whatever you would learn we have learned can we go ahead and introduce a model right which  uses all of these building blocks that we have right but rearranged in a slightly different  way right and that could be the offering for people who are not interested in a farming  experience but are basically interested in getting good food right.  So the way we do it is very simple so we have this business the original farmers and many  
**[0:17:38-0:17:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:17:38):**  farm model that's running and we will probably launch right now we are just in two cities  we are probably going to launch in a few more cities gradually as well but one of the areas  that we are focusing on is how do you build a service for those remaining 80 percent of  people who are using the service but for whom this was not really built for it right and  there are more convenient and more efficient mechanisms possible.  
**[0:18:00-0:18:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:18:00):**  So what we are doing there is as follows so we have basically and we launched this somewhere  in November end so it's been about three months since we launched this but basically what  we said was that if you have to fix the food system building community and engagement is  something which is absolutely necessary right I mean we cannot fix things in a silo by being  on our own right so community is a very important angle of it.  
**[0:18:29-0:18:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:18:29):**  Secondly is that traceability must be there you need to know where your food is coming  from right that's going to be important and third was from a trust perspective trust we  need to enable people to build that trust and we cannot we should not probably go out  on our own and say trust us you know there should be mechanisms and models in place so  that this trust happens on its own so we kept these three things kind of in mind and what  
**[0:19:00-0:19:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:19:00):**  we have launched essentially is we call it so the way I mean this model actually has  been very popular in China since I think late 2018 but in a slightly different context but  essentially what we do is we form groups of people in localities or in neighborhoods right  so in various neighborhoods in Bangalore we have about I think close to 200 such groups  now right these groups are people with some of the larger groups are people with 70 80  
**[0:19:34-0:19:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:19:34):**  people who all live in either the same apartment complex or absolutely in the same block completely  right so these groups of people they basically we connect them to specific sets of farmers  right which could depend on the part of Bangalore that they are based in right so now those  farmers we still if you remember our conversation we have on the technology side we have two  things right the consumers have an app and the farmers have an app as well right and  
**[0:20:05-0:20:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:20:05):**  the farmers use that app to do farm management etc so what we have done is some of our existing  many farmers as well as we have tied up with several other farmers right and we have given  them a app which basically gives them a production plan and they focus on growing four or five  different vegetables okay so they do not do they do not do 40 or 50 vegetables like our  mini farm setup do but they focus on four or five vegetables but they do it in a slightly  
**[0:20:34-0:20:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:20:34):**  different approach as to compared to traditional farming right so in traditional farming let's  say you have two acres of land maybe you're going to plant spinach in it you'll do mono  cropping and then you plant all of them at one go so that your labor is minimized and  then after four weeks you are going to harvest let's say 20,000 bunches of spinach and you  will try to use you will go to a in in India you would basically go to a mandi it's called  
**[0:21:04-0:21:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:21:04):**  those are the agricultural markets right which are basically b2b where an auction of your  produce happens and then five or six intermediaries finally take that produce to the end consumer  right this of course means that the farmer gets only 15 percent or maximum 20 percent  of what the end consumer pays number one a lot of wastage because it changes so many  hands and farmers never get the upside so prices keep on changing prices are very fluctuating  
**[0:21:30-0:21:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:21:30):**  very sometimes you lose money sometimes you make money but upside is typically kept by  the intermediaries the farmers don't enjoy much of their upside right so anyway so that  is the traditional farming model right what we believe is a lot more sustainable a lot  more uh friendlier to the soil is of course when you are doing multi-cropping right but  if you are doing multi-cropping the way we kind of ask all of these folks to do it differently  
**[0:21:59-0:22:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:21:59):**  we tell them you need to harvest things every week at least a couple of two or three times  every week right and you need to sow also every week right so it's not like the earlier  thing the traditional farming model is so once wait for x number of weeks or x number  of months harvest everything at one go take it to the market right here it's no no i have  two acres i'm going to divide it up into five plots one plot i'm going to plant this week  
**[0:22:28-0:22:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:22:28):**  next week i'm going to plant another plot right and you are always growing four or five  different vegetables so not only does it diversify your risk as a small grower but uh you are  never really uh of course you will be doing uh multi-cropping right and you are doing  constant harvest as well right again this constant harvest is almost like a it's actually  like a uh like a systematic investment plan right so if you are not if you are let's say  
**[0:23:01-0:23:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:23:01):**  investing in the equity market right uh one of the uh best ways to do it is by doing a  systematic investment plan right saying hey you know what every month five percent of  my or ten percent of my salary i'm just going to put in this particular index fund irrespective  of whether the market is going up or going down right in the long run uh that sort of  a strategy has always been nice and safe and has given good returns right uh rather than  
**[0:23:28-0:23:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:23:28):**  waiting to time the market yeah which is impossible with food as well it's very similar what you  mentioned with vegetables it's the same you you can never you can never time the market  or outsmart the market maybe you do it once but a few times in a row is very difficult  right right and i mean we have just talked to hundreds of farmers who tell us you know  uh last season i grew capsicum i made so much money this season i uh decided to grow cucumber  
**[0:23:54-0:24:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:23:54):**  and i lost it all you know so and it's so surprising but uh i have uh met so many farmers  who have given up farming and i would ask them why are you given up farming no sir last  season i made a lot of money that's why i gave up farming why would you give up farming  if you made a lot of money out of it so it's almost so then they're like oh maybe if i  continue maybe i'll lose money so it's almost like going to a casino you know that uh okay  
**[0:24:18-0:24:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:24:18):**  i am hundred dollars ahead so let me uh move out now while i'm in the positive right so  uh which means that interesting risk mitigation strategies can be used and one of the ways  to do it is kind of like this sort of an approach which is what let's say market gardens would  typically do right in various uh parts of the world unfortunately india does not have  many market gardens where you know this sort of an approach where they're constantly uh  
**[0:24:44-0:24:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:24:44):**  growing stuff constantly taking so uh so anyway so what we do is uh uh so we have given farmers  these apps where we tell them there's a guaranteed optic as long as you follow our production  plan right uh and you follow the instructions on that we'll make sure that we procure the  produce from you right consumers know where they are getting all of this from and there's  a very efficient last mile distribution uh system at play here and this was required  
**[0:25:13-0:25:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:25:13):**  because uh if you look at fresh produce um last mile costs are usually four to five times  the cost of first mile and when i say first mile it's basically farm to city right and  last mile is from the city to individual consumer homes so that last mile is usually at least  in india it's almost four times the first mile cost okay and uh so which is why uh it  made sense to create a distribution model where that last mile cost is really minimized  
**[0:25:46-0:25:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:25:46):**  right and indian cities lots of traffic and all of this stuff so that's where all of these  local neighborhood hubs kind of play a role we call this farm is in tribes so that's basically  our new product uh farm is in tribes which we think will appeal to those 80 people right  uh and pretty much it should appeal to actually pretty much everybody right because what we  are trying to get there is to get uh good quality organically grown food at uh much  
**[0:26:16-0:26:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:26:16):**  cheaper prices than what you get in organic stores right and we really really believe  that uh although uh uh organically grown stuff is currently a very small part of the overall  market in india but it can really explode almost overnight if we can just get the prices  of organic food down to within 20 percent of what regular conventional produced is priced  at right now it's almost at 100 percent higher right so if we can get it down to 20 percent  
**[0:26:47-0:26:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:26:47):**  higher so now the question is how are you going to get it down to 20 percent higher  because in the short run your costs of production are going to be higher uh in organic farming  in terms of you know labor uh it does require a lot more labor till your soil becomes completely  self-sufficient uh uh our experience has been that the cost of production in organic farming  can actually be uh higher right and lower you mean the cost at some point yes yeah after  
**[0:27:16-0:27:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:27:16):**  so once your soil has become has got really good organic carbon percentage after that  point of time what happens is that you realize oh i don't need to put in much stuff all of  my composting is happening at the farm right and i'm not spending a lot of money buying  fertilizers and pesticides so your input cost drops and things are really good and i'm still  getting good yield in those initial years the yield is usually lower uh and things go  
**[0:27:41-0:27:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:27:41):**  slower but once you've got your soil organic carbon to more than uh let's say three four  percent then things become really good and how many years does it take normally uh so  it would take about three to four years it would take to kind of get to that sort of  a stage it really depends a lot on how much you are willing to invest into it right because  uh if you are putting in for example in every acre if you are putting in 40 tons of compost  
**[0:28:05-0:28:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:28:05):**  every year then you can probably turn things around very quickly even in one and a half  years or so basically the only metric that seems to matter more than everything else  is the soil organic matter percentage or soil organic carbon percentage you know if you  can just get that to be really high because then all of the best problems etc start really  going away yeah it's a great proxy yeah so how do we get organic food to people at just  
**[0:28:34-0:28:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:28:34):**  20 percent premium on inorganic food by doing two things right one is by doing disintermediation  right so that there are not those five or six intermediaries in so by doing direct procurement  with farmers number one number two is by training farmers giving them some of the software tools  uh know-how required which we have learned over the last two three years on how to basically  improve their organic yields right so that so that's the second thing and third is by  
**[0:29:02-0:29:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:29:02):**  having a very efficient distribution system especially in the last mile so the way the  last mile system works is it's actually very very straightforward and simple so every community  or neighborhood group has a leader okay and so every farm is and tribe has a tribe leader  uh there's a economic arrangement with the tribe leader as well so everything that's  sold uh through tribes parmesan makes 30 percent the tribe leader makes 10 percent and 60 percent  
**[0:29:29-0:29:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:29:29):**  is made by the farmer okay wow that's how the model works so the farmer ends up making  almost three times what he makes when he sells in the market right and so it's 60 30 10 and  uh the tribe leaders are responsible for creating the groups right uh going ahead and telling  more recruiting new members so our customer acquisition costs are low right uh the delivery  costs are very minimal because we don't we go ahead and deliver everything to the tribe  
**[0:30:03-0:30:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:30:03):**  leaders home right and people either come and pick up or the tribe leader so these are  a lot of them are in apartment complexes so if it's not a very large apartment complex  you know you get these 20 bags and you could just say okay uh folks please come between  6 pm to 6 30 pm uh on wednesdays and collect the bags from me right we have started these  tribes at home right now we are going to experiment starting some of these tribes even at offices  
**[0:30:28-0:30:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:30:28):**  as well right uh and i have a feeling that offices might really work out uh uh well uh  so that's that's basically the model um that we are currently kind of focusing on uh because  i think the mini farm model is something which is it is really really optimized for people  who want to learn farming who want to get completely involved but it's not the most  efficient from a production uh uh or pricing standpoint no completely it makes a lot of  
**[0:31:00-0:31:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:31:00):**  sense and it seems a lot of learning and i think a lot of farmers and other people working  in the let's say the distribution and the logistics and how to create this short food  webs are running into the same issues are running into okay what is efficient how do  i get it to the last mile which is very very expensive obviously delivering at home for  80 people would be completely impossible etc etc etc so you see very similar discussions  
**[0:31:27-0:31:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:31:27):**  happening around the world on these topics and in terms of um the you mentioned a number  of times the organic farming world and last time we discussed quite a bit the regenerative  sites or the zero budget natural farming how has it been growing has it been growing first  of all and how if yes how has it been growing the focus on a more sustainable more regenerative  ways of farming in india the last two years absolutely so that has actually there's a  
**[0:31:52-0:31:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:31:52):**  lot of good news around that which is that zero budget natural farming has been specifically  mentioned and called out by india's finance minister in the latest budget for example  right so there have been allocations towards that it has been discussed in parliament right  so there is a lot of uh focus around that and i think what people are also realizing  in the country as well as uh uh politicians policymakers etc is that there are some very  
**[0:32:24-0:32:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:32:24):**  very good learnings from our traditional ways of farming right our traditional way of farming  uh uh let's say before before we all invented discovered uh the haberboost process of uh  nitrogen fixation right even before that india was a fairly densely populated country right  we had a lot of mouths to feed right and we were able to do that uh pretty easily right  uh by using traditional farming making sure there are traditional ways of putting that  
**[0:32:54-0:33:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:32:54):**  nitrogen and carbon into the soil so uh so i think there is a lot more things have changed  uh quite rapidly in the last two three years since we started because now a lot of people  know about zero budget natural farming for example as well as other flavors of regenerative  agriculture so i think the the move is pretty good uh in terms of organic farming so to  speak right there is one issue that we see which is that a lot of consumers have also  
**[0:33:30-0:33:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:33:30):**  developed uh you know uh some sort of a negative thing around organic farming as well because  a lot of consumers have started thinking organic is basically just about marketing you know  and nothing is really organic and it's all just higher price and there's a lot of marketing  around it so in certain uh segments organic is also becoming a bad word so to speak right  so i think uh there is definitely a lot of consumer education uh which needs to happen  
**[0:34:03-0:34:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:34:03):**  but uh things are far better than than just two three years back at least in terms of  policy support etc having said that there is still uh see the one of the things i think  which will be a issue going forward i'm not sure how it is outside india but at least  in india is that the the entrenched conventional farming lobby is going to react to this right  so we do see nowadays articles being written in newspapers uh uh uh questioning for example  
**[0:34:37-0:34:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:34:37):**  hey is this zero budget natural farming thing does it really work is it actually scientific  right or is it more of you know uh too empirical cannot be and i think those are actually good  questions to ask because it will force uh some of us to produce the data that can be  convincing right so that is uh uh uh in some sense good that there is but i think uh we  are entering that era where uh there will be a lot of questioning of organic as well  
**[0:35:06-0:35:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:35:06):**  as regenerative saying that hey you know the typical arguments which are there right in  terms of is this going to be enough to uh feed so many mouths right yeah so i think  a lot of that is going to come in but it shows that you're getting to a space that that at  least they feel a sort of threat i mean i think we can learn a lot from the renewable  energy people and the let's say the doubt campaigns that the fossil fuel companies have  
**[0:35:33-0:35:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:35:33):**  created over the last decades but it's an interesting sign that you're getting to that  space means that you're becoming a threat to them for sure they will use every trick  in the book to delay so i actually kind of take it as a positive sign yeah i take it  as a positive sign that since you have started seeing a few of those articles in newspapers  etc now that means that you are uh earlier the whole thing was too small for uh folks  
**[0:35:57-0:36:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:35:57):**  to react now it's like okay hang on this is becoming bigger so it's a threat to a traditional  way of things so i think i think it's good and in terms of and that would be my final  question of this short check-in that which is becoming a bit longer but it's very interesting  because there's so much has happened in the last years what has happened on the we've  discussed the investor side of things also last time have you seen more interest is it  
**[0:36:21-0:36:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:36:21):**  been easier to to let's say present pharma to the tech investors you normally speak to  in bungalow what has been the investor mindset towards these kind of enterprises where as  we discussed last time times are always longer obviously there's nature involved it's very  different than your normal app photo sharing sure so we are we are actually uh we are just  getting ready for the next round right so we never raised any money after that because  
**[0:36:50-0:36:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:36:50):**  uh i mean this was a business where cash flow started coming in as well right uh but we  are going to raise around now so we have just started reaching out to investors etc uh the  first thing that i notice uh in general is that overall people feel uh like uh that people  feel that organic in general is a small market right so that's one hesitation that we see  from uh conventional traditional investors i mean uh we have not talked to a lot of investors  
**[0:37:23-0:37:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:37:23):**  right now uh but whoever we have spoken to seem to indicate that hey yeah all of that  side all of that is fine why don't you guys you know do fresh produce but don't don't  restrict yourself to organic right do all of the conventional stuff so i think uh some  of that is there still some nice reports come out which say oh hey you know what organic  has now increased so much right so at least that's what we see in india or the uh investors  
**[0:37:51-0:37:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:37:51):**  that we have met is that um like people have concerns around whether it's too small a market  yeah and how do you think i mean that's going to be interesting to see it's going to be  interesting to see how they respond to your numbers and to this strong strong interest  you have received from customers yes so as i said i think uh so india is a very price  sensitive market in general right so i very strongly feel that there are one or two things  
**[0:38:16-0:38:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:38:16):**  that need to get fixed and those two things that need to get fixed is one is uh the price  part needs to get fixed right it needs to be more affordable and it is possible to make  it more affordable for uh for consumers right and i seriously believe that if it can be  made more profitable in one year you can see uh the market being 10x of what it is right  because nobody i mean if you talk to because you've talked to thousands of consumers right  
**[0:38:47-0:38:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:38:47):**  everybody is if you talk to them they would be in that mode you know uh if it was it's  hundred it's almost double the price or triple the price i wish it was just you know 20 30  percent more then i don't mind paying right that's a conversation we have had so many  different times so i think if there's a way to make organic more affordable which is what  we are trying to do and then the second big problem of course is the the trust part of  
**[0:39:13-0:39:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:39:13):**  it right which was part of our original thesis when we had started right how do we solve  the trust issue with organic enough trust deficit less regulation uh or regulations  with a lot of holes sort of a country like india and i think uh this sort of an approach  where you don't necessarily rely only on certifications or certificates to prove trustworthiness but  uh kind of get people involved is going to be crucial and that's for example our tribe  
**[0:39:45-0:39:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:39:45):**  leaders play a very important role in that right because they come on farm visits with  us right so we take them to the farm show them the farms make sure that i mean it's  a it's a criteria to be a tribe leader because this is something which enables and builds  their trust right uh some of our tribe leaders are uh nutritionists for example right so  these are people who automatically consumers trust as well that okay she's a nutritionist  
**[0:40:12-0:40:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:40:12):**  she probably knows uh what's good and what's not so good what is acceptable what is not  acceptable and things like that right so i think uh if we can solve for trust and uh  uh price then i think the organic market can completely explode in india so this is on  the fresh produce side the the funny part and this is my sense of it right is that uh  organic cosmetics to me seems to be a much larger market than i think so too i have the  
**[0:40:44-0:40:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:40:44):**  discussion all the time it's we pay much easier and much more for what we put on our skin and  what we put in our mouth yeah and it's not like so this price sensitiveness that we see  when it comes to vegetables and fruits does not exist when it comes to cosmetics there  right in fact it's probably the other way around oh this thing costs so much it must  be really really good you know so so uh i mean that's something that we hear from investors  
**[0:41:10-0:41:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:41:10):**  uh as well that organic cosmetics is actually they feel more comfortable investing in that  versus wow uh something which is related to food in general that's really interesting and  just the last question on the tribes so with that price point you're getting to the 20 or  you're getting close what is your feeling what's your since you launched in november  where do you see yourself where are you now and more or less in terms of fixing the price  
**[0:41:38-0:41:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:41:38):**  issue or challenge yes yeah so i think uh it's looking very promising because we are already  lower than most organic stores retail physical stores etc we are able to do it lower than them  because of those two strategies in place right directly working with farmers uh uh procuring  and this last mile efficient last mile distribution the only thing we have to now crack is on the  scale side of it because right now the trucks that are coming from the farms to the city are  
**[0:42:09-0:42:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:42:09):**  not fully occupied right so as soon as i can make sure that every truck is completely full right  then my costs will reduce substantially so it does look like it will be very very possible  maybe in the as soon as in the next three four months to get to a level of where we are 25 30  more than uh uh organics i think we'll see a huge inflection point right now we are doubling every  there's been three months so the bases are small but uh uh revenues etc from tribes is doubling  
**[0:42:41-0:42:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:42:41):**  every month so that's going really well but we have to see uh like based on operations it looks  like we should be able to get to a very very competitive price in the next three four months  it's not a long thing and i think if that happens then you'll see kind of like a real explosion in  demand so to speak thank you so much shami i think that sounds extremely exciting i will check in  sooner than two years now this time and um please keep me posted i think it's uh the model changes  
**[0:43:11-0:43:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:43:11):**  you've made the lessons learned and the way you approach this is truly truly inspiring and getting  a lot of fresh and thus very healthy because we had some interviews lately on the importance of  healthiness and importance of freshness sorry on healthiness and and how quickly especially fresh  produce deteriorates and loses its nutrients when it's not fresh so i think the people will find the  taste much better and also the nutrient density much better thank you so much and have a have a  
**[0:43:37-0:43:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:43:37):**  great day you too take care bye bye if you found the investing in regenerative agriculture and food  podcast valuable there are a few simple ways you can use to support it number one rate and review  the podcast on your podcast app that's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and  it only takes a few seconds number two share this podcast on social media or email it to your  friends and colleagues number three if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have  
**[0:44:02-0:44:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:44:02):**  the means please join my patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further  you can find all the details on patreon.com regenerative agriculture or in the description  below thank you so much and see you at the next podcast dear friends of the podcast i'm super  excited to share with you the online video course investing in regenerative agriculture and food  how to put money to work in regenerating soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while  
**[0:44:39-0:44:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:44:39):**  doing it why are we doing this course after a hundred interviews and more than a hundred  hours of audio asking the question how to put money to work in regenerating soils and have been  following the space since 2011 and recording these podcasts since 2016 we thought it was time to share  our lessons learned what have we seen in the space over the last years how have we built our decision  making framework what to focus on with the podcast how have we picked interviewees and what questions  
**[0:45:05-0:45:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:45:05):**  should you ask what is happening in the space what should you read what should you listen what  should you watch how to approach this space for whom is this course you the soil builders and  investors in the space the soil builders people working in this space entrepreneurial farmers  fund managers vehicle builders crowd investing platform builders ag tech companies farm to gut  food companies permaculture key line designers holistic management consultants etc etc people  
**[0:45:33-0:45:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:45:33):**  that are building soil at scale and the investors who are putting their own money to work through  their family office or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work  through foundations institutional capital banks insurance companies etc is this course free no  this is pay what you think it's worth meaning i have no way of knowing what this course will be  worth to you and i'm very aware that among the listeners of this podcast and we have people with  
**[0:46:00-0:46:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:46:00):**  very different means so i'm inviting you if this course is creating value to you and if you have  the means to consider paying what you think it's worth thank you so what is this course it's  currently a series of 17 videos mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus pdf slides so you  don't have to write along we're gonna look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why  extractive agriculture is so risky how to invest what kind of frameworks you could and i think  
**[0:46:29-0:46:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:46:29):**  should build what to invest in and what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of  investors you could find if you're a soil builder every lesson will have a digging deeper part where  i will share what kind of reports what kind of interviews what kind of videos you can look into  if you want to dig deeper we're going to look at nutrient density landscape design and a lot more  so what is it not it's not a list of investable deals unfortunately that doesn't exist in this  
**[0:46:55-0:46:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/07/shameek-chakravarty-2/#t=0:46:55):**  world we're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution  it's also not investment advice before making any investment please find professional investment  advice so get ready get a cup of coffee a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking  click on the link below sign up and i'm really looking forward to your feedback  