### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2020-00-23)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com slash course or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  What is the role of the largest commodity buyers and brands in the world like Nestle  and Ferrero in the regenerative transition?  
**[0:00:20-0:00:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:00:20):**  How can they be part of decommodifying their supply chain from an extractive to a regenerative  one?  How can we take our attention to the top-down and bottom approach being very, very humble  and how large brands need a much more holistic view of quality?  And why do you maybe need to work on small and very deep regenerative projects that seem  
**[0:00:40-0:00:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:00:40):**  to be impossible to scale?  Welcome to another episode of investing in regenerative agriculture, investing as if  the planet mattered.  Podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  
**[0:00:59-0:01:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:00:59):**  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why my focus on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small and consumers start paying much more  
**[0:01:17-0:01:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:01:17):**  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  In March last year, we launched our membership community to make it easy for fans to support  our work.  And so many of you have joined as a member.  We've launched different types of benefits, exclusive content, Q and A webinars with former  
**[0:01:33-0:01:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:01:33):**  guests, ask me anything sessions plus so much more to come in the future.  For more information on the different tiers, benefits and how to become a member, check  gumroad.com slash investing region egg or find the link below.  Thank you.  Welcome to another episode today with Bastien Sachet.  
**[0:01:50-0:01:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:01:50):**  He's CEO of the earthworm foundation since 2016.  The earthworm foundation exists for much longer and we'll go into that, but is a nonprofit  organization that built on values and driven by the desire to positively impact the relationship  between people and nature.  They work with some of the largest agricultural commodity buyers in the world to cultivate  
**[0:02:08-0:02:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:02:08):**  more life in their value chains.  And we're also going to get into what that means.  They're focusing on deforestation, agriculture, chocolate, coffee, hazelnuts, and much, much  more.  Welcome Bastien.  
**[0:02:18-0:02:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:02:18):**  Hi Koen.  So let's start with a question.  How did you end up in soil agriculture, deforestation, land use, and what brought you there?  Well personally I'm an agronomist and I've grown up in the countryside.  So of course these are things I've always been close to, but it's only as I went into  
**[0:02:35-0:02:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:02:35):**  my professional career that I started to do different things.  And I ended up at some stage after various steps having this vision in Argentina on the  soy field where I see the soil going up in dust and on GM crops and cans of Roundup on  the side.  And I'm thinking, that's not what I want to do.  
**[0:02:53-0:02:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:02:53):**  We can change that.  And then I found this organization, which at the time was called the Forest Trust, which  had the objective to make forest well-managed.  And I thought, wow, that's great because it combines the business side.  We can have products coming out of the forest, wood, et cetera, and keeping them as they  
**[0:03:10-0:03:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:03:10):**  should be healthy.  So I started to work with the TFT in 2006.  And then we started to work on really two key ecosystems, forests and soils, because  they are the main habitats for life.  I like to say they are kind of the belly of the earth.  
**[0:03:25-0:03:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:03:25):**  They are where life starts.  And what we eat, what we wear, what we burn, what we use to live basically comes from there.  So for us, it's really what needs to be the focus.  Now, completely, I think for, hopefully for anybody listening to this podcast.  If not, there's some great books you should reach out to me.  
**[0:03:42-0:03:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:03:42):**  I will let you know some great farms to visit.  But then, I mean, the organization was mostly, when you joined, mostly focused on forests,  obviously forest growth in soil, but how did that gradual or quick transition happen to  much more focused on commodities, agriculture?  You're also working in grain at the moment.  
**[0:04:00-0:04:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:04:00):**  How did that come back to the soy discovery you had when you were in that field?  So we've always been leveraging the power of businesses and their supply chains to create  change at the origin of those supply chains.  And at the time, the supply chains were really the timber and wood supply chains linked to  garden furniture because that's where the focus was and the realization that all this  
**[0:04:21-0:04:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:04:21):**  production was driving deforestation, especially in Asia.  And we proved and we learned how to use the purchase and the procurement of companies  in the downstream to really leverage change in the upstream.  And we saw it was possible.  So we thought, okay, that's a great thing.  
**[0:04:37-0:04:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:04:37):**  And in 2007, the Stern reports come showing how important forests are for climate.  And personally, I was sitting in a four-wheel drive visiting one of our projects in Indonesia  in Kalimantan, and I see all these logging trucks and bulldozers being lined up just  nearby the forest.  And I say, how was that?  
**[0:04:56-0:04:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:04:56):**  Oh, and the forest manager says, we just sold half of the forest and it's going to become  a palm plantation.  And I'm like, oh, no.  So we've done all that in vain.  And maybe we need to focus on other supply chains.  
**[0:05:07-0:05:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:05:07):**  And our model could work with palm, with cocoa, with all these commodities that drive change.  And so we went into these commodities and we started to work on tackling deforestation  through agricultural commodities.  And of course, when you dig deeper, you get to the farmer and the smallholders and how  they manage the land because the way they manage their land is going to impact the forest.  
**[0:05:29-0:05:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:05:29):**  And then quickly you come to the source and the essence of everything is what do you get  from your soil?  How do you interact with your soils and your agriculture?  And we realized that all of this is one whole thing.  It's a holistic approach.  
**[0:05:41-0:05:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:05:41):**  In the same way we were seeing human beings, people, workers being exploited, we think,  you know, we're not an environmental organization and we will leave the social to other people.  We take this holistic approach that is about human is part of nature, soils, forest, and  people, rural communities and workers while they are really our focus.  And that's how we really embrace the whole thing.  
**[0:06:03-0:06:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:06:03):**  And that's what we work on at the moment.  And it's a great bridge to unpack a bit how you're working, because I think it sounds  amazing.  We're working on the big commodities that cause deforestation.  If we like it or not, palm oil, many others, I mean, chocolate in an industrial way, coffee.  
**[0:06:18-0:06:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:06:18):**  I mean, there's so much stress on the forest that if you only focus on the forest, you're  just not going to win the battle.  Even though it started with garden furniture, which I still remember the teak discussions  a long time ago, which started a lot of awareness actually, but we thought only wood.  And of course there are many products.  
**[0:06:35-0:06:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:06:35):**  So can you describe in a way how you then work with a large commodity player, a large  commodity buyer, a large brand, obviously you don't have to name them, but what is a  good example of how a process like that starts?  How do you get them to really care and really do something?  There is two aspects.  
**[0:06:52-0:06:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:06:52):**  I think there is an aspect where you engage with people, individuals in those companies.  So often we say we've got member companies, but often we work with individuals.  And when you see those individuals switch from companies to companies, you see that  they're, they ignite an approach and a process in their own companies.  And then there is a real, the practicality of what we do.  
**[0:07:11-0:07:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:07:11):**  Do they follow them as well?  Like if they move to another company, that old company, hopefully say is a client and  then a new one as well.  Is that...  Often it happens.  
**[0:07:20-0:07:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:07:20):**  And it's quite interesting because you can see the impact spreading a bit in this way.  And then as I said, there's a practicality of what we do.  We believe that sustainability is nothing else than managing environmental and social  quality.  And what companies know how to do is to give you quality products.  
**[0:07:37-0:07:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:07:37):**  If you drink a kind of Coke to take a very well-known product, you know you're not going  to get sick.  Companies have put all the processes in place so that they check everything before it gets  to your mouth and to your body.  And we're thinking, well, today, what consumers are asking for is really a more holistic view  
**[0:07:54-0:07:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:07:54):**  of quality.  Environmental and social quality are important, but it means companies need to shift their  thinking and extend the walls of their factories if you want, which traditionally were the  limits of what they look at, to the whole supply chain starting at the farmer's plot.  So it makes companies think a bit differently about that.  
**[0:08:14-0:08:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:08:14):**  And then it's just a normal process of taking interest, being quite humble, not coming with  norms and don't do this and don't do that, which has been a lot of the punitive ecology  approach, I would say in the past.  They need to come with an open mind to say, how do we create something that benefits everyone?  One thing we have to remind is that supply chains today, commodity supply chains, they  
**[0:08:35-0:08:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:08:35):**  are inherently extractive.  So they are built and the business model is built on extracting natural capital, extracting  human capital.  This is why you still have trade labor and cocoa.  This is why you have people working for very low and decent salaries in palmer plantations  
**[0:08:53-0:08:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:08:53):**  sometimes.  This is why we are tapping into forest all the time to get fertility.  And it's not like there are no ways to do differently.  It's just the way it's been because of opacity, because of not really looking after where  or asking the question, where does it come from?  
**[0:09:09-0:09:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:09:09):**  So if you want, in a way, what we ask companies is ask yourself the questions, how do I relate  to people in nature?  Where does it come from?  How has it been made?  All these simple questions, everyone can ask them.  
**[0:09:23-0:09:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:09:23):**  And if you start asking those questions, then you open the opportunity to change.  And that's what we do with companies, going in the field, asking, discussing with the  suppliers, but not in a way where everything comes with, you should not do this, stop that,  put a norm, verify that.  No, first understand, ask questions, two, engage, three, build trust.  
**[0:09:43-0:09:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:09:43):**  And then together with everyone in the supply chains, figure out how everyone can be winning  out of that.  And then economically as well, mainly, you know, how a farmer can make better business,  how a supplier can thrive and how a brand can be successful as well with its consumers  by taking such an approach.  
**[0:09:59-0:10:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:09:59):**  So I would say more on ecology of solutions.  So you, let's say a company calls you up and says, we've heard about you, Boston and Earthworm.  It's a fascinating, we probably have a problem or we get a lot of questions about our supply  chain, et cetera.  What do you do first?  
**[0:10:14-0:10:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:10:14):**  What's your first step in engaging with them, which is the first step, but how do you engage  with them?  Do you meet the people?  Is that the people on the top?  Is that the people buying the cocoa?  
**[0:10:23-0:10:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:10:23):**  Is that a first, let's say discovery contract with them?  Because you probably want to ask a lot of questions, but you also don't want to lose  the potential of having a client.  So how would they hire you for a period and allow you to ask a lot of probably difficult  questions, but humble?  
**[0:10:38-0:10:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:10:38):**  Is that how it works?  I would say we're a bit like, you know, when you go to the doctors, you got this first  appointment.  You're not a consultant, right?  I'm not at all.  
**[0:10:45-0:10:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:10:45):**  How would you describe yourself?  I like the work, you know, a doctor is not a consultant.  He does consult, okay, but he's not a consultant.  So I would really compare the process that we implement to the ones that doctors implement.  It's kind of a healing process.  
**[0:11:01-0:11:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:11:01):**  So the company comes and says, look, I want to change.  Either it's because an NGO campaign, a consumer pressure, the CEO's decision, or just some  individuals within the company thinking, hey, why don't we try something different?  So we sit down, we listen, and we understand what is the magnitude of their problem, how  deeply they want to change.  
**[0:11:22-0:11:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:11:22):**  And then we will try to together start a journey where we're going to go quickly on the ground  and assess, engage suppliers.  We will check whether they've got something in writing about what they want in terms of  environmental and social quality.  If they don't, we will start by writing that together, because we believe that turning  
**[0:11:41-0:11:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:11:41):**  the intention into words and then putting those words into action is what we do.  So if there are no words, we'll put the words on the paper.  Recently Ferrero is working on its hazelnut charter.  Okay, what is responsible hazelnut?  Just as background, Ferrero is the maker of Nutella and a lot of other products with hazelnut  
**[0:12:00-0:12:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:12:00):**  in it, just for the people that don't know the company behind it.  Exactly.  So that's one example.  We did that with Nestle and Palmoil.  We worked with Wilmar in the same way.  
**[0:12:09-0:12:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:12:09):**  So we tried to put words.  With these words, we will then engage the suppliers and the suppliers will tell us,  well, this is where we're at.  This is what we think.  And we'll deploy the teams on the ground to figure out, to test, to visit some suppliers,  
**[0:12:22-0:12:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:12:22):**  et cetera.  Then we'll prioritize.  We'll say, okay, where should we focus first?  What are the biggest challenges that this supply chain faces?  And it varies from country to country.  
**[0:12:31-0:12:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:12:31):**  So Palmoil in Malaysia, it's mostly a social issue.  In Indonesia, we'll talk about deforestation and expansion.  And so we really try to build a plan of transformation.  What becomes really interesting is that we will ask systematically to know where the  raw materials come from.  
**[0:12:49-0:12:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:12:49):**  This is a big hurdle.  Often people say, oh, traceability is not so important.  I said, yes, you need to know where things come from because we cannot change what we  cannot see.  And then we talk to the traders, we talk to the commodity suppliers who have for years  
**[0:13:05-0:13:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:13:05):**  thrived on opacity.  They are the kings of making one ton of Palmoil equivalent everywhere in the world.  And what we say is you source from different landscapes, from different terroir, and you  have to recognize first that these exist.  And that is done by highlighting the information of where it comes from.  
**[0:13:25-0:13:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:13:25):**  I remember on the, I talk about Palmoil because it's a commodity we worked a lot on.  When we started, the buyer of Nestle told us, look, it will be very difficult to get  traceability.  It's almost impossible.  It gets traded so many times, et cetera.  
**[0:13:39-0:13:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:13:39):**  I mean, 10 years later, most of the industry have traceability to all the mills, the 2,500  mills on the planet and now progressively towards plantation.  It's possible.  And then after that, we'll engage on the ground and that becomes really interesting because  then we will pool the influence of different brands in a given landscape.  
**[0:13:59-0:14:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:13:59):**  You take a landscape in Indonesia or in Africa, you got all sorts of raw materials coming  out of it.  So we enter with one raw material, let's say rubber, and then you'll see the produce cocoa,  the produce flavor and fragrances, palm, food.  And then we'll start working together with the government, with the different companies  
**[0:14:15-0:14:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:14:15):**  that source from there and the farmers to figure out, okay, what's the path towards  regeneration?  And that's, I think what also companies appreciated that they're doing the work in their supply  chain, but eventually at landscape level, they connect with others.  And is it difficult to get in that buy-in, like you said, sometimes it's people within  
**[0:14:36-0:14:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:14:36):**  the company, let's say at a medium or senior level, but you need to buy in from the top  and you target specifically the top, as I know.  How do you get the real senior management that probably has never visited a palm or  implantation or how do you get them to support it?  I wouldn't say excited, but to see the potential of Regen Ag, to see the potential of a Fagor  
**[0:14:58-0:15:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:14:58):**  factory, to get them out of their office, basically, maybe literally.  What's your strategy there?  You just said it.  We try to get them to the field.  The best ever engagement I've noticed is to take a CEO to the field, get him to touch  
**[0:15:12-0:15:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:15:12):**  the soil, get him to meet people, get him to reconnect with the reality he's connected  to and that he has long forgotten about because his worries are in meeting rooms, his days  are in meetings and calls and dealing with problems that are more linked to the downstream  part of their work, to the branding, to the supermarket, the retailers, etc., his clients,  but he rarely focuses on the suppliers.  
**[0:15:35-0:15:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:15:35):**  We take the opportunity together with the staff of the very company we work with to  say, hey, let's organize a little trip.  Let's go and see by ourselves.  I seize any opportunity I can to do that.  I remember once with the CEO of Nestle France, he says, look, regenerative agriculture is  
**[0:15:50-0:15:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:15:50):**  really interesting.  Then I said, let's go and have a look.  We got Professor Boivin, who is a researcher on soils in Geneva, to organize a little visit  with us at a farmer's who are doing regenerative agriculture.  I remember that day when we came and it was really cold, the wind blowing and I'm like,  
**[0:16:10-0:16:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:16:10):**  oh my goodness, am I not killing my relationship with the guy by bringing him?  Or the guy itself.  Yes, or the guy itself.  We had this lovely moment where the farmer had prepared a little foldable table and he  had some warm coffee.  
**[0:16:25-0:16:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:16:25):**  For some reason, I didn't even ask him, you know, he had prepared a pot of Nescafe, you  know, hot water and Nescafe.  And he says, which is a nice touch for Nestle CEO of France.  Very nice touch.  It's funny.  
**[0:16:36-0:16:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:16:36):**  And he had bought some croissants from the local bakery and he said, look, I'm going  to show you what I'm doing.  And he was not at all impressed.  He was just being himself and very frank in even asking challenging questions to the CEO.  But we had this very human connection.  
**[0:16:51-0:16:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:16:51):**  We all got some earth in our hands and started to touch the mud and try to understand.  And I know that from this point, you know, the CEO really said, look, that makes total  sense.  I had a feeling this was important, but that just reminds me how really important it is  for me.  
**[0:17:07-0:17:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:17:07):**  And I think that these are the kinds of moments where it's not the only thing, you know, there  are many things that make people change, but reconnecting to nature, feeling that you're  doing something important for the world.  I think all of these are things that are buried into our human nature.  And then when they have the opportunity to come out, I think it's important.  
**[0:17:27-0:17:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:17:27):**  It was the same for me when I had this wake up call early on.  So I know that this process is a multiple impressionist touches that comes from conversations,  the investor saying you need to do that and yourself walking through an exploratory journey  and reconnecting to nature.  I think many listeners can connect to that.  
**[0:17:46-0:17:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:17:46):**  And I mean, it's actually in your mission statement of the connection between people  and nature.  And probably it's one of the core challenges we have.  We are so disconnected and thus we don't know where in our personal life and obviously in  our business life, we have no idea where the palm oil comes from or where our food in general  
**[0:18:03-0:18:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:18:03):**  comes from.  Plus we're mostly in meetings and offices, et cetera.  And we're now starting to see the terrible price we pay for that, but to get people out  in the field, it's not easy.  But once it happens, I have seen it a few times as well, it really gets people like  
**[0:18:17-0:18:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:18:17):**  everything they thought about agriculture or red, et cetera, even if they didn't pay  too much attention, turned out to be way more complex and way more interesting and way more  opportunities than they could ever imagine.  And in first, obviously that's the same.  So you get the CEO on board, but then you go very, very deep.  
**[0:18:32-0:18:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:18:32):**  Like you go deep into one landscape.  It's not that you try to change the whole palm oil sector at once.  You decide to go very deep into even different produce in the same landscape.  That's very deliberate.  Can you explain why that is?  
**[0:18:47-0:18:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:18:47):**  Yes.  What we believe is that if you take a supply chain of a Nestle, a Ferrero, a Maas, these  large companies, it just connects to pretty much everywhere in the world.  I remember when we started looking at Nestle's pop and paper supply chain for the packaging  and we contemplated 3000 suppliers and this has just the converters and behind the converters,  
**[0:19:08-0:19:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:19:08):**  you have the meals and behind the meals, you have the forest owners and you're like, oh  my goodness, this is just too complex.  We'll never get to the end of it.  So what we do is to look at, okay, where does it hurt?  Where are the supply chains connected?  
**[0:19:22-0:19:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:19:22):**  Hurt for the company?  For nature and people.  So where are the companies connected?  So it's important for me as a company that region, because it's where I source and I  need that sourcing.  
**[0:19:33-0:19:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:19:33):**  Let's say the south system of the US, for example, is a basin where a lot of the pop  and paper from the world comes out.  There is no single company, large company that cannot source from there for its pop  and paper supply.  It's impossible.  
**[0:19:45-0:19:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:19:45):**  You are unnecessarily connected there.  So you're saying pulp and paper, meaning the ingredients basically to make the packaging.  Yeah.  And it's made from pulp.  So every company in the world that makes packaging at some point sources part of that from that  
**[0:19:59-0:20:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:19:59):**  region, like you're touched by it.  Inevitably because a lot of the pulp that is produced in the world is coming from those  areas.  So in Brazil, the commoditization of supply chains have located the supply of cocoa in  Ivory Coast, Indonesia Palm.  
**[0:20:13-0:20:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:20:13):**  It's very concentrated.  So basically supply chains are what they are.  We're not judging of whether it's good or bad.  We're pushing for more resilience, more diversification, but still you see these pockets of impact  that exist on ecosystems.  
**[0:20:27-0:20:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:20:27):**  So we've got forest and we've got a lot of people sourcing from there.  And then we look at what's critical.  What are endangered ecosystems?  Things that really need to be preserved because they matter for nature.  And then we will work at the heart of that and we will focus.  
**[0:20:42-0:20:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:20:42):**  So rather than doing assessments and visits everywhere, we will focus there and we'll  say, look, let's try to find a solution.  So where it hurts the most in, let's say it is watershed where the most I'm just making  up an example, the most chemical leaching of this paper production or the most soil  erosion or like where it hurts the most within this area where most in this case of the pulp  
**[0:21:04-0:21:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:21:04):**  and paper comes from.  That's where you want to be.  Absolutely.  So for example, we engaged in Indonesia where we know there's population planted on peat  and there are social conflicts.  
**[0:21:15-0:21:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:21:15):**  We know this is a place that you need to look at with a lot of care.  And if we can find solutions there or if we can find solution in the Southeast of the  US, these solutions can be replicated at scale.  And there what we will do is we will innovate together with the various partners in the  landscapes to say, for example, how do we measure the forest health knowing that you  
**[0:21:35-0:21:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:21:35):**  got people coming in taking biomass?  Are they taking wood for pulp, wood for cellulose, wood for viscose, wood for packaging?  So you've got all these uses and people are not equipped today to have indicators to know  how we manage this forest.  So we will work together with them.  
**[0:21:51-0:21:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:21:51):**  We'll bring in scientists.  We say, hey, how do we keep the finger on the pulse of that forest?  We'll bring technology and we'll go deep.  We'll try.  We'll try, we'll fail.  
**[0:22:00-0:22:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:22:00):**  And eventually we come up with a methodology or a solution that we deliberately want to  remain open source.  And then we said, okay, you can use it.  I give you a great example, which I'm very proud of, which we did in on forest products.  In 2004, we started to work with a timber company in Congo, which had 1.2 million hectares  
**[0:22:20-0:22:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:22:20):**  of management of concessions pristine forest.  Not small.  Yeah.  Yeah.  Quite a lot.  
**[0:22:27-0:22:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:22:27):**  And we had a couple of the Congo basin with the elephants, the gorillas, everything you  can imagine that is pristine about our forest, emblematic animals.  And they had a big challenge because they wanted to get this FSC certification, but  they could not because they were pygmy population, indigenous population in the middle who use  the timbers and you need to get their consent and the free prior and informed consent concept  
**[0:22:52-0:22:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:22:52):**  and impossible to get.  And we thought, oh.  And everyone, the industry was saying, yeah, FSC is bad.  It's impossible for Africa.  It's not suited for Africa, et cetera.  
**[0:23:01-0:23:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:23:01):**  And we thought, how can we unlock that problem?  So we worked with this company.  We brought scientists from the university college of London.  We brought technology company.  We started to work and say, how can we get the consent from people who are not literate  
**[0:23:15-0:23:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:23:15):**  semi nomadic and who are not organized in a traditional society?  They are little groups of people.  There is no boss.  So we thought, okay.  No, they are organized in a traditional society, but not ours.  
**[0:23:26-0:23:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:23:26):**  They were maybe the traditional one.  Yes, exactly.  Not in a traditional way as we think it, as you say.  So we worked with them and we found a way where the communities could actually map on  a GPS by themselves, all the trees that are important to them in the forest and say to  
**[0:23:41-0:23:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:23:41):**  the company, don't touch these trees because they are ours.  And we need them.  Trees for prayer, trees where they eat the caterpillars and everything.  And it happened.  So we mapped all the trees, the fishing areas, the sacred areas, and you had a new layer  
**[0:23:55-0:24:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:23:55):**  of the forest that was the layers of the pygmies coming on top of all the other environmental  and social layers that existed already.  It's completely ignored any of these layers.  I mean, completely ignored their layer of it.  Completely.  
**[0:24:08-0:24:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:24:08):**  And the company said, okay, we are committed to manage things in the best possible way.  So we'll do that.  And we will give up on harvesting those logs, those trees, et cetera, et cetera.  And it happened.  The company got FSC certified.  
**[0:24:20-0:24:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:24:20):**  And then what happened is you had a wave of companies who committed to do that in the  Congo Basin.  Up to 6 million hectares, I think, got certified.  We didn't do it.  We just shared the methodology and we created a center for social excellence to train young  
**[0:24:34-0:24:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:24:34):**  experts.  So suddenly scale happened because there was a practical solution to a given problem that  created value for everyone.  And I think to do this, funnily enough, everyone says, yeah, you need to go to scale.  And they think scale first.  
**[0:24:50-0:24:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:24:50):**  I think we need to have faith that scale comes when you create something useful, which means  letting go of the desire to power and manage everything, control everything, power everything.  You need to let go and trust the fact that complex systems will self reorganize.  And it's a bit like what happens in nature.  Nature comes up with something and then the world reorganizes.  
**[0:25:12-0:25:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:25:12):**  It's chaotic.  I don't know if you know the theory of chaos in physics, but I very much believe in that  because that's how chain reactions happen.  And so all we have to do, focus on trying to solve the problem in a practical way and  work with people to find what creates value for everyone and then share it.  
**[0:25:30-0:25:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:25:30):**  Share it with communication, scale it with finance, scale it with technology.  There's plenty of tools to scale.  Our role is to incubate and make that new solution emerge.  And I really believe that that way we can really tackle things at scale without ourselves  becoming big and powerful, et cetera.  
**[0:25:50-0:25:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:25:50):**  And we very much see that working in practice.  Wow.  There's a lot to unpack, but let's start with a devil's advocate question.  That sounds amazing.  Let's say I'm Nestle or I'm a big commodity buyer in general.  
**[0:26:01-0:26:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:26:01):**  I'm imagining it's quite difficult for me as a senior manager there to accept this fluid  chaotic process, because I would love to have a project with you.  I'm hiring you and there needs to be an outcome ready.  And at the same time in that question, actually the company, even if it's one company working  in a much bigger base and the company pays for that process, even though their impact  
**[0:26:22-0:26:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:26:22):**  might be on the whole base and on many other companies that also getting FSC.  So there's sort of agreeing to that open source, this chaoticness process that maybe nothing  comes out or maybe something completely different than they imagined or they called you for  like, we need a solution, but we actually already have an idea, but maybe in your work,  you find something completely different.  
**[0:26:42-0:26:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:26:42):**  How do you deal with very rigid potential clients that are not made for the chaos yet?  Sometimes we don't even deal with them.  They don't want to work with us.  So I give you again, the metaphor of the doctor for disease or illnesses that are well known.  There are treatments that are well known and some doctors who are just, you know, even  
**[0:27:00-0:27:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:27:00):**  eyes closed, they said, okay, these guys got a flu, flu, aspirin plus this plus that go  away.  And these are the traditional consultants who will churn out a lot of that.  And their, their model is to just do as many of that as possible.  And then you've got the complicated illnesses, the complex disease, the things that, you  
**[0:27:20-0:27:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:27:20):**  know, it doesn't yet exist, the treatment for deforestation, human exploitation, how  do you change the climate impact of your supply chain, all these things,  Commodifying, huge commodity,  All these things.  And then companies, I think it requires doses of humility from the side of companies and  
**[0:27:37-0:27:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:27:37):**  also from our side to say, well, we don't know if we can heal, but what we can do is  to have a go at it.  What's our plan is, and this is what we tell companies that we intend to do it this way,  but we constantly review and adapt.  So the challenge is this very adaptive and agile nature that we need to keep alongside  
**[0:27:58-0:28:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:27:58):**  with key principles that, okay, we will find a solution.  We will be open to be surprised by what the reality tells us.  So it's a very much agile trial and error process, but guided by the constant desire  to have an impact.  And we measure results.  
**[0:28:13-0:28:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:28:13):**  We measure results so that we can see is it working or not.  How do you measure or what do you measure normally?  I mean, it depends obviously, but what are like key metrics that usually come back?  So we try to objectivize nature.  So we'll try to measure the deforestation, right?  
**[0:28:28-0:28:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:28:28):**  How, how?  Yeah.  Okay.  Deforestation, right?  Biomass, forest.  
**[0:28:33-0:28:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:28:33):**  I'll take, I'll take proxies for the health of those ecosystems.  So soils, soil health, which is based on structure, carbon, et cetera.  So we try to measure that.  Farmer prosperity, farmer resilience.  These are two important things.  
**[0:28:47-0:28:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:28:47):**  And then forest health, which is a good proximity, forest density or forest cover.  And these are not complicated things to manage and they're good proxies also for the climate  impacts.  They are not complicated things to measure.  Probably they're difficult to manage.  
**[0:29:00-0:29:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:29:00):**  Exactly.  So once you know what impact is happening, you try different things to see whether, you  know, the system will change or re-adapt.  Just like a farmer tries and say, I'll try that cover crop.  I didn't work this year.  
**[0:29:11-0:29:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:29:11):**  The yield was not so good.  Why?  And you constantly try to play with the system to try to adjust.  So yes, for big corporates, especially industrial ones who are used to fully control the environment  before they land, they want to know where they start.  
**[0:29:25-0:29:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:29:25):**  These five years project, in five years, where will I be?  I can give you an indication of the direction, but I don't give you a guarantee that this  is exactly where you'll be.  Magellan, when he started to think, I believe we can go to the Pacific.  There is a Pacific Ocean.  
**[0:29:39-0:29:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:29:39):**  I believe there is a world without deforestation.  But how do we get there?  When is it along the coast of Argentina and he's trying Marda Plata, da da da, and he  doesn't get there.  His founders in Spain and in Portugal are like, come on, what is he doing?  
**[0:29:52-0:29:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:29:52):**  But somehow they're facing and trusting there must be something and we will find.  So they were so far away that they couldn't really control him as well.  I mean, the communication lines were very, very long.  So you had months and months of freedom before the letters arrived.  That helps.  
**[0:30:08-0:30:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:30:08):**  Unfortunately, the companies keep asking every month where we are on the project, but we  don't have that freedom.  But yes, in a way there is trust.  There is mutual trust.  So we need to deliver progress.  
**[0:30:19-0:30:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:30:19):**  But on the other hand, there is a mutual trust and humility from companies saying, we can't  do everything by ourselves.  We need others.  We need collective action.  And here is a path that seems to make sense to us.  
**[0:30:30-0:30:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:30:30):**  You know, they trust their gut.  They're like, hmm, sounds good.  And there is really a typology of company that works with us.  These companies that are able to do that and the companies that are not able to let go.  And they're like, no, we need to control everything.  
**[0:30:43-0:30:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:30:43):**  We need to know the metrics.  And these companies, they will try to fall back on more traditional approaches.  They will try to seek big coalitions that predefine everything.  Logically, it can make sense, but in practice it doesn't work.  Yeah, you mentioned in a pre-interview, like as soon as you get to the big consortium,  
**[0:31:01-0:31:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:31:01):**  big groups, scale becomes political very quickly and thus everything stops or moves in an incredibly  slow pace.  And that's one of the reasons you chose to go deep and really deep into and not choose  to have every buyer of every palm oil or every buyer of every pulp combined into tackling  these issues.  
**[0:31:21-0:31:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:31:21):**  Yes.  It's a different theory of change than the one that has been predominant for the last  20 years, which was to say, let's agree on what sustainability is.  Let's agree on what regeneration is, which nobody knows.  Yeah.  
**[0:31:34-0:31:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:31:34):**  And then you often you've got a group of people who try to hijack the discussion and say,  this is what it's going to be.  And they try to use their political power to impose a certain vision.  It is doomed to fail.  Why?  
**[0:31:46-0:31:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:31:46):**  Because when you put people together, inevitably it becomes political unless you have nature  in the middle or a map or something to discuss concretely.  But if it's just to align, it becomes political.  Two, to stay relevant, they will need to have everyone on board.  To have everyone on board, you need to dilute your values and you need to adopt the lowest  
**[0:32:04-0:32:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:32:04):**  common denominator.  So it will lose ambition.  And third, last but not least, if you don't work with the farmers, if you don't work with  the communities on the ground, with the people who are managing the land, you're missing  the main actors.  
**[0:32:18-0:32:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:32:18):**  And so if all the corporates and governments sit down together and say, this is what it's  going to be, it is inevitably profiting them first.  It's not co-design, therefore it will never go to scale.  Therefore it's going to have to be pushed onto people and therefore it will never work.  Extractive.  
**[0:32:34-0:32:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:32:34):**  Extractive.  It has to be extractive.  Top down and it doesn't work.  So we prefer this bottom up approach, supporting by a kind top down approach, bottom up, rooted  in practice, rooted in concrete, producing solutions that create value and that by themselves  
**[0:32:49-0:32:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:32:49):**  they can scale.  And just to give an indication, and actually we get to the name then, because we started  and it was called the Forest Trust.  You took over in 2016, you decided to change the name.  Can you give a bit of an indication, first of all, why, and also what's the size of the  
**[0:33:05-0:33:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:33:05):**  organization just to give an indication that it's not three people in a room somewhere,  it's actually quite sizable.  And then we get to why earth work.  So the founder, Scott Poynton, he's a great guy who started the organization.  When was that?  
**[0:33:18-0:33:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:33:18):**  It was in 1999.  He's got a blog and I encourage you to have a look at it.  When he started the organization, he was very inspired by earthworms.  And it's been something that we've always had within the organization.  And when he stepped down and I stepped in, this idea of being named earthworm was not  
**[0:33:36-0:33:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:33:36):**  new.  This is something we wanted to do.  And so I decided, let's go for it.  And it was a bit of a shock initially because it's not like we're going to be called the  eagle or the bull or something quite powerful.  
**[0:33:48-0:33:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:33:48):**  Earthworm is a bit dirty.  It's not the animal you necessarily identify to.  You don't want to touch.  I do, but some people think, oh, yeah, it's a bit weird, but actually it's one of the  most powerful animals, one of the most powerful, relevant in the universe.  
**[0:34:02-0:34:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:34:02):**  And I'm glad you're saying that because that's the way we see it as well for us.  An earthworm is, it's the best symbol of circularity.  It recycles constantly.  It connects the world between the surface and the depths.  We talk to NGOs, we talk to communities.  
**[0:34:16-0:34:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:34:16):**  We talk to big multinationals.  We try to connect these people to create something fertile.  And the earthworm does that.  It connects the organic and the mineral and eventually produces humus, which is something  that nests life, that hosts life.  
**[0:34:31-0:34:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:34:31):**  So we like that.  And we also like the idea of working at the roots of supply chains where it's needed and  getting our boots on the ground and our hands dirty with mud.  Okay.  It doesn't have hands nor feet, but you see the metaphor.  
**[0:34:44-0:34:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:34:44):**  And that's how we thought that we need to become who we are.  We had not had the opportunity to do that before, but then it made total sense to become  who we wanted to be.  Also because you are more and more into agriculture and I mean, obviously very deep into forest,  but not only anymore.  
**[0:35:00-0:35:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:35:00):**  Yes.  Can you describe a bit of your work, let's say on row cropping or nonforest commodities  at the moment?  Exactly.  And so it made sense to say, you know, earthworm, you find them in the forest, you find them  
**[0:35:10-0:35:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:35:10):**  in agricultural fields and you find them in companies.  All the people we work with, they are earthworms within their companies.  One day there was a lady from the bank.  She said, you know, I'm the earthworm here.  I'm the earthworm in this bank.  
**[0:35:23-0:35:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:35:23):**  And I like the image because it's that this relentless cultivation of life, whatever happens,  whatever is dumped on the soil, you know, problems, et cetera, the person keeps going  and trying to cultivate something healthy and fertile.  And I really like that.  Maybe just to answer your question, the organization today is about 230 people around the world.  
**[0:35:44-0:35:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:35:44):**  We are in 16 offices, but 80% of the staff is really on the ground, close to supplier,  farmers, forest, and working actively in landscapes.  And what kind of clients, I mean, you mentioned a few, what are the biggest commodities or  biggest crops you work in or the biggest landscape, whatever you want to define it.  Somebody asks you about your clients.  
**[0:36:02-0:36:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:36:02):**  What do you answer?  We work with a lot of brands and some of their suppliers.  Among the biggest brands will be Nestle, Ferraro, Mars, Racket Bank, Kaiser, Pizet, Carson's  brands who are relying on natural materials, be there, Poppin paper, rubber, palm, cocoa,  soy, cereals, things that will go really in their products and be important for them.  
**[0:36:25-0:36:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:36:25):**  And then we'll engage their suppliers and some of the suppliers like, oh, I like this  approach.  I want to apply it not just for that client, but for everyone.  And that's what we do.  Sometimes we engage with investors as well, who are more and more starting to think, you  
**[0:36:37-0:36:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:36:37):**  know, I'm invested in all these companies, how are they doing?  How can I get them to embark on an approach that is transformative?  And so we'll work with them.  How many clients do you have in Togo?  We work with about 120 companies.  
**[0:36:49-0:36:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:36:49):**  The smallest one probably is a charcoal producer in the east of France and the biggest one  will be Nestle outside.  Wow.  The full value chain.  Yeah.  
**[0:36:58-0:36:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:36:58):**  That's very interesting.  And in terms of outside, I mean, you mentioned cereals and grains.  Have you seen that grow like the agriculture and not necessarily the agroforestry piece?  Is that something that has been moving?  You mean the, how companies are priced?  
**[0:37:11-0:37:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:37:11):**  Yeah, no, row cropping as well.  I mean, obviously Nestle buys everything, but you've started, I think working with them  mostly on the forestry products or the plantation products.  How has been your shift or not your broader focus now on agriculture?  What I'd say, look, is that a lot of companies have engaged on their raw material purchase  
**[0:37:31-0:37:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:37:31):**  through risk management.  So the 2000s, the year 2000s, you know, we're marked by, oh shit, we need to find out.  Where'd that come from?  And we need to clear that risk.  We don't want a problem.  
**[0:37:43-0:37:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:37:43):**  We don't want a reputational issue.  So the management would tell the people in the sourcing, do whatever it takes to solve  that problem.  I don't want my name in the papers.  That was the mandate initially.  
**[0:37:55-0:37:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:37:55):**  And you go only that far with that Monday because you just, you don't really engage  in regeneration.  The bare minimum.  Yeah.  Yeah.  
**[0:38:03-0:38:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:38:03):**  You try to clear out the risk, but eventually it's not fully associated to the creation  of value.  What's happening, I would say since a few years now is that you have another community  asking companies to change.  Before it was the NGOs.  
**[0:38:16-0:38:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:38:16):**  Now it's the NGOs plus the consumers plus the investors.  Consumers and investors are much more important to your bottom line if you're a company,  to your survival, economic survival than NGOs.  So it's creating different things.  The leaders that are put at the head of companies, they need to have sustainability in mind.  
**[0:38:35-0:38:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:38:35):**  Let's take the new CEO of Airbus.  He had, and one of his key things, Guillaume-Fourie is, you know, how do we shift aviation?  Right.  Big challenge.  But that's also why probably as a CEO, he can't dismiss the topic.  
**[0:38:48-0:38:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:38:48):**  He's being asked by investors to deal with that.  Mark Schneider, the CEO of Nestle is the same.  He has to put sustainability and take it in account as part of one of his key objectives.  One.  Two.  
**[0:39:01-0:39:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:39:01):**  He's asking, do I want to buy a fake story about this chocolate bar or can you tell me  the real story?  Because otherwise I'm going to shift to another brand.  I'm going to shift to the local cereal, Bean to Bar, who can tell whose story is the very  story of how it's been made by home, etc.  
**[0:39:17-0:39:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:39:17):**  But if I buy it from you, I get something a bit fake and I don't know really where it  comes from and people are telling me it's bad.  So I'm going to probably shift.  So there is an inherent need to shift that is being put back to the businesses by consumers  and investors.  
**[0:39:33-0:39:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:39:33):**  And then it makes businesses think, hey, I really need to embrace that differently.  So what the change is marked by much more proactivity from companies to say, I want  to know where it comes from.  I want it to be good.  I want it to be good for planet, for people.  
**[0:39:49-0:39:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:39:49):**  Please help me.  So it's not about why should I do it?  It's about how can I do it?  And what's fascinating is we see a big appetite despite the current recession to keep that  journey going.  
**[0:40:00-0:40:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:40:00):**  We were expecting that people would completely drop their investment in these aspects because  it was kind of CSR stuff.  It's not.  It's like we want to accelerate.  The climate crisis is still there.  
**[0:40:10-0:40:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:40:10):**  COVID is linked to that.  We'll have other episodes like that.  So we need to change.  And of course, some companies are suffering, but we can see the intentions are still there.  No, that's very interesting.  
**[0:40:20-0:40:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:40:20):**  To shift gears a bit, I mean, you mentioned already investors a few times and you have  an interesting overview of the sector, obviously, as you are deep into the supply chains and  you know the brands.  And so it's a question I like to ask if you tomorrow morning, you wake up and you're the  head of an investment fund of a $1 billion investment fund.  
**[0:40:37-0:40:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:40:37):**  Let's put a nice amount in that.  How would you put that to work?  Obviously, we're not giving investment advice here, but I'm very curious on your view of  where you think a fund like that.  That's investment, they're not grants, but they could be very long term investments.  
**[0:40:51-0:40:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:40:51):**  What would you do?  What I observe today is that there has been a lot of investment going to the downstream.  So the downstream of the supply chain for me is the part that is closest to the consumer  and the upstream is closest to the farmer.  If you look at how many brands and how much investment is put into the downstream to optimize  
**[0:41:13-0:41:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:41:13):**  the route of the yogurt pot between the industry and the retailer, how do we make sure the  packaging is lighter, that the cardboard box is this and that and everything is optimized  to the maximum.  And then a lot of investment and business models are being developed there.  It's also where people are in the cities.  
**[0:41:31-0:41:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:41:31):**  So they look at what they've got around them and they start developing ideas and pitching  to people who have money, who are in the cities, these kind of same things.  The same bubble.  Yeah.  The same bubble.  
**[0:41:42-0:41:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:41:42):**  And they start to suck very quickly because they're like, well, you know, that's not really  changing the world a little bit, but you know.  Most of the impact is not downstream.  It's upstream.  Exactly.  
**[0:41:50-0:41:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:41:50):**  The impact on forest, on people, on climate is upstream.  And this realization is accompanied by the fact that when you look at what's happening  between the farmer and his first client, the co-op or the guy who buys his raw materials,  there is very little innovation.  I would say near to nothing.  
**[0:42:07-0:42:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:42:07):**  It's like a dessert.  So if you put a little bit of money there to sprout new ideas, to incubate new ideas  or to stimulate new ideas, there is entrepreneurship.  You look at Africa, for example, there's lots of entrepreneurs there, but they are not revealed.  They're not supported.  
**[0:42:22-0:42:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:42:22):**  So you don't have a deal flow of investment coming out of that.  But that's where investment could make a lot of difference.  I give you an example.  We're in the pinemold supply chain of Nestle.  We have companies in Ivory Coast who supply pinemold.  
**[0:42:37-0:42:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:42:37):**  So the farmers harvest the palm, they put it on the side of the road, and then the meal  comes and collects them.  As part of a diagnostic, we talked to the meal and the meal says, oh, you know what?  These guys are useless.  Whenever we come to pick up the fruit with the trucks, the fruits are rotten.  
**[0:42:51-0:42:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:42:51):**  And when we go to the meal, we can process them, the quality goes down, et cetera.  Palmol, you need to process it within 24 hours.  And then on the side, we talked to the farmers and the farmers said, oh, these meals are  really useless.  You know, they always come up late.  
**[0:43:06-0:43:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:43:06):**  So we said, OK, let's coordinate.  So we take a piece of paper, we put it in the village, and we said the truck will be  there on Tuesday.  And the truck is there on Tuesday.  And then the fruits are picked up.  
**[0:43:15-0:43:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:43:15):**  So farmers get more money, the meal gets more money, everyone's winning.  And a lot more production because you reduce waste.  I mean, this is dead simple.  We then talk to people to say, look, why don't you invest a bit of time to make that digital?  Everyone's got a smartphone, you just can coordinate this kind of stuff.  
**[0:43:33-0:43:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:43:33):**  And then we put it into the hands of local entrepreneurs and they're developing this  kind of stuff.  So I'm thinking this is just giving a little bit of attention to a problem which is present  all across Africa, touches all the smallholders, and could drastically reduce the waste, drastically  reduce the need for expanding a new plantation, drastically increase farmers income.  
**[0:43:54-0:44:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:43:54):**  So to respond to your question, let's take some of that billion and put it to identify  opportunities.  Identify opportunities at the very roots of the supply chain in between the farmer.  But you're meaning one step after the farmer.  That is the sweet spot you're talking about.  
**[0:44:12-0:44:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:44:12):**  Yes.  All the fertilizer chemical companies, they have a lot of thinking around how do we make  the farmer more efficient?  There's a lot of business around data and technology.  How do we get the data from the farmer?  
**[0:44:21-0:44:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:44:21):**  Yeah.  Okay.  That's all right.  And I think it's probably too much thinking going in there.  I would really focus on that first step on the collaboration and all the opportunities  
**[0:44:31-0:44:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:44:31):**  around the value chain connection, supply chain connection that exists between the farmer  and his first client.  There is a lot there.  The first chain, basically the first piece.  Yeah, exactly.  
**[0:44:40-0:44:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:44:40):**  That would be a first thing.  And then I would really use the money.  And this is my second point to ignite, to start, to seed fund, to try and fail, because  I believe the funds, the big funds are there.  The other billions are there to scale up.  
**[0:44:56-0:44:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:44:56):**  I'm not worried about that.  Now, I'm asking this question literally because I made a prediction.  I don't know if it was pre-COVID, but this year we as a sector, but probably maybe me  even would get calls from people saying, okay, I'm ready to put serious amount of money to  work.  
**[0:45:12-0:45:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:45:12):**  So where do I go?  And I'm not giving investment advice, but I'm also thinking, are we as a sector ready  to absorb that?  So I have no doubt that the money is coming or maybe even already there and knocking on  some of our doors of people that we've interviewed or other people in this space, and they're  
**[0:45:27-0:45:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:45:27):**  going to be nine zeros and maybe even more.  The question is, do we have the infrastructure?  Do we have the tissue to put that to work?  Well before I answer that question, I would say, my view is where do you focus?  So you focus at the roots of the supply chain and you focus on the risky stuff, taking risks  
**[0:45:44-0:45:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:45:44):**  and because the scale up thing and will come from others.  Okay.  Or you split your thing into one thing that is less risky and one thing that is more risky.  But you can take a portfolio approach.  Yeah, you could.  
**[0:45:55-0:45:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:45:55):**  Yeah.  You're in charge, you can do whatever you want.  Exactly.  So I take a portfolio approach.  I put something on things that are already scaling up.  
**[0:46:01-0:46:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:46:01):**  So I'm almost sure I'm going to get a return.  And then I'm taking the other half on risky things really at the roots of supply chain,  Indonesia, Africa.  And then I try to work with a coalition of actors, which is backed by the offtake of  big companies.  
**[0:46:17-0:46:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:46:17):**  So a Nestle can say, yeah, I'm going to continue to buy that palm oil, but if you can make  it better, I will continue to buy it.  I can commit that I'll stay and stick with this supplier because if he makes a fault  to change, I'll stick to that.  And that's the first point for an investor is to have a strong offtaker.  
**[0:46:32-0:46:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:46:32):**  So within those supply chain, not somewhere else, within those supply chain, I will work  with that.  I will connect with any organization that helps in stimulating entrepreneurship.  We've got a great organization called Seedstars around here.  They do incubation work in Africa, in developing countries, mostly on entrepreneurship and  
**[0:46:50-0:46:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:46:50):**  tech.  Let's take these guys to the countryside and rural areas.  I'll connect with universities and young people.  Otherwise they keep coming up with better yogurt roots for stuff.  No, they need to come up with stuff for farmers.  
**[0:47:02-0:47:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:47:02):**  Yeah.  And connect with local organization, people who have boots on the ground.  We'd be happy to participate to this kind of stuff and identify, okay, here, there is  an opportunity.  Here, there is an opportunity.  
**[0:47:13-0:47:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:47:13):**  Lots of organization locally are in touch with farmers.  They are in touch with those opportunities, but they can't come and tell you, this is  a company that you can fund because often the investors are like, oh, it's too risky.  I need to have my return, et cetera, et cetera.  So it's about creating a fertile environment within supply chains, at the roots of supply  
**[0:47:32-0:47:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:47:32):**  chain to take some risks, try things out.  And you can be sure because it's so desertic in terms of funding there that if you put  a little bit of investment with this entrepreneurial spirit in connection with the purchase from  brands, you will succeed.  As I said with the example on palm oil in Ivory Coast, there's so much to do.  
**[0:47:51-0:47:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:47:51):**  There's so much to do.  So the value is there.  You almost have to pick it from the trees, but you need to get organized to have a basket.  A low hanging fruit, literally.  Yeah, exactly.  
**[0:48:00-0:48:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:48:00):**  So you would pick Indonesia, palm oil and Africa.  What would you do in Africa?  I mean, where does it hurt the most, do you think?  No, I'd put Indonesia as a whole, not just palm oil, but I would pick region.  In Indonesia, Africa are places where that's, you could have a huge impact on ecosystems  
**[0:48:16-0:48:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:48:16):**  and on people by looking at that.  I give you another example because to me it's so impressive.  We worked a bit with Givaudan in flavors and fragrance supply chains and, you know, Vetiver  and Patrick.  Sorry, for anybody, who are they?  
**[0:48:30-0:48:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:48:30):**  What do they do?  So Givaudan is one of the leading brands that supplies all the flavors and fragrances that  you will use in products, in food, et cetera.  So they have hundreds of raw materials from, you know, orange peel to turpentines to patchouli  and Vetiver and all these things that you will use.  
**[0:48:50-0:48:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:48:50):**  They do it chemically, but they also have a big division on naturals.  And the appetite from the market is, okay, can we have natural products?  So the natural flavors are important.  So they go all around the world and they source those raw materials.  And we realized that in Indonesia, they source Vetiver and patchouli and we studied the process.  
**[0:49:08-0:49:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:49:08):**  They are a grass and a little tree, a little bush, and that, you know, you can harvest  their flowers, fruits, roots, and then you can process them into flavor.  So you have to distill.  So you heat the water, you process it, and then you will collect the essential oil, which  is a real small fraction of it.  
**[0:49:26-0:49:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:49:26):**  So what you need to do on the agricultural side, a lot of things have already been done.  But then when you look at the transformation in distillation process, lots of very artisanal  distillers burn a lot of wood to heat up the water, boil it, collect the essential oil,  and then they have to cool it down.  So they take the water from the river, they heat the water from the river, which has huge  
**[0:49:47-0:49:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:49:47):**  impacts, and then they cool it down.  We sent one student for three months to look at the process and like, look, we could really  recover the heat from that system.  So you don't have to use so much wood, which is coming from illegal areas and sometimes,  and you could really transform the process.  
**[0:50:03-0:50:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:50:03):**  So we sat down with Givaudan to say, okay, and this is a discussion that is ongoing,  how can we create a more efficient distillation and create models that are practically working  for the communities who distill?  It's not a huge investment, but could be backed up by Givaudan to scale.  And this has been, you know, these kind of ideas that are, as you said, low hanging fruits,  
**[0:50:24-0:50:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:50:24):**  just have to study a bit, take interest in what's happening, and then you see opportunities  to drive change at scale.  Yeah, I remember I interviewed Paul Chatterton of WWF or of the Sustainable Finance or the  Landscape Finance Lab.  And one of, they were working in the supply chain of H&M, I think, one of the main negative  
**[0:50:41-0:50:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:50:41):**  impacts was actually the dyeing industries or the coloring industry and was one of the  main reasons of deforestation in, I think, Bangladesh, in one of the, I'm getting the  country wrong, because they needed the boilers, they needed the hot water.  So they figured, and many of them could be greatly replaced by solar, etc.  Just that nobody looked at what was the reason of deforestation.  
**[0:51:02-0:51:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:51:02):**  It wasn't the wood.  Yeah, it was the wood to burn, the water to boil for the coloring of the, and that was  a huge, or is still, they're working on it, a huge negative impact on the supply chain  of H&M, which probably they never even knew.  And because nobody went there and asked the questions before.  
**[0:51:18-0:51:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:51:18):**  But the landscape was being deforested because they were coloring the clothing.  And the solution is not to say, hey, guys, don't do this.  No, because you just look at how much they pay.  The little entrepreneurs, they still, they pay 25, 30, up to 40% of their cost is fuel  cost.  
**[0:51:34-0:51:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:51:34):**  Fuel cost to be able to power the machine.  If you tell them, look, you want to reduce your fuel cost, but you need to go through  a phase where your risk is going to be backed by some investment, and maybe some projects,  subsidy assistance, etc.  That will work.  
**[0:51:47-0:51:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:51:47):**  It's not complicated.  Transition finance.  Yeah.  So with the 1 billion, we could do a lot.  It's I think one of the most unsexy, sexy thing is flexible, fair, well-structured working  
**[0:52:01-0:52:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:52:01):**  capital, which probably is going to change the world in many, many ways.  But it's something that we greatly overlook in transition from farmers and transition  for companies.  Like there is a way to transition.  We know there are more efficient ways, but of course there might be some years where  
**[0:52:15-0:52:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:52:15):**  you can take a hit or your yields go down or your production goes down or et cetera,  et cetera.  But if you structure that well, you can go through it.  And that's why I think finance is so interesting because you can help companies, farmers, consumers  go through that transition and you can finance that.  
**[0:52:31-0:52:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:52:31):**  Partly blended, partly investor.  I mean, whatever situation, I don't say everything has to be a financial investment obviously,  but money can play a very interesting transition role there.  I would indeed really look at not doing it alone.  So I would involve brands as off takers.  
**[0:52:48-0:52:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:52:48):**  I would work in the supply chain and I would definitely go for blended finance because  some of the things that will be achieved are for common good.  So there are a lot of public finance that is coming in as a grantee, as a support.  And then I would go for subsidies and grants to compliment some of the things that need  to be done that could be done through a subsidy or grant so that it doesn't affect the yield  
**[0:53:11-0:53:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:53:11):**  or the return of the investment.  So I would really try to do this collectively.  We've been talking with BNP Paribas.  There's a guy there, Pierre Rousseau, who's doing an amazing job in starting these kinds  of projects.  
**[0:53:22-0:53:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:53:22):**  So this is the approach that we often like to take.  And that's what we would do if we had 1 billion of investment.  It's very interesting.  I recorded or we recorded last week with the Perennial Fund, who has been a few times on  the show actually, and will be out soon, hopefully.  
**[0:53:37-0:53:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:53:37):**  And their strategy of financing the transition of farmers in the US has been on three pillars.  One is access to peer support, that you need others that are on the same journey or that  are a few steps ahead.  You need to see, touch, feel as a farmer, but also as an entrepreneur that this is possible,  that is not crazy.  
**[0:53:54-0:53:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:53:54):**  Access to independent advice, like you need someone that's not paid by an input company  to tell you how to apply, how to do, you need good agronomic in case of a farmer advice.  Access to markets, both the off-take agreements during the transition and after, in the case  of organic, in the case of regenerative organic, you need a company that says, I'm going to  buy it.  
**[0:54:14-0:54:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:54:14):**  I'm committing to off-taking, off-take for the common good, maybe carbon, maybe water,  maybe biodiversity.  That depends where you are, what is possible.  And then the third, but only the third, not the first two, because the first two are access  to support and access to markets is capital.  
**[0:54:29-0:54:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:54:29):**  Could be flexible, blended, a mix of everything, but it's not, I mean, without those, it needs  to be the three of them because without the market, none of the entrepreneurs are going  to move.  And of course they don't even know it's possible, let alone, obviously they're not going to  move.  
**[0:54:43-0:54:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:54:43):**  So you need that, these three puzzle pieces for a successful, I think, transition in general.  And they really nailed that in terms of, of agriculture piece.  And I'm very excited to share the podcast.  We'll be out when you're listening to this probably.  So go and go and find it.  
**[0:54:55-0:54:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:54:55):**  But they are, it's very interesting that transition finance piece, it's not necessarily only about  the finance.  It needs the other pieces because otherwise we're just throwing money at something and  putting more depth on the books of entrepreneurs and farmers, which honestly don't really need  it.  
**[0:55:08-0:55:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:55:08):**  It's going to be funny how much something as unsexy as working capital is going to change  things.  That's a, so I think it's a transition capital is going to be a big driver.  Yes.  Okay.  
**[0:55:21-0:55:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:55:21):**  So we took away, we talked about the fund.  You're no longer in charge of that fund, unfortunately, but you have a magic power to change one thing  overnight in the agricultural, but definitely let's say the land use industry.  What would you use your magic wand for?  You can change one thing overnight.  
**[0:55:36-0:55:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:55:36):**  What would that be?  It would give a connection to nature and to life sciences and some kind of basic education  about how nature works to every business person in the world.  That would make every CEO of a company aware of what are the nature's processes and how  they as a human being are connected and relying on nature.  
**[0:55:59-0:56:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:55:59):**  That awareness, if it could be instantly put in them in the hearts, in the minds and in  their guts.  You can, you have the power, Ross.  It would be, I think, a life changing because somehow it would facilitate and accelerate  the alignment and the decision making because it comes from the gut.  
**[0:56:17-0:56:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:56:17):**  You know, when someone makes a decision, it comes from the gut as much as from the heart  and the minds.  But I would put them connected to that so that they are quicker in making decisions.  They are quicker in taking risks, in embracing the unknown and having this faith that nature  can do it and that solutions will emerge, etc., etc.  
**[0:56:37-0:56:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:56:37):**  Not trying to control everything, but releasing a bit of control and trusting.  I think it's a really good answer.  What do you believe to be true about regenerative agriculture that others don't believe to be  true?  And I definitely stole, slash borrowed this question from John Kemp, who you often ask  
**[0:56:53-0:56:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:56:53):**  is about agriculture in general.  So what do you believe to be true that you see others actually not really believe?  Well, what I believe is that nature does it for you.  And because it does it for you, it costs less.  And therefore it's beneficial economically.  
**[0:57:09-0:57:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:57:09):**  Often people think that regenerative agriculture is another layer of a punitive ecology approach.  You know, it's going to be a series of don't dos, and therefore they're going to be costs  and you're going to produce less, etc.  Because it's, you know, how normative and punitive ecology has been imposed or proposed  to farmers in the past.  
**[0:57:30-0:57:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:57:30):**  The thing is, as soon as you do it, you realize that the earthworms, they do plow for you.  And when they do that, actually, you don't need to go out with your tractor and your  plow and spend time, money, petrol to do that.  But to be able to realize that this little earthworm is going to plow that field for  you.  
**[0:57:50-0:57:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:57:50):**  If you just give him some feed, which means planting some seeds.  This is a paradigm shift.  We don't think like that.  So we as humans, we believe and we had to do that.  We had to dominate nature in a way to survive.  
**[0:58:05-0:58:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:58:05):**  We had, I was reading Lewis and Clark, they were killing bears every day to survive and  to eat.  So they had to fight against nature.  We know in a new era where we recognize nature is fragile, but also incredibly powerful.  So we can work with her to unlock that power.  
**[0:58:24-0:58:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:58:24):**  And that will make us realize that actually we don't have to do everything ourselves.  Nature does it for us.  And we have to trust that.  It's just a bit like the planting of trees.  You know, instead of conserving forest and let nature plant trees, we want to all go  
**[0:58:37-0:58:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:58:37):**  out and plant lots of trees.  That's good.  But just realize that nature does it faster, better and cheaper than us.  I think it's a perfect way to end this conversation.  Thank you Bastien for your time, for your openness.  
**[0:58:51-0:58:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:58:51):**  And I don't think it's the last time we talk.  I hope it's not the last time we talk.  I think we learned a lot on commodities, on large companies, on what is possible on the  ground and how to make change.  So thank you so much for sharing today and be in touch.  
**[0:59:06-0:59:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:59:06):**  And thank you Koen for the great podcast you've created and the inspiration you vehicle and  you carry to everyone for this podcast.  Thank you.  If you found the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  
**[0:59:21-0:59:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:59:21):**  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast.  And it only takes a few seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you, and if you have the means, please  
**[0:59:37-0:59:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=0:59:37):**  join my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or in the description  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  
**[1:00:06-1:00:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=1:00:06):**  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to put money  to work in regenerating soils, and I've been following the space since 2011 and recording  
**[1:00:25-1:00:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=1:00:25):**  these podcasts since 2016.  We thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  
**[1:00:37-1:00:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=1:00:37):**  How have we picked interviewees?  And what questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  
**[1:00:45-1:00:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=1:00:45):**  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  You the soil builders and investors in the space, the soil builders, people working in  this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers, vehicle builders, crowd investing,  
**[1:00:59-1:01:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=1:00:59):**  platform builders, act tech companies, farm to gut food companies, permaculture, key line  designers, holistic management consultants, etc, etc.  People that are building soil at scale and the investors who are putting their own money  to work through their family office or as private individuals or people who are putting  other people's money to work through foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies,  
**[1:01:21-1:01:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=1:01:21):**  etc.  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you.  
**[1:01:30-1:01:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=1:01:30):**  And I'm very aware that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very  different means.  So I'm inviting you if this course is creating value to you.  And if you have the means to consider paying what you think it's worth, thank you.  So what is this course?  
**[1:01:46-1:01:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=1:01:46):**  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides.  So you don't have to ride along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  
**[1:02:10-1:02:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=1:02:10):**  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  
**[1:02:26-1:02:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=1:02:26):**  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately, that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  
**[1:02:41-1:02:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/06/23/bastien-sachet#t=1:02:41):**  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  