### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2020-00-07)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  How a former Shell engineer discovered the potential of soil carbon.  The key role of regenerative entrepreneurs to find profitable business models to get  
**[0:00:21-0:00:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:00:21):**  regenerative products from the farmers who are the heroes in this story to the consumers.  We discuss grass, cows, methane, carbon, the science behind regenerative livestock farming,  distribution models, bird-friendly ranching, the Gaia hypothesis, how to scale regenerative  agriculture and why regeneration is inevitable.  I hope you enjoy this wide-ranging interview as much as I did recording it.  
**[0:00:47-0:00:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:00:47):**  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture.  Investing as if the planet mattered.  This show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  
**[0:01:07-0:01:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:01:07):**  Why my focus on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  
**[0:01:25-0:01:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:01:25):**  In March last year, we launched our membership community to make it easy for fans to support  our work.  And so many of you have joined as a member.  We've launched different types of benefits, exclusive content, Q&A webinars with former  guests, ask me anything sessions plus so much more to come in the future.  
**[0:01:41-0:01:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:01:41):**  For more information on the different tiers, benefits and how to become a member, check  gumroad.com slash investing region egg or find the link below.  Thank you.  So welcome to another episode today with Russ concert, co-founder of standard soil and blue  nest beef, feed the soil and nourish the world.  
**[0:01:58-0:02:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:01:58):**  Russ comes from a background of shell and is now laser focused on taste and birds.  And obviously we're going to ask all about that.  Welcome Russ.  Hi, what a joy to be here.  To start.  
**[0:02:08-0:02:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:02:08):**  I mean, I always ask this personal question.  You come from a world of energy, shell, fossil fuels.  How did you end up on?  I can imagine obviously because of climate and carbon, et cetera.  But you have quite an interesting story there.  
**[0:02:20-0:02:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:02:20):**  Why did you, how did you end up on soil?  And then we get to the very first.  Yeah.  The cut to the chase.  Really.  
**[0:02:27-0:02:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:02:27):**  I spent 30 years figuring out how to take carbon out of the ground that was dead.  And now I'm in the business realizing the potential to put living carbon back into the  soil.  I've come to see in a very unusual way that these are all part of just the one big carbon  cycle that drives the overall health of planet earth.  
**[0:02:43-0:02:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:02:43):**  I'm an engineer by background.  I'm sure that'll become visible as we chat.  And I went into the energy industry in the 1970s because at that time the issue was like,  Hey, we're going to run out.  We're not going to have enough.  
**[0:02:54-0:02:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:02:54):**  We had shortages and these were the big issues.  We were certainly aware and thinking of clean and alternative, et cetera, at that time.  But that wasn't the driver.  But over the course of my career, got more deeply involved in that.  I helped set up Shell's technology venturing group in the late 1990s, led a innovation  
**[0:03:14-0:03:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:03:14):**  investment group called Game Changer through the 90s and into the early 2000s for a long  time.  And really got exposed to entrepreneurs in every facet of alternative energy systems,  biofuels, solar, wind, as well as novel approaches to oil and gas.  And part of that was carbon sequestration.  
**[0:03:33-0:03:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:03:33):**  And we realized it was a really big problem, but it was a really tough problem.  And we had invested in quite a number of ideas for taking carbon out of the air and none  were particularly compelling.  And then I ran across some folks one day that said, Hey, we could take carbon out of the  air and store it in soil.  
**[0:03:52-0:03:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:03:52):**  My very deep background in oil and gas was measuring and counting carbon in the deep  earth.  And when I went looking for data, I said, Holy cow, the quantity and distribution of  carbon in the earth was identical to the source rocks that were buried hundreds of millions  of years ago that later formed oil and gas.  
**[0:04:10-0:04:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:04:10):**  So literally what these regenerative farmers were doing was putting carbon back in the  earth right where it was put millions and millions of years ago.  Can you explain it a bit?  What do you mean that the composition was the same for the non-engineers and the non-sourcers?  What do you mean by the composition was the same?  
**[0:04:25-0:04:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:04:25):**  Yeah, so oil and gas comes out of what we call source rocks.  Source rocks are made of dead organic matter that was buried, decomposed, and cooked under  time, temperature, and pressure in the deep earth.  And then a liquid or gas came out of it and floated up into a place where a guy like me  used to poke a hole in it to suck it out and refine it and put it in your tank.  
**[0:04:45-0:04:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:04:45):**  And literally, I still remember where I was sitting the day I got the first data set from  a farm in Australia.  And I looked at the quantity and distribution of soil organic matter.  And I go, I know exactly what this is.  This looks just like the source rocks I used to measure and...  
**[0:04:59-0:05:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:04:59):**  A bit higher up.  Yeah, a bit higher up.  But morphologically, if you put it under a microscope, it looked identical.  You had some sort of broader matrix, what we would call soil in the shallow earth, what  we would call a rock in the deep earth.  
**[0:05:13-0:05:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:05:13):**  And interspersed within it are these little particles of organic matter.  So what it really did for me was appreciate not only the connectivity, but the do-ability  of regenerative agriculture.  Because these pioneers that were developing and deploying methods to put carbon back into  the soil weren't asking the planet to do anything it hadn't done for millions and millions of  
**[0:05:34-0:05:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:05:34):**  years.  It was really just tapping into the same natural force that's like the equivalent of water  running downhill.  If water runs downhill and I come up with a plan to make water run downhill, you should  expect that that's a doable plan in some way.  
**[0:05:47-0:05:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:05:47):**  How fast, how much?  You got to do the math.  But the basic mechanisms were entirely the most un-novel thing you could think of anyway.  And you were in that office, saw that paper coming in, you thought, holy cow, I've seen  this before.  
**[0:06:03-0:06:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:06:03):**  That was quite a few years ago.  So what happened after that?  What happened in your life?  What changed?  Did you go to Australia?  
**[0:06:08-0:06:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:06:08):**  Did you visit this farmer?  What were the next steps?  Close.  At the time, I had already decided I was going to retire from Shell and get involved in helping  renewable energy entrepreneurs mature their businesses.  
**[0:06:22-0:06:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:06:22):**  And I just had met a number of friends that kept pulling me into these questions about  the science and scalability of regenerative agriculture.  One in particular, my very dear friend, Peter Bick, he's a movie producer.  I made a movie called Carbon Nation.  I was in the process of making a new movie called Soil Carbon Cowboys at the time.  
**[0:06:38-0:06:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:06:38):**  And said, Ross, you need to come to this conference or this event.  And I started doing that.  And pretty soon, Peter and I were cooking up plans to do science projects and studies  along with some other colleagues.  And again, I was kind of like the reluctant regenerative agriculture entrepreneur, if  
**[0:06:55-0:06:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:06:55):**  you will.  I was still spending most of my time working with renewable energy entrepreneurs.  And then at some point, I really came to appreciate that these regenerative agriculture producers  were very much where the renewable energy entrepreneurs were, say, 20 years ago.  They knew how to make these principles work on small scale in various places.  
**[0:07:15-0:07:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:07:15):**  But they really didn't lack, they really didn't yet have the business models and the resources  in which to kind of make it all come together and help it scale.  So it's kind of the equivalent of back in the days when the only solar panels you would  find were on fence posts on farm gates or something, or the off-grid hermit.  And so once I started to really spend time around these folks, I'm like, oh, man, the  
**[0:07:41-0:07:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:07:41):**  economics of this as a business just, I mean, it makes sense.  And what would it look like to create a business that would create value and profit by putting  carbon back into the ground in the same way we had previously taken it out of the ground?  That's where this name Standard Soil was born.  It was like, what would it look like if John D. Rockefeller were to land back on the earth  
**[0:08:03-0:08:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:08:03):**  and try to create a business to pump carbon back into the ground as fast as he took it  out?  And that made you almost reluctantly a regenerative agriculture entrepreneur.  Right.  So, I mean, Standard Soil has been around for a bit.  
**[0:08:16-0:08:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:08:16):**  What is Standard Soil at the moment?  We're talking June 2020.  I mean, everything is fluid in these crazy times.  But what is Standard Soil?  What do you spend most of your time on at Standard Soil?  
**[0:08:27-0:08:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:08:27):**  Yeah, so we spent quite a bit of time trying to find the optimal business model to help  pump that carbon back into the ground fastest.  And what we're working on exclusively at the moment, or nearly exclusively, maybe I'll  say is a direct-to-consumer grass-fed beef business.  One of the really big challenges with regenerative agriculture is how to tell a story that engages  
**[0:08:49-0:08:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:08:49):**  consumers that they can understand.  I mean, you might get people enthusiastic about change, but who really knows what a  ton of carbon is, right?  You know, if you went to the store to buy a ton of carbon, what would you get?  And some of my colleagues here had already been working with the National Audubon Society,  
**[0:09:05-0:09:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:09:05):**  who separately and simultaneously had come to the realization that grassland bird populations  were in steep decline due to industrial agriculture.  In the United States or in North America, actually about 50% decline in the last 50  years.  So that's total populations.  
**[0:09:23-0:09:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:09:23):**  And when they looked around and said, how do we work with people that manage land in  a way that could recreate grassland bird habitat, they of course landed on ranchers that are  producing beef.  So just to explain, because this is how we get to the birds, the Audubon Society is the  biggest association of people that are very interested and are caring about birds in the  
**[0:09:42-0:09:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:09:42):**  US.  It's more than one million members, right?  Yeah, more than a million members.  Many millions of people engaged in the conversation started by John James Audubon many, many years  ago, famous naturalist.  
**[0:09:53-0:09:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:09:53):**  They landed, they figured out that we have to work with ranchers because they manage  so many grasslands.  And that's one of the key areas where birds have been disappearing.  Plus the area of opportunity for bird habitat to come up.  Yeah, exactly.  
**[0:10:07-0:10:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:10:07):**  The traditional method of conservation was one in which conservation groups goes and  buys a piece of land and regenerates, you know, protects the bird habitat, right?  Well, that's also resource limited.  You can only buy as much land as you have a bank account.  And they said, how do we create a market based incentive mechanism to work with private ranchers  
**[0:10:24-0:10:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:10:24):**  where if they graze their animals in a way that's good for birds, they can be a part  of our program.  And it was kind of certainly inspired by things like, you know, rainforest friendly coffee  and chocolate type things.  But can we create this similar type thing for cattlemen and beef production, of course,  
**[0:10:42-0:10:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:10:42):**  being their primary product.  So to be able to create a certification system that you can then deliver to consumers.  And it's been up and running for a couple of years now.  And so you can find local regional farmers that are following these practices and buy  their beef.  
**[0:10:57-0:11:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:10:57):**  And for us, the challenge was like, how can we help you?  This sounds really good because you have both a supply side and you have a customer base.  But if you really want to make this thing work at scale, you got to figure out how to  aggregate that supply, process it, put it together, market it, ship it, all that stuff.  So not just your local rancher that has been certified bird friendly or bird friendly and  
**[0:11:20-0:11:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:11:20):**  extra habitat, et cetera, which we'll get into in a minute what that actually means.  But you're saying there should be a brand on top of that aggregating the beef and making  sure that there's a market as well, not just a local market for the local rancher that  has the stamp.  Adam, a marketed scale, I think one of the key words that we lose track of in regenerative  
**[0:11:38-0:11:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:11:38):**  agriculture is how to get this to scale.  And the way we think of scale from an industrial perspective, again, I'm a mechanical engineer,  my background, big oil guy, right?  I think in terms of scale, we've got to build a big something, right?  And in today's industrial agriculture, that means the big thing is the feedlot and the  
**[0:11:55-0:11:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:11:55):**  processing plant.  And we've kind of seen how that thing, that model, is fragile in our food system, in our  current environment.  But it came about because you need efficiencies that you can only get at scale.  So how do you do that?  
**[0:12:07-0:12:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:12:07):**  I mean, I tell people, hey, if you have a local rancher, especially that's Audubon certified,  that you can understand and develop a relationship to buy beef that's been produced in a way  in your ecosystem, that's doing good things for birds and good things for wildlife and  good things for carbon and all this kind of stuff, awesome, could do it.  But that doesn't work for people in New York City, Miami, Boston, Washington, D.C., Los  
**[0:12:30-0:12:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:12:30):**  Angeles, Houston, where I live.  We've got large major urban population centers.  And so we need scalable businesses that can do that.  And that's what we're trying to do at Blue Nest Beef is create the scalable businesses.  So now we work directly with the National Audubon Society to tell that story, to engage  
**[0:12:47-0:12:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:12:47):**  consumers and try to bring impact.  Because we have to take this whole regenerative agriculture thing from being a nice little  story and a few farms dotted here and there into the mainstream somehow.  And so we got to get scale.  I think we just have to get scale using different approaches than feedlots and CAFOs.  
**[0:13:06-0:13:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:13:06):**  So at the moment at Blue Nest Beef, I can order a package of beef if I'm living in a  major, let's say, urban area or anywhere in the U.S. and I get this beef from bird-friendly  certified ranchers, basically delivered to your step.  That's it.  You can't get it where you're at, but anywhere in the lower 48, we've had to exclude a lot  
**[0:13:27-0:13:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:13:27):**  in Hawaii.  Shipping frozen food is a little bit more complicated, those longer distances.  But there you go.  And I mean, I mentioned in the intro, we're going to unpack a lot of these things, but  you're very much focused on taste.  
**[0:13:39-0:13:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:13:39):**  Can you explain a bit, not necessarily the why, because I think the why is pretty clear  because it's very important and has to taste good.  But how do you select on taste or where does that focus show that you are so much focused  on trying to get the best tasting grass-fed and grass-finished beef?  Yeah, well, of course, a lot of people think of animal genetics, which are important.  
**[0:14:00-0:14:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:14:00):**  But the thing that a lot of people don't realize is that a good taste starts in healthy soil  and healthy plants that grow in healthy soil.  When you really start managing soil differently, what you're essentially doing is liberating  all of those other nutrients that are necessary to help different things grow.  You know, all the carbon comes from the air, all the water comes from the pores in the  
**[0:14:21-0:14:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:14:21):**  soil by way of rainfall or irrigation, but all of the other stuff, all the other things  that you see about in your nutrition analysis, the calcium, the magnesium, the iron, all  of that stuff starts in the soil.  And so when you're managing food production systems in a way that regenerate healthy soil,  you're liberating that stuff, you're allowing the plant to thrive.  
**[0:14:43-0:14:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:14:43):**  So whatever eats the plants is now healthier, and this propagates down the value chain.  One of my favorite authors and good friend, Dr. Fred Provenza, retired now from Utah State,  wrote a book called Nourishment.  His research actually started with grazing goats who would self-select different browse,  different things to graze on based on taste.  
**[0:15:07-0:15:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:15:07):**  And it turns out that that taste is very deeply connected to nutrition and even medicinal  properties that the goat would need to optimize its own health.  And as human beings, we've evolved in the same type of ecosystem.  What you and I say tastes good is really your body's way of telling you that, oh, there's  nourishment in that food for you.  
**[0:15:28-0:15:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:15:28):**  Another relevant author here, I got my name from Mark Shasker, wrote a book called The  Dorito Effect.  It actually chronicled Fred's story a little bit in that story.  He said, one way to look at where we started to go wrong in our food system is when we  started decoupling taste from nutrition.  
**[0:15:46-0:15:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:15:46):**  So the moment we started lying to our taste buds.  What do you mean by lying?  Lying.  So deceiving a taste bud.  You add something that adds flavor and delightfulness to the human body, but there's no nutrition.  
**[0:15:57-0:15:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:15:57):**  No nutrition.  Empty.  You decouple that.  Whereas when you get back into real whole food, I just had some fillets off of our beef  here last weekend, by far, and I've been in the grass-fed beef business for a while.  
**[0:16:10-0:16:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:16:10):**  The most amazing beef I've ever had.  My body, when you take a bite of real whole food that's produced from healthy soil, your  body goes, wow.  I think it goes wow now because we've lost that.  I had a customer here two weeks ago send an email saying, my wife was raised in France  
**[0:16:30-0:16:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:16:30):**  and when we were cooking the steaks, it reminded her of the smell in her grandmother's kitchen.  When we ate them, the flavor was exceptional.  Is it something that's a risk in a sense that we've been lied to, or our taste buds, and  that's us, have been lied to so much that we sort of like the taste now of certain salty,  sweet, sugary things, and maybe we're not able to distinguish the real taste and that's  
**[0:16:54-0:16:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:16:54):**  the real nutrition?  Are we easily fooled at the moment?  We are easily fooled, but it's also, my experience so far is backed up Fred's research.  One of the phrases he talks about Fred Provenza here is the wisdom of the body, that it's  still there.  
**[0:17:08-0:17:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:17:08):**  We didn't breed it out of our system.  It's a joy when we've done little tasting things for customers and it doesn't matter  whether you're three years old, 30 years old, or 80 years old.  When you taste real whole food and your body goes, wow, I didn't remember that that's what  it was.  
**[0:17:26-0:17:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:17:26):**  So it's still in there.  You just have to get out of that Dorito effect mindset, which is short term delight without  nutrition.  I honestly think the raging diet wars are really annoying, right?  Eat this, don't eat that.  
**[0:17:41-0:17:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:17:41):**  But if people were to just eat real whole food and let their bodies select what they  need based on taste, I think we'd all be so radically healthier, we could start shutting  down hospitals, right?  Because they think our bodies are still wired to do this really, really well.  Now it still takes people, the heroes in regenerative agriculture, the farmers, they're not the  
**[0:18:02-0:18:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:18:02):**  investors, they're not the entrepreneurs like me, the people who, the hard work is the farmer  out in the field looking at their ecosystem and what they have to work with, their soil  types, their animals, their environment, the rainfall.  How do I optimize this system to maximize the expression of healthy food that comes  from it?  
**[0:18:22-0:18:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:18:22):**  And they'll be reading things like the diversity of forage, the properties of the soil, is  it getting softer, the smell of the soil.  But at the end of the day, that all shows up as flavor in food that people like you  and I can recognize.  And even in our business, I've always known it intellectually, but over the course of  
**[0:18:40-0:18:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:18:40):**  the last six months, I would say I've heightened my practical appreciation for the full lifecycle  role of processing.  We're working exclusively with a processor by the name of Lawrence Meats in Cannon Falls,  Minnesota.  They were profiled by Michael Pollan in the Omnivore's Dilemma as the class abattoir  
**[0:18:58-0:19:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:18:58):**  for their ethic and sustainability approach.  And Mike and Rob Lawrence and their team are so amazing.  The respect and care they give the animals and how it's treated through that lifecycle.  We've always said it, but now I really believe it, that every step matters in preserving  that flavor and nutrition.  
**[0:19:17-0:19:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:19:17):**  If the animal is stressed prior to processing, you'll detect it as an off flavor.  And this is part of the challenge in developing regenerative agriculture.  We have to- In terms of scale, in terms of, yeah, you  don't want to go to that massive plant that are all shut down now because of COVID, but  yeah.  
**[0:19:34-0:19:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:19:34):**  So to borrow from a relevant and analogous industry, if what we're trying to do is the  equivalent of electrifying transport, we need to make it so that when people get into an  electric vehicle, it doesn't feel like a cheap compromise.  It's like, wow, that's amazing.  So that's what Tesla did to the world for us is their mission was to really accelerate  
**[0:19:54-0:19:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:19:54):**  this transition to electrification of mobility.  But what they did was design and deliver an amazing car.  You sit in it and you go, wow, that's a really good car.  You drive it and you go, that's an amazing car.  And I think that's what we have to do in regenerative agriculture.  
**[0:20:09-0:20:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:20:09):**  And I think the tool that we have to work with is a taste and flavor and aroma and these  very human senses.  And then it'll show up in terms of improved performance.  And I tell people in my own journey, I spent 50 years not realizing as a child of the 60s  eating processed food, Kraft macaroni and cheese and Tang as a substitute for orange  
**[0:20:30-0:20:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:20:30):**  juice.  And I actually loved spam when I was a little kid.  These kinds of things are relics of the mindset that we had, which is we could industrially  replicate anything.  And what I discovered about 10 years ago is that nature figured this out all along and  
**[0:20:45-0:20:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:20:45):**  we just lost track of it.  So all we need to do is rediscover it.  And then I think as entrepreneurs, our role is how to invent and allow business models  that can make this viable, compelling, convenient, accessible, all these things.  That's the role of the entrepreneur and the investor here.  
**[0:21:02-0:21:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:21:02):**  But the heroes are the farmers.  They're the ones that are reading the landscape, integrating the animals.  And the missing ingredient, frankly, is the consumer, the consumer who gives a damn.  It's been really fun on this journey with Lune's beef.  What we need most are thoughtful consumers that give a damn, that they care about where  
**[0:21:20-0:21:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:21:20):**  their food is coming from.  They care about its story, its impact on ecosystems, its impact on their health.  And I don't get frustrated with vegans and vegetarians because most of them are thoughtful  leaders.  I get frustrated with what I call careless carnivores, which are people that are just  
**[0:21:36-0:21:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:21:36):**  like giving the cheap stuff and they can't see the system that's around that that causes  problems.  And I realize it kind of is what it is now.  And again, that's where us entrepreneurs come in, is we have to develop systems that at  some point, by starting with the people that can really appreciate and be thoughtful about  
**[0:21:53-0:21:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:21:53):**  food, can help this thing scale.  And someday you won't even have to be a thoughtful carnivore.  It'll be the better way that we produce food.  But of course, it's the way we produce food in a way that restores soil instead of degrading  it.  
**[0:22:08-0:22:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:22:08):**  So I mean, this is decades and centuries long transition.  I don't know if you're familiar with an author by the name of David Montgomery, written several  books lately, very importantly, I think foundational.  We had him on the show almost at the beginning, I think I'm going to say episode 27 or something  in that row.  
**[0:22:25-0:22:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:22:25):**  Very early on, right?  Very early on.  Yeah.  But the growing revolution was already out.  Yeah.  
**[0:22:30-0:22:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:22:30):**  Growing revolution is that I always tell people go back and read Dirt, the Erosion of Civilization.  Yeah, which is very good.  But David's story is one in civilization as a whole without realizing it was based on  a business model of exploiting the organic matter in soil until we had to plead for centuries.  I mean, people say, oh, but the agriculture changed the last 50 years, which is absolutely  
**[0:22:51-0:22:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:22:51):**  true.  We speed up the process, but the extraction, except for some exceptions, I mean, there's  some especially indigenous peoples that have been, let's say, sustainable, in some cases,  even regenerative.  But that's it, that's some kind of exception somewhere.  
**[0:23:05-0:23:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:23:05):**  We've mostly been extracted for the last, since whatever we invented agriculture 12,000  years ago.  This has been a downhill battle, which we're losing.  And it's, yeah, it's...  And it wasn't my designer intent, right?  
**[0:23:18-0:23:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:23:18):**  It was a mental problem.  No, we didn't know.  I mean, we maybe knew a bit, but it was too slow to really see.  I mean, soil erosion, like a millimeter a year.  How much do you see about that?  
**[0:23:28-0:23:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:23:28):**  Except in a generation, you see suddenly the tree doesn't have roots anymore.  Right.  There's no roots, which is a problem.  You see the roots are exposed now, but yeah, you don't see it.  I mean, it's not like somebody woke up 10,000 years ago and said, let's deplete the soil.  
**[0:23:40-0:23:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:23:40):**  It's just like, it was there.  Let's do annuals instead of perennials.  And then when this one wore out, you went here.  And that worked fine, I like to say, as long as there was another Iowa out there somewhere,  right?  
**[0:23:52-0:23:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:23:52):**  So living in North America here, it was really a great resource exploitation of a country  that had rich soil that kept us running for the last several hundred years.  But now, I mean, I grew up in Nebraska, I went to school in Iowa, we're pretty much,  we're getting close to running out of Iowa.  And so the new conversation is by people, you know, I love the movie Interstellar because  
**[0:24:13-0:24:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:24:13):**  it fictionalizes this story of we've ruined the soil on planet Earth, so we have to move  to the stars.  What I've learned by spending time with these regenerative farmers that gave grounds to  Alan Williams, the Ray Archuletas of the world, these are the folks that like, oh, no, we  can fix this.  
**[0:24:28-0:24:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:24:28):**  In fact, I've kind of flipped the story in my own mind.  We don't have to leave the Earth to find the next Iowa on Mars, if it were.  We can't have any hope of making Mars work unless we figure out how to make Earth the  easy one work first.  And so the good news is in spending time on the ground with these folks, the hard part  
**[0:24:48-0:24:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:24:48):**  is changing how you think, which is really, as some people say, changing how you see.  But once you can do that...  What do you mean?  What should it change in?  What is A or B?  
**[0:24:57-0:24:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:24:57):**  What is before and after?  What do you say, 10 years ago or maybe even 15, whenever you got that paper?  The farmer will say that it's a big flip of tactical things like shifting the mindset  from what do I need to kill today to get more of what I want to grow.  And the shift is to now how do I enable what I want to grow more, so the positive, the  
**[0:25:18-0:25:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:25:18):**  affirmative, and to bring an imbalance with the other stuff.  And even, I mean, the insightful people no longer see weeds as the enemy.  They see weeds as the first responders, right?  The weeds are the things that nature brings in first when the soil is broken to start  life growing again.  
**[0:25:33-0:25:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:25:33):**  There's some functional physiological reasons for that.  There's a role.  Yeah, there's a role.  But it's step one.  And then you have to, as the land manager or farmer, you think about step two, three,  
**[0:25:43-0:25:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:25:43):**  four, five, 15 down the line, but it's a continue or it's a transition.  Yeah, you have to learn to think in systems.  So maybe the thing that's really understandable by people now, because it's been so big in  the last decade, is the study of human microbiome research, right?  Where germ theory, for a long time, we thought like germs are bad.  
**[0:26:03-0:26:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:26:03):**  Let's kill everything.  We're going to do whatever.  And we started to realize we actually, what we did was create evolutionary pressure for  some of the things we didn't want.  So we get intestinal infections of Clostridium difficile, right?  
**[0:26:17-0:26:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:26:17):**  C. diff.  And what we did was we brought that out of balance.  So it wasn't that we had too much of something we needed to kill.  We were missing the things that would naturally keep it in balance.  So the more general abstraction of this, I like to say is, and I feel I come from this  
**[0:26:33-0:26:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:26:33):**  disease myself, if you will, is we have to learn to think in loops instead of lines.  The linear way we've been thinking since the dawn of civilization is we take an input,  we do something to it, we get an output.  And everything else is somebody else's problems.  But nature doesn't work that way.  
**[0:26:50-0:26:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:26:50):**  Everything is connected to everything else.  And the output of one thing is an input to another, and it's all interdependent.  And that learning to think in loops instead of lines is a fundamental skill that most  in Western civilization just haven't cultivated.  You mentioned the indigenous peoples.  
**[0:27:05-0:27:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:27:05):**  I think this is the real advantage of indigenous thinking.  Indigenous peoples all around the world have held on to the ability to see systems, to  see relationships.  And so I think we have to rediscover and reconsolidate and re-expand these ways of thinking in order  to kind of create a regenerative future.  
**[0:27:27-0:27:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:27:27):**  Which is, I mean, some huge steps you made as an engineer going from very machine thinking,  input and output to much more systems thinking and circles and loops instead of lines.  And you ended up selling beef.  And I think I want to, I get it.  I wouldn't say pause there, but actually dig a bit deeper into that because I can already  
**[0:27:48-0:27:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:27:48):**  imagine obviously the mentioned vegan and vegetarians.  Okay, great.  But why beef and why not regenerative grain, perennial crops in a certain trees in a certain  way?  What draw you to the livestock industry, which can have a huge environmental positive impact  
**[0:28:08-0:28:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:28:08):**  when we see the LCA is coming out, we're going to discuss methane and we're going to get  into that.  But what ended up for you basically drawing in and slowly getting closer to the livestock  side of things?  Short answer, land area and rates.  
**[0:28:23-0:28:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:28:23):**  When you look at planet earth, the grassland ecosystems constitute a very large fraction.  Really comparable.  So scale.  There's a really important, it's a bit technical scientific insight here in that grasslands  are a fairly modern evolutionary invention.  
**[0:28:40-0:28:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:28:40):**  They've only really evolved in the last 30 million years worldwide.  Grasses is a species.  You can trace the roots back into the cretaceous, but not any further.  They didn't expand into the Eocene and then later the myocene.  And it's because what happened was grasses invented a different way to do photosynthesis.  
**[0:28:58-0:29:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:28:58):**  Compared to trees or others.  Yeah, trees.  Yeah.  Most photosynthetic organisms on planet earth work along a pathway called C3 photosynthesis  and grasses figured out this trick called C4 photosynthesis.  
**[0:29:13-0:29:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:29:13):**  It basically, in C3 photosynthesis, the plant can get confused about whether it's trying  to grab onto an oxygen or a CO2 molecule.  And so it kind of loses efficiency.  In C4 photosynthesis, it kind of puts a front end filter on that.  It separates the CO2 from the oxygen and then it does the rest of its metabolism.  
**[0:29:34-0:29:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:29:34):**  And what that meant.  It meant faster biomass growth and root growth.  And the process by which a plant does photosynthesis requires evapotranspiration.  The plant basically gives off water in order to bring in CO2.  And so C3 photosynthesis didn't really work well in continental inlands.  
**[0:29:52-0:29:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:29:52):**  When grasses kind of evolved, they figured out how to conquer these continental inlands  and cover very large ecosystems on planet earth.  They also developed traits, for example, coexistence with fire, number one, which is if you can  just kind of imagine a fire running into an ecosystem that has both grasses and trees,  the grass grows back faster than the trees, right?  
**[0:30:11-0:30:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:30:11):**  So there's an evolutionary advantage.  The important one here is the evolution of grazing ruminants.  So grazing ruminants in a natural ecosystem, we have dense herds roaming frequently, come  in and eat the nutritious part of the grass, say the top half for simplicity.  And what that does is cause the grass to go back into a growth mode, which is like, hey,  
**[0:30:33-0:30:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:30:33):**  I need to catch more sunshine again.  Instead of produce seeds.  And so the symbiotic relationship between grazing ruminants and grasses is a really  good photosynthesis engine.  And photosynthesis is the primary process by which planet earth takes up carbon and  
**[0:30:47-0:30:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:30:47):**  then does something with it.  The other advantage that grasses have is as perennial systems with dense root systems,  they have a really symbiotic relationship with the soil.  So within a very narrow sphere or narrow volume in the soil, you have all these reactions  that show up on your food as taste, but really it's the biology of buying and selling micronutrients  
**[0:31:13-0:31:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:31:13):**  to help the plant grow.  And so the ruminant really is kind of a tactical contributor to a system that helps the earth  capture more sunshine.  And that's literally why I ended up with grass because grass and cows are a formula to capture  a whole bunch of carbon in soil fast or grass and cows and sheep and any other ruminants.  
**[0:31:35-0:31:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:31:35):**  Now it's not at all exclusive.  So this relationship can work in savannas and it can be present in other ecosystems  as well.  And if you start going down the path, you'll realize that all of nature is kind of doing  the same thing.  
**[0:31:50-0:31:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:31:50):**  You're participating in this bio-economy of loops that are feeding each other in a system.  And then the role of whatever the agent is, and I would argue now it's humans, is those  species that figure out how to participate in that ecosystem to help it grow more, you  get more of those.  Evolution says, I like that.  
**[0:32:12-0:32:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:32:12):**  You can reproduce, you're nourished, you can have children, you can have more of that.  And species that don't help that happen, they get kind of winnowed out of the system over  time.  And I honestly think it's a bit of a, I know it sounds like a bit of a leap, I think that's  exactly what we face as a human species right now is where we've gone through 10,000 years  
**[0:32:31-0:32:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:32:31):**  is a tiny, tiny little fraction of earth's history.  We've unintentionally inhibited the capacity of the planet to capture and cycle sunshine.  And the choice sitting right now in front of us with regenerative agriculture is how  to help earth do what she wants to do more.  And if we help her do that, she's going to say, I like you, please.  
**[0:32:52-0:32:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:32:52):**  And if we don't?  And if we don't, well, she'll replace us with something else at some point.  Meaning you're suggesting that if we don't act as the agent to help speed up regeneration  or speed up biomass production and to maximize growth of life, we at some point will be replaced  by something else that will do that for nature.  
**[0:33:13-0:33:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:33:13):**  Yeah, if you zoom out to the, and I realize I'm like worse than a helicopter.  I'm more like a helicopter with a jet engine going up and down sometimes.  That's why we have the space in this interview.  That's why I don't do four months.  People would have switched out by now if they didn't care.  
**[0:33:28-0:33:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:33:28):**  The only place that the input really matters is at the outer interface of the planet as  a whole.  So the upper atmosphere where the sunshine comes in, if you look at the earth and although  it's not completely irrelevant, I think from a volumetric flow, we'll put it aside for  now.  
**[0:33:44-0:33:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:33:44):**  Comets and meteors and things like that, they're meteors that might bring exogenous material  to the planet.  We can put that aside for now.  Really the only true input to planet earth is solar energy.  And earth has evolved as, you know, it's a very close cousin to the concepts of James  
**[0:34:00-0:34:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:34:00):**  Lovelock and Lynn Margulis of Gaia theory as an organism that moves out of equilibrium  that helps life cycle.  And that's kind of the long arrow, the long arc of evolutionary biology on planet earth.  And yeah, I mean, I'm not trying to be fatalistic.  These cycles are really, really long, right?  
**[0:34:19-0:34:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:34:19):**  It seems like a long time ago when the pyramids were built, but in the scope of earth history,  it was yesterday.  And so in general, I think we can see that in the history of the earth, those species  that continue to help the earth do what it wants to do, which is capture its one and  true only input, will be rewarded with prosperity.  
**[0:34:40-0:34:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:34:40):**  And if not, at best you're fighting it, right?  To me, the way, you know, my friend Gabe Brown says, you know, I'd rather sign the back of  the check than the front.  And I think that's exactly the right way to think of regenerative agriculture as a farmer.  But I think it applies to civilization as well.  
**[0:34:56-0:35:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:34:56):**  If we can work with the natural forces of the universe to help earth do what it wants  to do, nature will be writing us the checks and prosperity, however that's defined, will  continue.  Probably not just in monetary terms.  It's exactly the thing you mentioned before on farmers, like the mind shift of seeing,  
**[0:35:18-0:35:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:35:18):**  of fighting and killing what wants to live on your land, in this case weeds or other  and infestants, et cetera, and desperately trying to keep something alive that wants  to die and fighting or flowing with or seeing what emerges, et cetera, which all sounds  very nice in theory.  And I know the practice is very different, but it is that mind shift of seeing what actually  
**[0:35:40-0:35:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:35:40):**  wants to emerge here, wants to grow here.  And it's the same that you hear every regenerative farmers say, like, I never expected to grow  X, Y, Z here, but it does really well.  Just I'm facilitating that, a herder, not someone that plants or grows or kills in that  sense.  
**[0:35:57-0:35:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:35:57):**  That's exactly right.  And the farmer is trying to read the flows of nature.  Again, as an engineer, what I can see is that that's all about-  And capture as much sunlight as possible.  That's the-  
**[0:36:07-0:36:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:36:07):**  And capture as much sunlight as possible.  And then things like soil, soil is the battery of this system.  This is the thing where the solar energy gets stored and exchanged in this ecosystem.  We then count it up and attribute it to sequestration as carbon because there really is carbon that's  held.  
**[0:36:23-0:36:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:36:23):**  What we're really doing is just taking a snapshot of a component of an overall ecosystem.  That's working better.  And the farmers that figure this out, they generally find better businesses on their  farms.  They find better happiness.  
**[0:36:36-0:36:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:36:36):**  They're not stressed by fighting the flows of nature.  I think there's a survey of Gabriel, I'm going to find it for the show notes, but that they  surveyed the happiness of farmers and the relaxedness and is farming fun.  And the regenerative ones were obviously saying, they did the surveys, obviously they surveyed,  but they were generally much happier than the conventional extractive.  
**[0:36:56-0:36:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:36:56):**  I don't like the word convention.  I always like to say extractive ones that haven't made the transition yet, but maybe  we're thinking otherwise they wouldn't be surveyed.  But you could see that happiness is very, very different.  I think if you look at stress levels, et cetera, of regenerative farmers, you would find much  
**[0:37:11-0:37:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:37:11):**  lower levels.  I'm making a big assumption.  Email me if you have those research because we'd love to see it.  Yeah.  Yeah.  
**[0:37:19-0:37:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:37:19):**  And I think those are good.  And with those kinds of thoughts in mind, I still think our role as entrepreneurs is  to figure out how to allow those things to come into being given that reality.  Given the current economic system we're in where carbon is not a currency, but money  is a currency.  
**[0:37:35-0:37:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:37:35):**  And that might change in the long run because we're in the long run, but for now it's not.  So if you want to help these farmers, and I'm going to get back to the methane piece.  I know we skipped that, but if you want to help these farmers, you figured, okay, you  need to help them sell beef.  When did you see that the Burt-Friendly was very close?  
**[0:37:53-0:37:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:37:53):**  Is it exactly the same?  Like if you're very advanced as regenerative farmer, rancher, in this case livestock, are  you automatically very good for birds or is it also the other way around?  Like you're very good for birds automatically you're storing a lot of carbon or there's  some small nuances there that are different.  
**[0:38:07-0:38:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:38:07):**  There's quite a bit of nuance in there.  If you're a regenerative farmer, you're almost certainly good for birds.  You can do good things for birds without necessarily being fully regenerative.  Okay.  So you selected the ones that were certified.  
**[0:38:21-0:38:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:38:21):**  Yeah.  And what I'd say is as an engineer, one of the part of my DNA that I still carry with  me is a sense of pragmatism, which we can't let the perfect be the enemy of the good.  So if we can start with birds and practices that are good for birds and bring farmers  on a journey to improve practices that over time become more and more regenerative.  
**[0:38:40-0:38:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:38:40):**  I bet it tastes.  And then we're moving the needle in the right direction.  And in the near term, I can work with the farmers in a very simplistic, mechanistic  way.  They follow the protocols, they get certified by Audubon.  
**[0:38:54-0:38:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:38:54):**  There's another third party certifier in there that ensures compliance.  But what really makes it compelling for them is that I can show up at the gate and say,  because you've done that, I can pay you more for your cattle.  So I can pay you a premium.  And we're not asking people to do this out of the goodness of their heart.  
**[0:39:12-0:39:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:39:12):**  I tell people I live here in Texas and I laugh back in my dead carbon days.  I was leading a production team out in West Texas and we were thinking about what are  we going to do?  Nobody's paying as much for oil anymore.  This was the early 1990s.  
**[0:39:28-0:39:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:39:28):**  And one of the guys in the room said, why don't we throw up a windmill?  Maybe people will pay us to make wind power.  And we all, nah, that'll never work.  And now of course you drive it.  And now Texas is a huge wind state at the moment.  
**[0:39:38-0:39:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:39:38):**  Right.  And it's not like Texas got religion about renewable energy.  No, no, it's 30 years in technology.  The landowners said, you'll pay me money for putting up a windmill?  I'm in for that.  
**[0:39:48-0:39:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:39:48):**  And then the entrepreneurs figured out how to bring in investors and wrap in business  models and secure power purchase agreements to make that kind of stuff viable and happen.  And it's been a 20 year journey to do that.  Right.  And you've mentioned in the pre call we did that you expect, because we mentioned affordability  
**[0:40:05-0:40:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:40:05):**  like one or two times, you we've discussed taste and almost exclusivity.  Like the currently the prices I think you're charging for, correct me if I'm wrong, are  definitely above the supermarket part, the supermarket meat that you use.  That's my, I wouldn't say my enemy, but it's the client that buys that without thinking  about it.  
**[0:40:23-0:40:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:40:23):**  That's the worst.  But you also said like in the age or 10 years, I think that grass fat and grass finished  and let's say holistically managed or paddock, whatever term we put on it, let's say soil  friendly is going to be cheaper than CAFOs and factory farms.  Where do you see that happening?  
**[0:40:38-0:40:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:40:38):**  Do you see that?  Because it's the same maybe 30 years as wind.  Where do you see the biggest shifts there?  The potential to make it affordable or maybe raise the other prices?  I don't know where the difference is going to be.  
**[0:40:50-0:40:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:40:50):**  Yeah.  In renewable energy world, we had this phrase called grid parity.  We've kind of forgotten now because we've already passed it.  We didn't do a party for that.  We should have done that.  
**[0:40:58-0:40:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:40:58):**  We should have.  We've talked about it for 20 years and then we managed in many places and we sort of,  ah yeah, that was fun.  That's a lot of work.  There was air right now.  
**[0:41:07-0:41:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:41:07):**  Now coal is irrelevant.  People are still trying to pretend they're killing it.  The power market in most places is an interplay between solar and wind and natural gas and  a remaining residual base load of nuclear if it happens to be present.  I think here what we're talking about is regenerative parity or CAFO parity.  
**[0:41:25-0:41:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:41:25):**  Maybe we need to coin the right phrase.  I think operationally it's doable within eight to 10 years on any given property, but in  aggregate to reach it would be much further out.  The real unbeatable advantage of regenerative agriculture is that once you start managing  the system of life to capture more sunshine by storing energy in the soil carbon battery,  
**[0:41:48-0:41:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:41:48):**  that you can grow more life.  Industrial agriculture today is based on a linear mindset that's a once and done thing.  I go in the spring, I till, I plant, I let it grow, I harvest, I'm done.  I come back next spring and do it all over again.  I bring it to a CAFO and yeah, feed it to.  
**[0:42:05-0:42:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:42:05):**  No matter what you do, you invent better and better fertilizers, whatever, you're going  to get an asymptotic yield system out of that and it's going to fall prey to the gravity  of, let's call it the David Montgomery effect of depleted soil at some point where you're  having to add more and more inputs to compensate for the lost natural assets and it hits a  wall.  
**[0:42:27-0:42:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:42:27):**  With regeneration, what we typically see is that the leading producers here can go into  a piece of land and increase the overall productivity of that piece of land by a factor of say two  to three, sometimes more.  In what time period?  In that eight to 10 year time period, within 10 years.  
**[0:42:44-0:42:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:42:44):**  In some places where you have good moisture to work with, you might be able to do something  in five, but it's really remarkable to see what, again, these people are my heroes, right?  I mean, we need to dress Gabe Brown and friends in Avenger costumes or something.  I don't know.  They would like that, but I don't know if the picture would look good.  
**[0:43:03-0:43:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:43:03):**  These folks that are listening to their ecosystems and working, it's really remarkable once you  understand how to do it, how fast you can turn around any given piece of land.  Why do you think there's so much pushback?  There are not enough peer reviewed studies.  What about the methane?  
**[0:43:19-0:43:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:43:19):**  What about the climate impact of all this livestock isn't livestock the huge enemy?  Yeah, Gabe Brown is doing funny things, but it doesn't scare me.  There's such an enormous pushback from, I don't know where, I mean, I see it a lot on  Twitter, et cetera, but where's that coming from?  Well, what I would say is you have to distinguish between legitimate pushback and good questions.  
**[0:43:38-0:43:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:43:38):**  We'll come back to the scale one that you mentioned there at the end, because that's  where my focus is.  How do we scale this?  The other stuff, the type of science we have to do here is observational science of functioning  ecosystems.  
**[0:43:51-0:43:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:43:51):**  The early people that tried to study the science of this tried to break it down into a few  key components and control it.  In the process, you inevitably break the ecosystem of the leading practitioners are effectively  managing all the other.  Meaning you would basically not decrease, like you're going to just study one piece  
**[0:44:08-0:44:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:44:08):**  of a very complex rotation, for instance.  I'm going to take that 10 acres, I'm going to put 50 cows on it, I'm going to take this  10 acres and put 100 on it.  Everything else is going to be the same, and then we're going to compare the two.  That's what we call reductionist science.  
**[0:44:22-0:44:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:44:22):**  It doesn't take into account that over here on this 10 acres that some regenerative farmer  is reading the system every day and trying to figure out how do I manage it so it can  capture more sunshine and store carbon and soil.  It's always going to have this functional limitation that observational research is  really the only way to do it.  
**[0:44:42-0:44:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:44:42):**  That means if it's observational research, somebody has to do it first and then somebody  has to follow them and study it.  The research, the science will follow the practitioners.  I'm involved with a science project here led by my friend, Peter Bick, who's a movie producer,  also at Arizona State, funding from the Foundation of Future Agriculture Research, McDonald's,  
**[0:45:01-0:45:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:45:01):**  and some others to study comparison ranchers.  Just to go on record here, McDonald's is investing in the future of beef.  That's very interesting.  Yeah, McDonald's is investing in trying to figure out how we can make viable supply chains  for regenerative beef.  
**[0:45:17-0:45:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:45:17):**  Absolutely.  Let's give him some credit where it's due.  Yeah, as a guy who used to live inside of the big bad whatever, oil in my case, but  pick your big bad ag, big bad pharma, whatever, I've learned that these companies and organizations  are just like you and me.  
**[0:45:36-0:45:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:45:36):**  They're trying to do their best every day.  They just unintentionally often caught in paradigms and incentives that keep them where  they are from exploring new things.  In the case of McDonald's, the question legitimately will be scale, right?  It doesn't really matter if Gabe Brown is running a herd of a couple hundred head.  
**[0:45:53-0:45:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:45:53):**  How do we get, I don't know how many Gabe Browns.  Let's get into that.  Then we touch upon the methane one because I keep promising, maybe people keep still  listening about the methane.  I will link your, you have a great TEDx talk on methane and all the questions around it,  
**[0:46:05-0:46:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:46:05):**  which I will link definitely below, but we can do a few summaries of that.  Let's first tackle scale.  It doesn't matter if Gabe Brown is great.  Doesn't even matter if he's double the size.  That's what you've been focusing on.  
**[0:46:16-0:46:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:46:16):**  How do we get to the acres or the acreage we need to have an impact?  Step one here is, and it's kind of parallel steps, if you will.  We have to study the people that are doing it right now.  Which is interesting.  You go from a linear here to a loop as well.  
**[0:46:30-0:46:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:46:30):**  They're parallel steps.  It's not step one, two, three, four.  That's exactly right.  We do our best to study the people that are doing amazing things now and compare them  against other people that are trying their best to do things.  
**[0:46:41-0:46:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:46:41):**  Then we try to draw out differences.  So in this McDonald's funded study, we've studied five sets of ranches in the Southeast  United States.  We're documenting changes in everything from soil carbon to water infiltration to microbial  genetics to plant species to insects and bugs and even rancher well-being happiness, like  
**[0:47:04-0:47:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:47:04):**  you were describing earlier and trying to draw that out.  We're just aggregating that data now and be publishing hopefully sometime this year with  the first pieces.  That would be amazing.  But we have to realize that even if 10 other people join us in doing similar research,  
**[0:47:19-0:47:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:47:19):**  those things will always follow, not lead, the regenerative practices because the only  way to get regeneration is to work at the system level.  So meanwhile, what I can tell you is anecdotally, even though I don't have the quantitative  data, very early on in my journey, I set foot on so many regenerative ranches.  And frankly, I still remember the time I took my wife out in the field on one of these regenerative  
**[0:47:42-0:47:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:47:42):**  producers, Greg Judy in Missouri.  And she says, oh my God, there's like insects everywhere, butterflies, dragonflies.  And the first thing you actually see is as a human being, you notice because very few  of us are soil scientists, is that, wow, life is thriving in this place.  And so in that way, I think it's a legitimate hook for us as-  
**[0:48:02-0:48:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:48:02):**  Which mean life, insects, which means birds by definition.  Yeah, insects and birds.  So birds feed on insects, birds feed in habitat.  All this life is connected in its loops, right?  Birds can fly away, they don't need to be there.  
**[0:48:14-0:48:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:48:14):**  In a sense, they're-  I like to see birds float with their wings.  Yeah, we did.  I'm going to make the canary in the coal mine, I think is a great point here.  They will go if the insects are not there.  
**[0:48:25-0:48:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:48:25):**  Some people say the metal arc is the canary of the prairie, as a cliche.  I didn't invent that, but I think that's true.  And it ties back to that 50% loss of grassland birds in the last 50 years.  So I think the one thing we can say definitively, and kind of strangely enough in this McDonald's  Fund research project, it was a little bit of an add on at the end.  
**[0:48:45-0:48:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:48:45):**  One of my dear friends, Steve Appelbaum at Applied Ecological Services, their team did  a lot of the on the ground work here, but they did bird count data on the same five  companion ranches.  And it's the grassland bird species on these ranches is the most different thing of anything  we measured.  
**[0:49:01-0:49:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:49:01):**  So the birds really are voting with their wings to tell us that, hey, I like this one  better than that one.  It's true in terms of population and it's true in terms of species diversity.  And what's really valuable here, we like to say birds are the treasure and the measure.  For Audubon, they're a legitimate conservation goal.  
**[0:49:18-0:49:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:49:18):**  But they're also a legitimate biological sensor that votes with its wings to go around and  say this place is better than that one.  And so I think we can use wildlife as a leading indicator of regenerative agriculture.  And then it has a double benefit, of course.  It's a much easier story to engage consumers around birds and butterflies.  
**[0:49:40-0:49:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:49:40):**  And those are things that are just much easier to talk to ordinary everyday folk about than  a ton of carbon.  More birds is better.  I mean, more butterflies is probably better.  You know, mommy, I like the pretty birds, right?  
**[0:49:52-0:49:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:49:52):**  It's just an easy it's an easier thing.  And again, I think we're talking about a civilizational scale journey.  If we're going to unwind the bad things we unintentionally did from 10,000 years of history,  we're not going to snap our fingers and do it overnight.  Any given farm can do it real quickly.  
**[0:50:09-0:50:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:50:09):**  This kind of five to 10 year window, it's really quickly.  But if we're going to rebuild a system, it's going to take generations.  And so I think we don't have to like, throw messages out to consumers that create a really  long leap for them to try to understand and engage in a different food system.  If we can start with simple stories like this food is good for birds and butterflies and  
**[0:50:29-0:50:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:50:29):**  wildlife and you and you it's healthy for you delivering a nourishing food for you.  But if we can kind of start there and then over the course of years and decades have  a conversation about carbon and water and prosperity and it's just a lot of benefits  of letting nature write the checks, right?  Gladly write the checks, which I think is what's really going on.  
**[0:50:51-0:50:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:50:51):**  I completely agree.  I think it's this is a long game, but we have to start now because we're entrepreneurial,  meaning you need to pay, you need to keep the lights going and get more farmers on the  journey.  The clock's ticking.  
**[0:51:03-0:51:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:51:03):**  And Interstellar as a movie is not far off the mark.  I mean, we're, again, I went to school and you're running out of Iowa.  We're running out of Iowa.  And the climate is telling us that something is broken and it takes time to do this at  the scale we're doing it.  
**[0:51:20-0:51:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:51:20):**  Even now in the age of COVID, a lot of people are disappointed to see that the Keeling curve  hasn't turned around and gone back down just because we turned off all the power plants  and cars for a couple of months.  But I would invite people to go into that Keeling curve.  This is the curve that measures atmospheric CO2 that you see frequently.  
**[0:51:38-0:51:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:51:38):**  The year to year increase is what happens as a result of industrial civilization.  But if you look at the curve, the intra-annual variations, the up and down, this is nature  inhaling and exhaling.  It's breathing.  It's doing what I was describing at the planetary level.  
**[0:51:54-0:51:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:51:54):**  And it's about 10 times bigger than the annual increase.  And so the task we have in front of us here is to manage Earth in a way that gets that  inhale to be bigger than the exhale.  And once we can do that, we can start turning the atmospheric CO2 curve back in the other  direction.  
**[0:52:09-0:52:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:52:09):**  And there'll be a whole bunch of other things that go with it.  Water systems will flow better, birds will come back, humans will be healthier.  So there's a lot of co-benefits in that system.  But that clock is ticking out there.  Is it safe to say that Earth has a respiratory disease?  
**[0:52:22-0:52:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:52:22):**  Yeah.  Or at least an issue?  Yeah.  I like it.  Can I use it?  
**[0:52:27-0:52:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:52:27):**  It's great.  Yeah, of course.  Of course.  It's not the first.  It's for sure not the first.  
**[0:52:32-0:52:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:52:32):**  But it is.  I mean, you described that we always look at, OK, it's now May or it's June 2020.  If we look at a year ago, we were at 416 parts per million, et cetera.  But we always forget there's this huge shift over the year and over the day, even over  the place, even in terms of literally breathing.  
**[0:52:49-0:52:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:52:49):**  Where does it come from?  From everything that grows on Earth.  That's exactly right.  Thus, by definition, we need more stuff growing on Earth as soon as possible.  And much of it, because that's the breathing or the cough, basically.  
**[0:53:01-0:53:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:53:01):**  That's the issue we're in, plus we're burning it, obviously.  But there's a much bigger curve happening there.  And most people focus on that little difference, which is a huge issue.  But the breathing is the piece that we can actually change very quickly.  Yeah.  
**[0:53:15-0:53:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:53:15):**  For what it's worth, just so people know it, all the scientists do, but a few of the lay  people do.  If we could somehow shut off all of the emissions today, we would still be getting warmer.  So we have to take out of the air some of the CO2 that we've put there, or we're still  in trouble.  
**[0:53:33-0:53:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:53:33):**  So we absolutely need to eliminate the emissions as rapidly and significantly as possible.  But it's not enough.  We really have to find ways to reverse the carbon cycle.  And I think nature is our biggest tool to do that.  Yeah, we can invent physical industrial machinery to do that, some.  
**[0:53:52-0:53:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:53:52):**  But back to the story of grassland and what it's doing, all we got to do is manage grasslands  and forests and savannas differently.  And we can help push that needle back in the right direction.  Because that's a question of scale, I get off on as well, because you get very different  reports there and potentially you get some groups, the report comes out, okay, if we  
**[0:54:10-0:54:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:54:10):**  change agriculture just in a few places, we store enough for XYZ and some others, like  even if we change all the agriculture in the world, it will never be enough.  Like there's very mixed messages coming out there in terms of potential for carbon storage.  What is your take on that?  Yeah, I was humbled and honored to be a co-author on a paper with some really smart scientists.  
**[0:54:33-0:54:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:54:33):**  Steve who I mentioned, Steve Appelbaum, who I mentioned earlier, Ratan Lal and others,  where we tried to put some numbers on that for North America.  It was published in the Journal of Soil and Water Conservation in 2016.  And what we tried to do is weave a story of regenerative agriculture applied to not only  the livestock and grazing systems, but crop production systems.  
**[0:54:52-0:54:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:54:52):**  And in doing that, we were able to demonstrate that at least in terms of potential, right,  again, it's really hard to say in terms of potential that we could really put a major  dent in this kind of overall climate equation, sequestering over a billion tons a year in  North America on an ongoing basis.  So it's still really early, there's really wide uncertainties around that.  
**[0:55:16-0:55:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:55:16):**  And it's why I'm so supportive of step one is get more farmers doing it.  Step two is measure it.  Step three is engage consumers in that story to create pull for step one and step two.  Because there's a lot of uncertainty in terms of where the plateaus, how deep do we store  it.  
**[0:55:33-0:55:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:55:33):**  And I think a lot of these headlines come out of that, like regenerative agriculture  is never going to do enough or regenerative agriculture is going to do everything.  And it's a constant like a swing between.  And I think, I mean, there's an argument there, obviously, on the carbon, I think the story  is much bigger than carbon, which we've touched upon in this piece.  
**[0:55:50-0:55:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:55:50):**  It's about water cycles, it's about regeneration of life in general, even without the carbon  piece, even if we wouldn't be severely suffering of climate change, we still would like to  change the agriculture and land use sector completely, because of all the other benefits,  even just on taste, there would be enough to do this.  But probably we're going to figure out at least my imagination is my, we're going to  
**[0:56:12-0:56:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:56:12):**  figure out a lot of extra benefits, even in terms of local climate stabilization of increased  rainfalls in places where we want to decrease in places where we don't want or softer rainfall.  I mean, there's going to be so many things we're going to figure out over the next decades,  that the focus on just okay, can we store enough carbon quick enough in the top 20 centimeters?  It's an important piece, but it's only one piece of a much bigger puzzle.  
**[0:56:36-0:56:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:56:36):**  But it's what all the papers are focusing on, or at least all the online statements.  They do.  As someone who's spent a long time investing in heretical ideas in energy technology, I'm  used to working with bleeding edge science.  This is bleeding edge.  
**[0:56:53-0:56:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:56:53):**  Yeah, absolutely.  I love it.  It's so bleeding.  I get more excited every day, because there's so much to learn.  Nature blows my mind.  
**[0:57:01-0:57:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:57:01):**  But they over-constrained something, because we're really smart at something.  Even things like the top 20 centimeters of soil that you just described.  It was obvious to me very early on, perhaps because I stepped in from the side, that our  whole mental model for how soil carbon accumulates is just incomplete, is the way to think of  it.  
**[0:57:18-0:57:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:57:18):**  Without realizing it, we were calculating carbon as if we were filling a bathtub with  something.  There's a fixed volume, and we're going to fill up the little holes between the grains  and the soil, and then it's going to be full, and it's done.  In reality, what's going on is it's a part of a biological dynamic system, where the  
**[0:57:36-0:57:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:57:36):**  system is evolving and churning, and you're actually growing the bathtub.  The soil is growing upwards in time.  I know there'll be people on this that listen to this and think that's heretical, but I  would say Archimedes himself would recognize that it's just first principles of physics.  There's no novelty in that.  
**[0:57:55-0:58:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:57:55):**  Every soil scientist in the world knows that as you increase soil organic matter, the soil  gets less dense, and that's because effectively you're fluffing it up, and you're filling  up some of the fluff that you've created with organic matter, but still it's overall fluffed  up.  It's kind of funny as an old oil and gas guy, because everything I thought I knew about  
**[0:58:15-0:58:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:58:15):**  how carbon worked in sediment, if I just flip it around the other way, like hold it up to  a mirror, I get regenerative agriculture.  In that world, we would extract carbon from a reservoir, it would deplete, and it would  compact.  In regenerative agriculture, we pump it back in, and it inflates and gets larger.  
**[0:58:32-0:58:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:58:32):**  It sort of makes sense, because a lot of the topsoil we lost is both floating away and  actually carbon that went up in the air.  This sort of compaction, and a lot of it is unannounced.  Don't email me when you're a soil scientist, please.  From a conceptual perspective, it makes sense.  
**[0:58:48-0:58:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:58:48):**  We lost a lot of topsoil.  You see that in Iowa.  You see these horrible pictures of how much topsoil we lost, which floated away in many  cases, but in many cases also was gas and basically was the fluffiness that left the  soil and went up in the air, which is why we're partly in this mess.  
**[0:59:04-0:59:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:59:04):**  That's exactly right.  Super interesting.  I mean, we can spend hours and hours on this.  I want to touch upon a few more pieces.  First of all, actually, we didn't really answer the question.  
**[0:59:14-0:59:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:59:14):**  In eight to 10 years, you said on an individual level of farms, you can get to cheaper than  a CAFO, but then on aggregated, it takes longer because of what you're building, because of  the butcher side, because of the consumer side, because of the transport.  All of that costs more when you're very small.  Is that fair to say?  
**[0:59:33-0:59:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:59:33):**  Well, the market has to grow, right?  So Tesla's been making amazing cars for 10 years now or more, but they're now becoming  the best-selling cars, right?  So you've got this big fleet displacement problem in food, just like you do in transport.  It's a bit faster, maybe.  
**[0:59:50-0:59:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=0:59:50):**  Yeah.  It'll take time.  And even in the farming community, I think there'll be innovative business models.  Some producers themselves will honestly, like in my segment here with livestock production,  it doesn't take much more labor to move 500 head than 50 or even 5,000 than 500 in a day.  
**[1:00:09-1:00:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:00:09):**  So there are some economies of scale on the production side, but they're also in processing.  There's a lot of energy now on small local processors, which is great.  This company Lawrence Meats that I mentioned that processes our food is more power-leg  than below.  Yeah.  
**[1:00:23-1:00:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:00:23):**  They're not as big as a CAFO, a large processing plant, but they're way bigger than your town  blockers.  They kind of are optimized to be able to flow through a fairly moderate amount of animals  in a day.  And so it works.  
**[1:00:35-1:00:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:00:35):**  And so I think new business models emerge, even on the farm side.  It may not be like the land has to be held by the same person, but maybe new business  models where many farmers join their herds together and manage thousands of acres as  a community.  That's how we used to do it in the commons.  
**[1:00:51-1:00:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:00:51):**  I think you'll see the reemergence of some of this stuff and people are moving a lot  of the fencing.  Yeah.  I think that's, so I think it'll get, it'll get interesting.  And you know, the type, there's a size thing there, right?  
**[1:01:02-1:01:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:01:02):**  The bigger herd, the bigger impact, not just because they're more, but they, there is a  network effect there.  Right?  Well, the way, maybe the way to think of it is at least here in North America, the stories  are of bison herds that would take days to pass a river.  
**[1:01:15-1:01:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:01:15):**  Right?  And so again, if nature has her choice to do things, she does figure out how to do economies  of scale in systems that works for the benefit of both the ecosystem and the animal.  And so I think we'll see new types of scale.  They just, there'll be loops of scale instead of lines of scale, if you can make that.  
**[1:01:34-1:01:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:01:34):**  And our, our business here with this Blue Nest beef and delivering food to customers  is a way to tap into other people that have already scaled other things like fulfillment  and distribution.  Right?  And you can ship things frozen to your doorstep by FedEx and UPS that I couldn't do even 10  
**[1:01:51-1:01:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:01:51):**  years ago.  Yeah.  Because let's talk about it.  You launched in November last year.  I mean, timing pretty good, but I think the last few months have been interesting.  
**[1:02:00-1:02:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:02:00):**  Can you describe briefly what has happened at Blue Nest beef?  Well, certainly I wish we would have launched a year earlier cause we would have had all  the kinks worked out before COVID hit.  But yeah, all of a sudden in, in March and April of this year, consumers started to care  a little bit about where their food was going to come from, but not from a sustainability  
**[1:02:17-1:02:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:02:17):**  perspective more from a, just like, where am I going to get my food perspective?  So the rush to online groceries in general was large and the rushed online meat sales  was even larger.  And it's because people had always kind of held back on fresh and frozen food products  and they were very comfortable with getting a box of something delivered to their doorstep.  
**[1:02:42-1:02:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:02:42):**  Clothes mostly.  But food, it was always a bit tricky.  It was always a bit tricky.  Of course, online grocery was one of the first internet crazes and they all cratered, right?  Cause they couldn't figure out how to make it all work economically.  
**[1:02:53-1:02:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:02:53):**  And that's what I mean by, you know, now with FedEx and UPS, I mean, you can, whether you're  ordering seafood or meat or whatever, you can get just about anything delivered to your  doorstep along with the razor blades if you want it, right?  I mean, it's a very liquid, flexible system because the Amazons of the world and the many  other entrepreneurs have evolved that business.  
**[1:03:12-1:03:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:03:12):**  So indeed the current crisis has been a surge to our business.  It has its own challenges.  Our messaging, you know, we'd really like to talk about birds and carbon and some of  these bigger things.  And a lot of our messaging is like, Hey, we still got inventory.  
**[1:03:26-1:03:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:03:26):**  We can chip you something that'll be there.  So we're still learning as well, but I'm quite encouraged to see that it may more broadly  than just us and BlueNest beef is all across America at least.  And I would expect in other places as well, the many farmers who are figuring out how  to sell to their local communities have experienced the same rush, right?  
**[1:03:48-1:03:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:03:48):**  Which is if you had food for sale, people came to your doorstep and figured out how  to get it to their kitchens.  And so, you know, even aside from the food, what that means to me is that there are thousands  and hundreds of thousands of Americans who are now getting to know a farmer somewhere  and getting to know something about where their food came from and how it was produced,  
**[1:04:10-1:04:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:04:10):**  who produced it, what it did.  And I hope some of that sticks.  I realize at some point they'll get the convenience of just being able to go to the grocery store  and get it.  Yeah, but some of it, I think we don't know if it's going to be 50% of this growth or  
**[1:04:24-1:04:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:04:24):**  10 or two, but it's not going to be zero.  I mean, not everybody switches back, especially on taste and especially on convenience.  I mean, it gets to your doorstep.  I mean, how convenient do you want to have it?  And that's probably, yeah, we don't know that number.  
**[1:04:38-1:04:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:04:38):**  Maybe in a year we know more or less what has been sticking and have that been enough  to grow a lot of these businesses, a lot of these farms.  And that's exactly right.  Taste and convenience are where we're putting our bets.  You know, we think if you taste our food and you find it as compelling as we think you  
**[1:04:53-1:04:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:04:53):**  will that you're much more likely to stick with it when you go back and get that, especially  at a grocery store or hamburger and take a taste and go, then you end up having to use  more ketchup, I guess.  You can always cover it in sauce.  Yeah, that's the-  
**[1:05:06-1:05:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:05:06):**  You can always cover it with something.  But I think once people, once their bodies recognize real food, and again, it's really  hard to know how many stick with it, but I'm pretty confident that many will as well.  And then of course our challenge as the entrepreneurs is to ensure that we can continue to deliver  that.  
**[1:05:24-1:05:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:05:24):**  But I mean, everything is hard to predict.  I feel, I tell people that, you know, in the age of COVID here, I feel like I'm in a wormhole  and I don't know what the universe is going to look like when we pop out the other side,  but I know it's not exactly this.  I think we're in a temporary transitional state of some kind.  
**[1:05:40-1:05:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:05:40):**  Now, I think the principles of physics that support-  Are still going to apply.  Are still going to apply, right?  I believe that there's some really, really deep physics and science behind this, you  know, what nature wants, what the ecosystem wants to happen, that will continue to drive  
**[1:05:57-1:06:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:05:57):**  things in a favorable direction.  But exactly how that plays out and, you know, whether our particular business model is,  you know, welcome and central, those are still uncertainties.  And let's wrap up with a few questions.  One let's very briefly, which is super dangerous because this is never going to be briefly,  
**[1:06:16-1:06:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:06:16):**  talk about methane.  Again, I will link your TEDx talk, but for people that say, okay, but okay, we talked  about carbon, but what about, let's assume with all the research that's coming and actually  some of the research that has been done that the carbon footprint of beef can be positive  when done well.  
**[1:06:31-1:06:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:06:31):**  I think, I think it can, you think it can, but we still need a lot of research there,  which has been going on.  I mean, there's a lot there, but what about this methane, which seems to be like the second  argument everybody uses immediately.  Yeah, but they fart a lot, which is not true.  
**[1:06:46-1:06:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:06:46):**  But what's the short answer?  I'm asking an impossible thing, but the short answer on when somebody says, let's say, you  say a potential client calls you and said, yeah, but Russ, what about the methane?  So the shortest possible answer is that the carbon we store in the soil significantly  more than offsets the potential methane emissions.  
**[1:07:03-1:07:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:07:03):**  A little bit of insight probably helps that the talk that you're referring to is I gave  it the Grass-fed exchange in 2017.  It's a few years ago.  Yeah.  So there's, I think a lot more.  
**[1:07:14-1:07:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:07:14):**  Yeah, but it's still mostly relevant.  And because of where I am and the people I know, I had early look at things that have  only since become public.  And I give some clues in that conversation.  But the way to maybe help people understand this is methane is nothing more than incompletely  
**[1:07:30-1:07:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:07:30):**  combusted hydrocarbon.  You can hear an X-Tel person talking.  Yeah, that's amazing.  Yeah, exactly.  Think of it like the leaky gas from your exhaust pipe of your car that wasn't quite combusted  
**[1:07:41-1:07:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:07:41):**  in the engine.  So it's a symptom of an engine that isn't perfectly tuned yet to combust it all the  way into CO2.  Are you saying that if a cow burps, it means that a cow hasn't digested everything, meaning  that if a cow is feeding on the super diverse perennial grass, as you're mentioning, she  
**[1:08:02-1:08:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:08:02):**  is burping a lot less?  You're a clever guy.  I saw the video, but yeah.  It's a situation in which...  It's interesting, which means that if we study that, which probably a lot of this research  
**[1:08:15-1:08:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:08:15):**  hasn't been done, but if we study very healthy soil grass systems with ruminants, we would  like to know the difference in burping of ruminants that are in those systems and ruminants  that are in CAFOs.  Correct.  And I think that that's an area that there's some clues.  
**[1:08:32-1:08:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:08:32):**  It still needs more research.  But once you understand the fundamental principles involved, it kind of makes sense.  So first of all, anytime a cow is like an internal combustion car, it is a combustion  engine.  Most of that combustion is biological metabolic stuff rather than high temperature engines.  
**[1:08:52-1:08:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:08:52):**  And so as long as there's a combustion car, it will have a tailpipe and there will be  exhaust.  So you can't eliminate methane completely.  However, what we can say is when the diet is diverse and has everything it needs to  get as much energy out of the fuel as it can, there will be less methane that comes out.  
**[1:09:14-1:09:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:09:14):**  So you're seeing a wide proliferation of ideas of additives for...  Seaweeds.  I've seen many, many.  What those things did, think of them like gasoline additives for your car.  They help the engine perform more perfectly to shift more of that energy towards the favorable  
**[1:09:29-1:09:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:09:29):**  things that the animal's metabolism is trying to achieve.  What we can see, so in one of the famous papers that addresses this question directly by Paige  Stanley at Michigan State University with Dr. Jason Roundtree, they actually did some  measurements of methane and pasture of the animals and they found that they were actually  30% lower than what the standard IPCC standards would expect.  
**[1:09:56-1:10:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:09:56):**  Now they did all of their calculations with the IPCC standards because that's what you  need to do for calibration, but I think it was noteworthy that they saw this about a  30% reduction, which I would attribute to a diverse, healthy forage from healthy soil.  Jason is involved in this McDonald's project that I mentioned earlier.  We've got a similar system where we do methane measurements of animal feeds at feeding trough,  
**[1:10:25-1:10:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:10:25):**  like do some temporary things.  They come in and they chew and they burp and then you measure how much methane is in  there and we're finding a fairly similar number there as well.  So I think we're seeing that directionally things are moving favorably in these diverse  pastures.  
**[1:10:41-1:10:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:10:41):**  Exactly how far, how fast, how big, I don't know, but what we can say is at least the  potential and we just don't have enough places mapped out with all the variables, like I  said, much to the chagrin of a conventional scientific mind, but kind of is what it is,  but we can certainly document more and more places now where the net uptake of carbon  in the soil is more than the effective climate contribution of the methane that's being emitted.  
**[1:11:08-1:11:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:11:08):**  It's not a perfect answer, but it's a good start.  Yeah, if you want to understand the methane question, you've got to look at a slightly  bigger picture and understand this relationship of soil and animal and grass and all of the  above.  I'm shifting gears now.  
**[1:11:22-1:11:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:11:22):**  But if you would be, let's say tomorrow morning or today, be in charge of a $1 billion investment  portfolio, what would you invest it in?  How would you put it to work?  It's a great question.  I've heard you ask something like that before.  
**[1:11:36-1:11:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:11:36):**  So I kind of thought cheated and thought a little bit ahead of time.  I think I would probably invest about 20% of that in just really good science, observational  science, very much like I talked about, because I think the more we understand, the more we're  going to understand what we need to do.  What would be the single piece, like if you had to select one, okay, this is reductionist  
**[1:11:56-1:12:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:11:56):**  thinking, but what would you love that a group of scientists focused on now, tomorrow, yesterday?  Well, it is reductionist thinking.  It's thinking at that system level, right?  The unique thing in this McDonald's research is that we did work at a system level compared  to at least any other science.  
**[1:12:13-1:12:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:12:13):**  So we need to understand the relationship of the animal to the grass, to the soil, to  the sunshine, to the water.  And so I would, by definition, only allocate that 20% to that kind of system level science.  Everybody else can continue on with the focused reductionist science.  I think from that science, you're going to have some new technologies emerge that allow  
**[1:12:35-1:12:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:12:35):**  us to measure, track, model, perhaps coax and cajole that regenerative ecosystem that  might fit in the classic investment portfolio of a venture capital type thing.  Some risky tech.  Yeah, I can see that.  I can see that kind of risky tech type stuff.  
**[1:12:50-1:12:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:12:50):**  But I would say the 60% of the majority of that investment I would direct towards actual  implementation of novel business models, which I've talked about so far.  Getting the regenerative products, produce products from the farm to consume.  Yeah, they'll be tech involved.  So heavy information technology and measurement technology and stuff like that.  
**[1:13:09-1:13:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:13:09):**  But I think the entrepreneurs are going to make regenerative agriculture happen are the  ones that invent new business models that help scale regenerative agriculture.  The principles may be controversial to scientists, but they're not controversial to practitioners.  They work each and every time in the field.  What we have to do is figure out how to build market mechanisms.  
**[1:13:31-1:13:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:13:31):**  But yet Alan Savory gets an enormous amount of pushback that it's never been proven on  scale, et cetera, et cetera.  If you read the comments on the TED talk or in some of the discussions in the UK, it's  really interesting.  I always wonder when is the last time you talked to regenerative ranchers that would  
**[1:13:50-1:13:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:13:50):**  tell you it actually does work.  And here you can see it.  But there's this, I don't know, this cloud of misinformation or talk around it.  Yeah, I'm used to that from the world I came from too in energy technology.  It's no different.  
**[1:14:03-1:14:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:14:03):**  Solar will never get beyond 100% and things like that.  Everybody's always careful.  Copernicus, of course, the famous stories, right?  Pretty darned up.  That's true.  
**[1:14:12-1:14:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:14:12):**  Okay, now you're...  We human beings are not really quick to jump onto things.  I'm a big fan of Thomas Kuhn, wrote a book called The Structure of Scientific Revolutions.  He coined this phrase paradigm.  I always tell people that a paradigm is the most difficult thing to break.  
**[1:14:27-1:14:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:14:27):**  So this thing of thinking in loops instead of lines is a paradigm shift.  This thinking of killing, not emerging instead of killing is a paradigm shift.  Yeah, you just have to fundamentally look at things differently.  And what Kuhn taught us in his study of all these scientific revolutions throughout history,  he was a professor of the history of technology at MIT, was normal science tries to squeeze  
**[1:14:48-1:14:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:14:48):**  everything into conventional explanations up until the moment when it can no longer  fit.  And then bursts.  That only happens when you get enough data that just cannot be ignored.  Yeah, I just finished the book 1491 on how the landscapes looked and how the indigenous  
**[1:15:06-1:15:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:15:06):**  peoples managed landscapes and how long a lot of these things have stopped.  How much science was already there for 20, 30 years until people said, no, actually,  there were a lot more people living, peoples living all across before Columbus came.  And actually, there were a million other things that we never thought were there would actually  happen.  
**[1:15:23-1:15:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:15:23):**  But sometimes you see a lifetime of a scientist that has been publishing and complaining,  like, look, it was completely different.  They managed with fire on a huge scale and they did this and it took until after he or  she was dead before the whole thing unraveled.  But yeah, the heretics, you know, there's famous examples in the modern time are the  
**[1:15:43-1:15:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:15:43):**  people that invented the concept of plate tectonics.  The idea that the asteroids killed the dinosaurs, the fact that ulcers are caused by microbes.  These are all heretical ideas that were by early traditional scientists.  But all the more reason why the data, what Kuhn taught us in that book was that the crisis  that allows the new paradigm to emerge only emerges when the data becomes so compelling  
**[1:16:07-1:16:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:16:07):**  that it can no longer be ignored in any way.  And so this is why I think it's so important that farmers and business people around the  world just focus on implementing, just get it working on the ground, ignore the critics.  You don't need to convince every consumer to buy your food.  You need to find the 10 that will and figure out how to make it profitable to serve those  
**[1:16:27-1:16:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:16:27):**  10 or those 100.  I have to stay in business while the science is catching up, basically.  Exactly.  And then over time, we're going to get the data and the observational science, that first  20 percent of the billion dollars, will start realizing, oh, you know, this is how that  
**[1:16:41-1:16:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:16:41):**  works.  Now, having dug into this because of the way my mind works early on to the first principles  of physics, I really think the flow of energy in the universe is on our side.  So I'm not terribly concerned that there's like a fatal flaw that we're going to uncover.  It floated up the levels I didn't even know existed before in considering why regenerative  
**[1:17:00-1:17:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:17:00):**  agriculture works.  But the actual manifestation on the ground, how to make it work in business, how to make  it work in different settings, these are all things that generations of practitioners and  scientists will figure out.  It just doesn't do us any good to get caught in debates that are historical at the moment  
**[1:17:19-1:17:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:17:19):**  when the urgent need here is to reinvent our food system in a way that simultaneously improves  the health of both people and planet.  And if there was one thing you could change overnight, so we take you away from your one  billion dollars, I'm sorry, with a magic wand, there's one thing you can change overnight  in the food system or in general, what would you do?  
**[1:17:38-1:17:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:17:38):**  Oh, good question.  If I had a magic wand, so I could trick people's brains into doing things, I would wave it  and have people learn to think in loops instead of lines.  It's so foreign to the Western mind.  You know, mechanistically, maybe we all need to go live with indigenous people for a while.  
**[1:17:58-1:18:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:17:58):**  1491, you know, if we could all transport back to 1491 and be observers in that system  and learn from it, that would actually be a great way to learn to think in loops instead  of lines.  I think it would be so, so educational and so counter to everything we think we know.  Yeah, there's so much we don't.  
**[1:18:19-1:18:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:18:19):**  I want to thank you so much, Russ, for this conversation.  I don't think it's the last time we do that.  We covered a lot, but still scratched the surface.  And I want to wish you good luck in these crazy times to keep shipping and keep delivering  to regenerative products to your customers.  
**[1:18:36-1:18:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:18:36):**  My pleasure.  Thanks for having me on.  It's a real joy to talk with you, Kun.  If you found the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  
**[1:18:46-1:18:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:18:46):**  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  It's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast, and it only takes a few  seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  
**[1:19:03-1:19:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:19:03):**  join my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or in the description  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  
**[1:19:32-1:19:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:19:32):**  Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to put money  to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011 and recording  
**[1:19:51-1:19:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:19:51):**  these podcasts since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  
**[1:20:05-1:20:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:20:05):**  What questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  
**[1:20:12-1:20:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:20:12):**  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  You, the soil builders and investors in this space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  
**[1:20:28-1:20:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:20:28):**  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management consultants, etc.  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  
**[1:20:48-1:20:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:20:48):**  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  that among the listeners of this podcast we have people with very different means.  
**[1:21:02-1:21:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:21:02):**  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  
**[1:21:18-1:21:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:21:18):**  so you don't have to ride along.  We're gonna look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  if you're a soil builder.  
**[1:21:37-1:21:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:21:37):**  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're gonna look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  
**[1:21:54-1:21:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:21:54):**  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  
**[1:22:11-1:22:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/07/russ-conser#t=1:22:11):**  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  