### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2020-00-28)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  How can we scale agroforestry to have the impact we need in terms of climate, biodiversity,  social impact and food and fibers?  
**[0:00:21-0:00:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:00:21):**  For this we need the biggest investors in the world to invest in it.  So how can we make agroforestry investable and bankable?  And how can we follow the example of the renewable energy industry, which grew from very few  small projects here and there 20 years ago to a massive investable and bankable industry?  This interview we explore the four-year due diligence which led to a German pension fund  
**[0:00:41-0:00:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:00:41):**  investing 200 million into agroforestry.  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture, Investing as if the  Planet Mattered, a podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and  agriculture space to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil,  people, local communities and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  
**[0:01:06-0:01:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:01:06):**  Why my focus on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  
**[0:01:24-0:01:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:01:24):**  In March last year, we launched our membership community to make it easy for fans to support  our work.  And so many of you have joined as a member.  We've launched different types of benefits, exclusive content, Q&A webinars with former  guests, ask me anything sessions, plus so much more to come in the future.  
**[0:01:39-0:01:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:01:39):**  For more information on the different tiers, benefits and how to become a member, check  gumroad.com slash investing region egg or find the link below.  Thank you.  Welcome to another interview today with Richard Falken, co-founder and current CEO of One  Two Three, the pioneers in making sustainable forestry and agriculture projects investable  
**[0:01:59-0:02:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:01:59):**  at a large scale.  We interviewed Olive Hrenke, chief project officer in March this year, but I wanted to  dig deeper in how One Two Three managed to get a German pension fund to invest 200 million  euros in agroforestry.  Welcome Richard.  
**[0:02:13-0:02:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:02:13):**  Thank you very much for the introduction, Koen.  I'm delighted to participate in this series.  Don't be scared.  You mentioned this is your first podcast and I'm sure you're going to like it.  But I want to start with a personal question, which I think is easy to answer, but might  
**[0:02:25-0:02:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:02:25):**  be quite extensive.  What brings you to soil?  Why are you doing what you're doing?  Yes, I mean, it's a fundamental question.  It's a long story, but I'll try to make it short.  
**[0:02:34-0:02:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:02:34):**  First half of my life, I was focused on more commercial businesses.  This second half of my life, and given my age, that maybe explains why I haven't been  involved too much with podcasts yet.  I focused on climate change mitigation for like the last 15 years or so.  And to me, that is the one big thing that humanity has not managed to come to grips  
**[0:02:57-0:02:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:02:57):**  with.  And it doesn't, to me, it doesn't look like we immediately will.  That's my behind motivation that helped me start looking much more seriously at forestry  and agroforestry in the context of large scale investments and making it accessible to investors.  Now where does soil come into play here?  
**[0:03:18-0:03:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:03:18):**  Soil of course, is the key to everything.  All our nutrition is based on it.  And from a climate change mitigation perspective, soil is super interesting because our soil  holds about three times as much carbon as the whole atmosphere and about five times  as much carbon as in the world combined.  
**[0:03:38-0:03:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:03:38):**  So soil is a prime carbon sink, and especially the organic soil components.  I don't want to necessarily educate everybody here about soil, but a good soil is composed  mostly of what we call humus.  So it's mostly fungi, microbes that transform plant matter into soil, other organic matter.  And at the end of the day for us, all projects are really soil management and soil health  
**[0:04:04-0:04:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:04:04):**  projects.  So good soils give you amazing growth.  They take away the disease pressure they make for healthy plants, healthy trees.  And we see ourselves as guardians of the soil for future generations.  So for us, soil is the key to land-based carbon sequestration.  
**[0:04:22-0:04:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:04:22):**  And do you still remember when you, I mean, this is a very profound insight that I think  many people in the podcast, they agree and definitely write me if you don't, like they  share that and we share that.  Do you remember when that came about?  Was there one moment, was that a number of pieces where you went from basically climate  
**[0:04:41-0:04:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:04:41):**  change, carbon in trees or trees have a lot of carbon to soil as well?  Like that didn't happen overnight, I think.  Do you remember where and how that triggered that insight?  Yeah.  The frustration actually, for me, the moment came when the Kyoto Protocol collapsed, when  
**[0:04:57-0:05:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:04:57):**  Canada exited the Kyoto Protocol and the carbon price went from what was above 20 euros per  ton to down to something like two euros or something per ton.  So the right to pollute, basically pollution was free once more.  You didn't have to owe up to the carbon pollution in the atmosphere.  And it made a lot of the projects I worked on collapsed.  
**[0:05:20-0:05:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:05:20):**  I was engaged already in the Kyoto Protocol in creating carbon emission reduction projects,  very real projects all over the world.  And I said, no, you know, the carbon credits is not the answer here.  I need to do something more tangible.  And to me, the most tangible project then was forestry.  
**[0:05:39-0:05:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:05:39):**  And what later with a very deep interest in agroforestry, I also come from a forestry  background.  My family has a long standing tradition of foresters and are very close to nature.  So we've been a little bit pre-exposed from the first time we saw the light of day when  we were born and brought up in a house in the middle of the forest without electricity  
**[0:06:01-0:06:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:06:01):**  or running water to today.  So that basically that circle closed for me at that point in time.  I said, no, this is the point in time when I need to do something more concrete and I  need to engage directly with forestry and agroforestry systems.  That was the click moment for me, if you want.  
**[0:06:17-0:06:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:06:17):**  And just for the listeners who haven't listened, which I will definitely link below to the  interview with Oliver, what is in a few sentences, what is 123, what are you leading?  What is the 123 project or company you're leading at the moment?  Our theory of change, if you want, is two-sided.  We have two focal points.  
**[0:06:36-0:06:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:06:36):**  One is to transform finance by creating sustainable nature or soil based investments as a real  asset class for professional and large scale investors who are also looking for climate  impact and return at the same time.  And large scale, what are we talking about?  These are hundreds of millions at a time, right?  
**[0:06:55-0:06:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:06:55):**  Well, these are pension funds and insurance companies primarily.  These are the biggest investors in the world.  And for those today, this asset class is not really accessible given their regulatory frameworks,  given their need to be very conservative and their obligation to not lose money for their  pensioners or for the insured population.  
**[0:07:19-0:07:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:07:19):**  And we wanted to change that.  We basically want to make this accessible with a view to making agroforestry systems  as investable as solar energy or wind energy is today to achieve that same kind of bankability.  That is our long term vision for the financial side.  And you see that as absolutely essential to get to the scale of impact we need.  
**[0:07:44-0:07:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:07:44):**  We're not going to get there with private individuals investing, with high net worth  individuals.  We need to, like in your theory of change, we need the largest pots of money basically  we can get our hands on to invest seriously in the space like they're investing in renewable  energy now.  
**[0:08:00-0:08:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:08:00):**  Yes.  I mean, maybe before I answer that one, I would like to expose the second part of our  theory of change because as I said, it's kind of two sided.  And the second part is the actual subject matter.  In order to make this accessible, we felt that there is a lack of skilled operator who  
**[0:08:18-0:08:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:08:18):**  can de-risk the business for these institutional investors.  So we decided to create an operational company that can deliver and walk the talk on sustainability  issues, but also on all operational issues.  And that is the second piece.  It's basically improving the way that forestry and sustainable agriculture is being done  
**[0:08:40-0:08:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:08:40):**  today and to marry that into the financial world in such a way that all stakeholders  benefit.  This is kind of the second piece.  And that risk piece is key, obviously, to the institutional world.  And you're saying they've seen maybe this space as too small and thus or maybe end too  
**[0:09:02-0:09:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:09:02):**  risky to place their large investments that are placing otherware in real estate and renewable  energy, et cetera.  So there's hardly so far, I think you've been the only one able to raise from a pension  fund these amount of serious capital for an agroforestry investment.  Is that correct?  
**[0:09:20-0:09:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:09:20):**  Are there other?  I think there are some others, but they are more on the North American or Canadian side.  And their motivation is still a little bit more classical, let's say more purely profit  driven.  But traditionally, there have been timber investments and also agricultural investments,  
**[0:09:37-0:09:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:09:37):**  but not necessarily with the sustainability and impact objectives that we have today.  And the key challenge here is to, as I said, is this marriage between the impact objectives  on the one side and to still achieve sufficient profitability that allow pension funds to  pay their pensions.  And this is completely achievable, actually.  
**[0:09:55-0:09:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:09:55):**  It's a myth that this doesn't work.  It is a question of good management and of good operational discipline and of a certain  long term view also.  But those are some of the problems.  And I guess we may come to that in a little bit more detail.  
**[0:10:08-0:10:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:10:08):**  Oh, absolutely.  I would love to unpack.  So because you already answered actually a question I always ask at the end, like, what  do you believe to be true about region egg that others don't?  Definitely inspired by John Kempf.  
**[0:10:19-0:10:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:10:19):**  And I think the myth here, you might have another answer, we can get back to that later.  But the myth that it is possible with good management and a long term view to get good  returns and as not just financial, but actually also the impact.  I think that's something fundamental, because otherwise we cannot expect pension funds and  insurance companies to even get into this space or even look at it, if we cannot get  
**[0:10:40-0:10:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:10:40):**  the returns that they not because they want to, but they need to literally in their system.  It's built into that.  Yes.  And pension funds don't even look at agroforestry.  They don't know that it exists, basically.  
**[0:10:53-0:10:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:10:53):**  But it's just not an asset class yet.  When they do the asset allocation, they just nobody thinking of agroforestry, I can assure  you, just start there.  So our job to get it onto the radar screen and to create successful cases.  And here, with today's sustainability drivers, it's really happening now, actually.  
**[0:11:12-0:11:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:11:12):**  I've looked at this for many years.  And people have politely nodded their heads, but they've never engaged.  But today people engage, actually, they're really interested.  They really want to go deeper and to have more impact and get a bigger bang for the  buck if possible.  
**[0:11:27-0:11:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:11:27):**  Yeah, let's explore that.  Because you I mean, we've known each other for a number of years.  And I've seen from the outside, let's say the process, because I think the first is  always the most difficult one.  In this case, a German pension fund that agreed to invest 200 million into 123 or into agroforestry  
**[0:11:43-0:11:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:11:43):**  through 123.  How did that come about?  I mean, this is a very open question.  We're going to unpack that.  But what did the first contact look like?  
**[0:11:50-0:11:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:11:50):**  Did you contact them?  Did they contacted you?  What was that process of getting a behemoth basically to actually look at it as an asset  class and look at it as a serious investment and not just something philanthropy might  put 500,000 to compensate something?  
**[0:12:04-0:12:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:12:04):**  No, they actually made an investment.  So how did that start?  It was initiated from our side, basically, or from my side to be concrete, by presenting  a case to the consultant that is helping our pension funds to manage their money.  And the first time around, they looked at me and said, Yeah, sure, come back when you  
**[0:12:27-0:12:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:12:27):**  have definitely a double digit return.  And anyway, what is this?  Then a year went by, and I tried again, and talking to different people.  And by that time, the interest in sustainability had increased to such a stage that was taken  seriously.  
**[0:12:43-0:12:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:12:43):**  And I was heard basically, the proposal could be made.  And then we're building political support for this over the course of a year, roughly.  Political meaning in the pension fund or political in the country?  But then several pension funds.  Yeah.  
**[0:12:58-0:12:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:12:58):**  How did you do that?  Did you bring them to the field to the forest?  How do you get support in these boards?  We already had a precursor organization.  And we basically they asked independent experts and consultants to visit what we have been  
**[0:13:13-0:13:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:13:13):**  doing before, to visit farms and forests and to do due diligence on site in Latin Central  America on the quality of the operations and all kinds of aspects that you can imagine  for about six months.  So you have, there was a track record, there were farms and forests to visit of the previous  work basically you've done.  
**[0:13:33-0:13:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:13:33):**  So it wasn't completely, these are some renderings.  This is what we're maybe going to do.  No, this is what we're going to do, but larger and look, there are the examples.  Yes, there was some previous work on a smaller scale.  And we were basically proposing to scale that up.  
**[0:13:49-0:13:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:13:49):**  And there was a certain leap of faith there, I guess, to trust us to manage that scaling  up.  So then personally I've been involved in other companies before and my passion is definitely  scale.  It really is fun to scale things up.  
**[0:14:04-0:14:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:14:04):**  I find, I know it's not, I don't have to have all the original ideas myself and I definitely  don't, but I really like to apply energy to making good things work better and bigger  and get more impact, more traction.  And this is what they saw.  They saw this energy and trusted us to create this opportunity.  
**[0:14:26-0:14:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:14:26):**  Every investment that we do, I mean, yes, there's a certain willingness to invest, but  then every single project that is presented can also be rejected.  It's piece by piece.  It's piece by piece.  So it grows over time.  
**[0:14:39-0:14:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:14:39):**  And today we have commitments of about 270 million and we've invested most of that, but  it's 12 different projects with a few more coming this year in seven different countries.  And every single one of them can be of course rejected.  Every single one of them has to fulfill all of the criteria.  There's a very extensive professional asset management, investment management process  
**[0:15:00-0:15:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:15:00):**  going on, very intensive due diligence processes, et cetera, that make sure that everything  we propose is double tested and there's independent experts for just about every aspect of the  business being heard.  And only if they approve, only if they concur with us will a project go ahead.  And how long did it take from, I mean, you mentioned the year went by from like the first  
**[0:15:23-0:15:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:15:23):**  connection and you connected with some other people and then six months.  I mean, I remember from your stories and being on the outside and seeing very little, obviously,  that it was a long process.  How many hoops did you have to jump through basically, logically, obviously, because they're  investing not their own money, but I can imagine from your side, did you think many times you  
**[0:15:42-0:15:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:15:42):**  were there and then actually there was another phase in due diligence that emerged out of  nowhere?  The real total length of the process from the first contact to somebody from these pension  funds to the actual start of the project, we were looking, the first contact was in  2013.  
**[0:16:01-0:16:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:16:01):**  And then a long time, nothing happened.  That's when the relationship started to build.  And then we actually executed and signed contracts on March 2017.  Wow.  Now, just to give people an understanding of when you first do something, because for  
**[0:16:15-0:16:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:16:15):**  everybody it was new and the length and time it takes for institutional investors to put  money to work, that people have an idea of, okay, it's three to four years, there's nothing  in this space basically.  But now with the second one, I'm imagining, I hope that it goes faster or not, you're  laughing.  
**[0:16:33-0:16:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:16:33):**  Yes.  And I really must say that we have been very blessed with fantastic support from our investors.  They've really helped us grow and they've babysat our growth, helping us to develop into a professional  asset management so that we could also focus very much on the operational side.  It has really been like a partnership of developing this together that has worked very well for  
**[0:16:56-0:16:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:16:56):**  hopefully both sides so far.  And in terms of returns, obviously it's early on, but what have you seen in the assets that  you've bought, are they performing as the models or as the predictions have predicted?  Is the investor going to be happy or is the investor happy?  Or what have you seen over the last years in terms of what you planned and what's actually  
**[0:17:19-0:17:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:17:19):**  happening?  Yeah, even though we are in the long-term business, you can still measure reasonably  precisely the ongoing so-called net asset value, which shows you the implicit increase  in value in a given project.  And that is established by independent experts as well on the biological forestry side, as  
**[0:17:39-0:17:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:17:39):**  well as on the financial side.  And so being part of a professional investment asset management process, we have a quarterly  assessment basically, and once a year there's physical controls of everything.  So we know that we are developing reasonably well.  Out of a portfolio of projects, I would say there are a couple of projects that are performing  
**[0:18:01-0:18:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:18:01):**  clearly below expectations.  There are a couple of projects that are performing above expectations and there are some projects  that are performing in line with expectations.  So you kind of have a typical statistical normal average.  But the good news is that we have invested more than 150 million euros so far into these  
**[0:18:23-0:18:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:18:23):**  projects and we can show already that most of that is working quite well.  And in terms of returns, you mentioned something, unless there's a double-digit return, these  investors are not even coming to the table.  And you also said it's perfectly possible to have a good return.  You didn't say double digit.  
**[0:18:41-0:18:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:18:41):**  Is there a tension you see in your projects between the return they want, the investor,  they being the investor, and the focus on sustainable and let's say towards regenerative,  which I think you mentioned very nicely, I will link it below as well, in your impact  report?  Is there a tension you see between the return that some of these, and maybe also the speed,  
**[0:19:00-0:19:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:19:00):**  like the time that some of these investors need or want or have in their system, and  the focus on sustainability and regeneration?  There's several answers to this.  My first answer at a high level is there's no real tension between return expectation  and sustainability as such, if you have enough time.  
**[0:19:20-0:19:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:19:20):**  That if is very important.  If we take a step back, then you look at the classical way to invest in agriculture, or  that is invested locally in Latin America or in Africa, et cetera, is fairly short term  with the locals investing, they have like a 20% return expectation or more, or they  wouldn't even consider an investment.  
**[0:19:44-0:19:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:19:44):**  And pension funds basically need to deliver today to back to their investors probably  about would be happy to deliver 4% or 4.5%.  So in order to get there and to compensate for their own cost structures, et cetera,  the very minimum you have to deliver across everything is somewhere between 6% and 8%.  Having said that, there are individual project types that deliver more.  
**[0:20:12-0:20:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:20:12):**  Greenfield projects where you have a higher risk have to deliver above that because the  risk is higher and brownfield projects where you basically take over existing already planted  ecosystems and that already have some returns would fall into that category.  And then we have long term forestry, where we really have like evergreen type of investment,  where you don't have to exit and there if you can deliver like 6% or so over the long  
**[0:20:41-0:20:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:20:41):**  term, then you can stay in and never have to exit because the investor is happy with  that.  And these returns for these different type of projects and different type of risk are  possible.  That's what you're saying.  
**[0:20:54-0:21:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:20:54):**  Yes, those are the ones we are seeing and as we get more experienced, I think we also  getting better at making correct and realistic assumptions about some of these parameters.  Of course.  Getting more and more experienced.  So there is a tendency for increasing profitability over time in our projects.  
**[0:21:16-0:21:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:21:16):**  We look at the first projects that will be less profitable than the projects we are doing  now.  That is also...  Yeah, you're learning obviously.  We are on a pretty good learning curve.  
**[0:21:28-0:21:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:21:28):**  Once you've done that three, four years with one and obviously a lot of education on your  side and a lot of education on the side of the pension fund.  I don't know if you're currently talking to other large scale investors, but do you see,  I mean, the world has changed as well, obviously over the last years, but is the second one  or would the second one, if you're not talking yet, going faster, you think?  
**[0:21:49-0:21:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:21:49):**  Or is it anyway a very long process if you want institutional capital to come on board?  Because we're not...  It's not that they can compare you to 10 other renewable energy funds or renewable energy  asset managers.  Do you see there a potential speed up or you have to go through a three, four year process  
**[0:22:06-0:22:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:22:06):**  again?  No, there will definitely be a speed up and there's several factors at work actually,  but due to a certain established base, we already have some other investors now that  are investing through our fund, Brownfield Fund, the Kakao I work for, Sufan basically  is called the SAF.  
**[0:22:24-0:22:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:22:24):**  I'm sure Oliver talked about that in his podcast, and because he's managing it.  So we have some investors in there and we are now also, we're opening up the business  development to also work with large off-takers who are interested in sustainable supply chain.  So on the strength of our farming and operational capacity, they are interested in securing  sustainable supply, for example, for Kakao, sustainable Kakao production, which is one  
**[0:22:53-0:22:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:22:53):**  of our specialties.  And they're willing to invest potentially in the forestry as well to get access to this  level of quality and quantity.  Yes, because there is a scarcity of supply of truly sustainable production in that space.  And we've basically decided at the beginning of our company to jump in there and to create  
**[0:23:13-0:23:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:23:13):**  that a position in sustainable Kakao production, but also in other products like coconut, for  example, sustainable bananas, dates and other fruits.  But right now the emphasis find a way still sustainable Kakao production.  And that's also opening up quite a big field that is at least as big as institutional investors  and possibly bigger actually.  
**[0:23:35-0:23:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:23:35):**  Wow, yeah, and more aligned because you need the off-takers.  Like you need someone, someone needs to buy obviously the forest produced, agroforestry  products coming off your farms and your projects.  Yes.  It's part of this de-risking that I mentioned earlier.  
**[0:23:51-0:23:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:23:51):**  Our job is to bring together key players in this value chain and the better the partners,  the less risk is inherently left for everybody.  Yeah, of course.  Our partners on the supply side, on the demand side are very interested in having pension  fund money co-investing into these projects because the cost of capital is lower simply.  
**[0:24:14-0:24:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:24:14):**  And it works both ways.  It works for the off-takers because they have to only invest a small piece or a certain  part of that.  And because they really want to have the sustainable produce and it works for the pension fund  because it's really secure if you have a 10-year or 15-year off-take agreement at an attractive  
**[0:24:33-0:24:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:24:33):**  rate, then that really secures the whole deal.  It's really similar to renewable energy where we were maybe 15 or maybe 20, 15 years ago.  Like the off-take, which obviously were the power purchase agreements and slowly the institutional  money coming in, et cetera, et cetera, and the asset managers in the middle trying to  make it work.  
**[0:24:52-0:24:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:24:52):**  Yeah.  And we don't see a lot of specialization yet.  So we have to reach out to all directions and try to create this sustainable middle  element that ties everything together.  And I mean, I ask the question often, but in this case it fits very well.  
**[0:25:09-0:25:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:25:09):**  How far off are we or what would happen if you would have a billion dollars to invest,  let's say tomorrow morning?  I mean, you have two more doubles going from 250 or 270, you're almost there with two more  exponential growth steps, but what would you focus on if you had a billion dollars to invest?  And just to be clear with the conditions you would like, it's an investment portfolio,  
**[0:25:31-0:25:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:25:31):**  but the timing you can choose and also the return, what would you focus your energy and  in this case your resources on?  Yeah.  You know, we're actually not that far away, I think, from that point in time.  This doesn't happen very often in this podcast.  
**[0:25:43-0:25:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:25:43):**  I don't know, I asked this question and we're not that far away from that point.  That's very good.  Yeah.  I think we're going to see a substantial increase of our portfolio over the next year or two  with very promising deals that I unfortunately cannot talk about.  
**[0:25:57-0:26:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:25:57):**  So to me, first of all, one billion in the context of climate change mitigation is a  small number.  It's nice, and I'll answer your question in a second, but I would like to put this number  into perspective for any of your listeners who made it this far.  You know, what can you achieve with one billion actually in terms of problems with frustration?  
**[0:26:17-0:26:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:26:17):**  If you invested in an agroforestry system or in a forestry system, you probably get  about 20 million tons of CO2 sequestered.  Is that per year, per block of time?  Unfortunately not.  That's 20 million over 20 years.  
**[0:26:31-0:26:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:26:31):**  Okay.  So it's about a million tons per year, roughly.  And if we are generous and if we had a methodology that would actually look at soil and what  we actually sequester in the soil, the real carbon sequestration is much higher actually,  because we don't take soil sequestration into account here.  
**[0:26:47-0:26:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:26:47):**  So this is pure biomass trees?  It is pure biomass and purely what is actually the smallest common denominator that can be  measured by gold standard or BCS.  Let's say you can get up to 30 million tons of CO2 with your one billion euros.  So I would ask you if we want to compensate the 40 billion tons of carbon that we're putting  
**[0:27:10-0:27:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:27:10):**  into the air every year as humanity, how much billion do we need to take these out of the  air to compensate 40 billion tons of CO2 that we're putting out every year?  What would that be in billions?  And so it's just to show you that we'll take about 1,330 billion euros in order to do that,  just to put that number into perspective.  
**[0:27:36-0:27:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:27:36):**  So you would leverage it.  So how would you use that billion to get the thousand times, more than thousand times actually  you need?  Yeah, I mean, first of all, if I had a billion euros to invest tomorrow, I would focus on  very few crops, two or three crops and try to become a world knowledge leader and make  
**[0:27:54-0:28:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:27:54):**  these crops super sustainable in the way they're being grown, trying to maximize the climate  impact of that.  This is more or less our strategy on the operational side to pick a few crops that we really, really  want to understand deeply in the context of an overall biodiverse and possibly regenerative  system that then will drag along a lot of other crops in such a system at some point  
**[0:28:18-0:28:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:28:18):**  later.  But first of all, we really need to understand how to work with a few strategic crops that  are important to the farming community and to the food and forest community.  Would you choose the biggest commodity crops there or would you choose the ones with the  biggest potential for regeneration?  
**[0:28:35-0:28:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:28:35):**  How would you select if you only could select three?  We would always go tree based as we want to promote climate change mitigation.  Where we would basically get the biggest bang for the buck in climate change terms would  be something that really lends itself well to agroforestry systems.  With a market, with, yeah, obviously.  
**[0:28:54-0:29:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:28:54):**  Yeah, with a real market where if you look at the palm oil catastrophe, which palm oil  is such of course is not a bad thing.  It's just the way it has been applied and forests have been destroyed to create huge  monocultures.  But there are a number of crops out there.  
**[0:29:12-0:29:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:29:12):**  Coconut would be one of them possibly that are still much underappreciated, I think today,  that are used that have amazing usages that we would like to engage in much more than  today.  And that actually it's a nice bridge to a question.  I mean, it could be the same answer, but I'm not going to ask it anyway.  
**[0:29:30-0:29:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:29:30):**  I've been experimenting a bit with asking this question on using the ITN framework.  So the I for importance, the T for attractability and the N for neglect thickness coming from  effective altruism and a few other organizations.  And if you want to know more, I will link some links below.  But basically looking at what you're trying to do in this case, focusing on a few crops  
**[0:29:50-0:29:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:29:50):**  or even in general, focusing on agroforestry and how to get institutional capital in there,  looking at the importance, which is what is the scale of the problem?  Like if all the problems in this area will be solved, like how much better would we,  the world be?  Tractability, like how solvable is the problem actually?  
**[0:30:06-0:30:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:30:06):**  And neglect thickness, how many other people are working on it with the thought that if  less people are working on it, your edit work will make a bigger difference.  If you have to look at importance, tractability and neglect thickness in, I mean, you chose  agroforestry, I think for these reasons, but within agroforestry, not necessarily from  the $1 billion investment fund, but just instead, if you had all the time in the world, what  
**[0:30:27-0:30:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:30:27):**  would you focus on and what would you spend your days on?  Or are you doing that already?  Ah, yeah, that's a good one.  And a big, it's a big one.  Yeah, I'd like to maybe take a step back again, looking at this, because I want to resist  
**[0:30:42-0:30:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:30:42):**  the temptation to make every problem look like a nail when I only have a hand.  So for us, first of all, it's very important to create holistic solutions.  Everything we do, whether it's agroforestry, whether it is regenerative agriculture, it  has to be in the context of an overall system that makes sense, otherwise not going to work.  So that's why I would like to take a quick step back and look at what are the fundamental  
**[0:31:08-0:31:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:31:08):**  problems facing us.  So the fundamental problem that I'm trying to solve or helping contributing to solve  at the beginning when we started out, it was climate change mitigation.  And it got more complex as we went deeper.  I've heard that before from other people.  
**[0:31:23-0:31:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:31:23):**  Yeah.  So we today we know with like 100% certainty that the 35 to 40 billion tons of CO2 that  we put into the atmosphere every year, that will lead us to tipping points of no return.  So there is a certain urgency to act now from that point of view.  And climate scientists that are not obliged to be politically correct, that can speak  
**[0:31:46-0:31:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:31:46):**  out freely in scientific journals, they are convinced that three to four degrees is probably  fairly realistic and not necessarily a pessimistic scenario actually for what's going to happen  in reality.  And all political efforts so far have not really led to a net reduction in global carbon  output.  
**[0:32:07-0:32:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:32:07):**  No matter what all our politicians have said, we're still in a rising curve of carbon output  today, no matter what everybody is claiming.  So if I look at the importance of this triple question, what is the fastest and far and  away the cheapest and technically absolutely perfectly working way to sequester carbon  from the atmosphere?  
**[0:32:29-0:32:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:32:29):**  The biggest and best one is to create long lasting tree based ecosystems and to increase  the living carbon content in the soil.  Even though we're not measuring the soil part yet.  But I mean, who cares as long as it stores carbon?  Yeah, as long as it's done, right?  
**[0:32:43-0:32:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:32:43):**  This is more a problem for the measurement and the finance inside.  You cannot finance anything that's not measurable, unfortunately.  But if you can finance it even without that measure piece, then hopefully in the next  years it becomes possible, which means the returns become even more interesting.  Yeah, we have to make it measurable.  
**[0:32:59-0:33:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:32:59):**  And of course it is possible.  But this is a machine that has been perfected over like 500 million years or so.  And if we compare it to carbon sequestration that is manmade, much more expensive by at  least a factor of 10 or so.  If you look at very good books like Drawdown or similar publications.  
**[0:33:18-0:33:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:33:18):**  They're raising a lot of money, though, for these carbon sequestration machines in Switzerland  and some other companies are raising serious, I mean, serious 50, 60 million.  Yes, no, it's a very good effort and we have to work all sides of the spectrum.  And one of the problems why people, if you don't mind my saying that, prefer to invest  into climate tech rather than soil based investments is because they think they understand tech  
**[0:33:43-0:33:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:33:43):**  easier.  It's easier to understand the mechanics of a tech startup than of nature.  Nature is much more complex to understand.  And people don't want to get their hands dirty.  And so seeing that all the time and we've been asked also by various players if we want  
**[0:34:00-0:34:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:34:00):**  to engage in climate tech.  They said, no, absolutely not.  We already have climate tech.  It's called a tree and it's called soil.  Yeah, it's much cheaper also.  
**[0:34:10-0:34:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:34:10):**  If I have to choose between something that is cheaper by a factor of 10, I mean, that's  revolutionary, right?  So why would I want to create machines when we haven't done this first?  And it's neglected as well, which is a shame, but also good if you're trying to create that  space.  
**[0:34:27-0:34:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:34:27):**  I wish more people were doing it, but the trees are creating this huge service to mankind  and the biosphere.  And to me, the biggest problem is the absence of investments in these tree based sustainable  agriculture and agroforestry.  So only I think it's about 2% of the so called green bonds that we all know.  
**[0:34:48-0:34:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:34:48):**  And every time you see the word green bond, you think, oh, finally, somebody is investing  in nature.  But no, they're not actually.  I think it's the maximum of 2% globally that is invested in forestry.  And then often with questionable sustainability, from my perspective.  
**[0:35:04-0:35:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:35:04):**  Are you planning to raise green bonds at some point?  Or thinking about, let's open it up a bit.  Not for a while.  I mean, a corporate bond, if you want to call a corporate bond, a green bond, then yes,  this is something that is in the books.  
**[0:35:17-0:35:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:35:17):**  So green bonds typically have a lot of public money in them, and that makes them incredibly  slow, cumbersome.  No, no, but like a corporate bond, like an energy company raising bond for increasing  their renewable energy or stuff like that.  That is something we are interested in looking at over the next few years.  
**[0:35:37-0:35:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:35:37):**  Interesting.  It's sort of the next step of large amounts, because there are large amounts in the bond  market.  Yeah, there are large amounts.  And again, it's a question of making this digestible to the normal financial investible.  
**[0:35:51-0:35:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:35:51):**  So what is being created with the green bonds today is often gigantic monocultures that  are not the answer to the problem.  At the same time, as I said, it's more complex than that.  Climate change is progressing, but we're also facing this fight against mass extinction  of many species of our planet.  
**[0:36:10-0:36:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:36:10):**  I think we're losing to the tune of about 50,000 animal species per year, and we're  losing 130,000 kilometers of forest per year.  So the dollar loss in biodiversity is an estimate to be about 170 billion per year.  It's not enough to just worry about one thing.  We need to build good soils, create maximum biodiversity in combination with these productive  
**[0:36:34-0:36:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:36:34):**  and profitable ecosystems.  That was my very long answer to the importance piece.  That's why I'm asking, I'm starting to ask this question more and definitely give me  feedback if it's serving, but to understand the thinking of the gas pattern, to have a  sort of framework to see why you're focusing on certain things and why not on many others,  
**[0:36:54-0:36:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:36:54):**  because there's so many things to worry about.  And that's exactly why I'm asking to get to the deeper part.  So please, thank you so much for sharing the important space.  And I'm curious about the rest.  Yeah, I think for German listeners here, we need to maybe quickly translate the word tractability  
**[0:37:10-0:37:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:37:10):**  that you used.  Yeah, in some versions of the framework, they use solvability, but then obviously it doesn't  work.  It's ISN and they use ITN.  So it's tractability, let's say slash solvable, like how solvable is the problem in this area?  
**[0:37:23-0:37:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:37:23):**  But it's a bit of a tricky word, I agree.  And it reads a little bit like traceability, which is...  Yeah, I know.  Your eyes jump to traceability and you think immediately of traceability, but that's not  the case.  
**[0:37:36-0:37:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:37:36):**  So tractability means how solvable is the problem.  And the answer to me is totally solvable.  It's a question of energy that we're putting into it.  And right now it's a human streak and we love to make our life as easy as possible.  And if I am an investor, I am going to do typically everything that has always been  
**[0:37:59-0:38:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:37:59):**  done, you know, and it's clean, easy and common to invest in the stock markets and in bond  market and intangible paper-based liquid assets like Wirecard, for example, would be nice.  Not even paper-based, like it's like, yeah, zeros and ones based.  Yeah, you're right here.  Paper is even better.  
**[0:38:19-0:38:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:38:19):**  That phase is over.  So why bother working through tangible real assets, both understanding the nature and  how the underlying assets work and how everything interacts?  That is much more complex.  It's much more work, actually.  
**[0:38:34-0:38:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:38:34):**  And I still see the investment community not being prepared actually to dive deeper and  to take that plunge, which they have to take in order to be able to judge properly and  to not just follow procedures and hope for the best.  And what should they look at if they are, let's say they're listening and there's a  stadium full of listeners, obviously social distancing, the virtual stadium full of listeners  
**[0:38:58-0:38:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:38:58):**  listening to this podcast.  I think, no, but we, I, my family office or the institutional investor I work with or  for wants to get into the space, but we don't have any experience yet.  What should they look out for?  What questions should they ask?  
**[0:39:11-0:39:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:39:11):**  Where should they start?  And then we get to the connectedness, obviously, I'm jumping around in questions, but I was  just curious, like, do you visit forests, do you visit farms, do you buy your own piece  just to try?  What's the best?  
**[0:39:24-0:39:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:39:24):**  Do you start gardening?  First of all, you actually look for that holistic system that I mentioned.  You need a partner who can provide you with a holistic vision of what is supposed to happen.  At that level, these guys don't need gurus.  They don't need single problem solving ideas.  
**[0:39:43-0:39:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:39:43):**  They need this translated into a real workable solution from somebody who understands exactly  what he's doing.  And there are some companies around, but not very many who can actually offer that service.  This is a little bit of general answer to that question, but I would look for the holistic  side.  
**[0:40:03-0:40:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:40:03):**  And then yes, of course, please, by all means, check out the lay of the land.  So nobody we've ever taken into a farm has resisted or everybody who is taken also catches  the bug.  That's good.  We're not against that.  
**[0:40:20-0:40:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:40:20):**  Exactly.  So from I mean, purely promoting what we do, it is very good to have people come and visit  and actually share first hand experience to really understand what we're doing, especially  in the context of social impact.  This is something that in Germany is quite often neglected or not seen, which in France,  
**[0:40:38-0:40:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:40:38):**  for example, is much more visual and much more asked for the aspect of putting the human  beings into the center of the activity.  What about the people?  How do they cope?  And how important is it that they actually make this work?  
**[0:40:50-0:40:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:40:50):**  Yeah, we had a discussion with Oliver on that, actually, just for reference, Richard didn't  want to listen to the interview with Oliver, because he didn't want to be influenced by  it.  He will listen to it afterwards.  But we had a discussion on the social part about that a lot of the work because this  
**[0:41:04-0:41:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:41:04):**  was right into lockdown.  Obviously a lot of your work as 123 was now just to make sure that the people working  on the farms and on the university projects had enough to eat, because a lot of the distribution  of food stopped because of lockdowns in different countries, obviously, at different times.  But a lot of the work went into making sure of Oliver this to make sure that there was  
**[0:41:25-0:41:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:41:25):**  enough food for all the staff to make sure that they could go on.  So that immediately shows the fragility of our food system, but also the focus on social  because obviously people need to eat also when crazy lockdowns block everything.  One of the key problems that investors face today is that with this investment, you can  create a lot of value beyond the financial return.  
**[0:41:48-0:41:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:41:48):**  Because if you do it holistically, you're creating jobs, you're creating a whole ecosystem  doing soil improvement, biodiversity, biodiversity, you're creating a better world for the next  generations.  You're paying pensions, you're paying Social Security for people who have never seen Social  Security in their lives before.  
**[0:42:04-0:42:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:42:04):**  So one of the fundamental questions is, of course, why does the investor have to carry  all of that cost when all he wants is a kind of reasonably decent return?  So shouldn't the cost be spread a little bit further on more shoulders?  And that's something that we're working on to provide intelligent co-funding from other  partners that are interested in different parts of different pieces of this value chain.  
**[0:42:32-0:42:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:42:32):**  And that it could be foundations that are interested in biodiversity, for example, or  it could be the state of the host country.  I've been speaking to ministers or presidents to ask them for support in actually saying,  look, we are solving one of your problems in terms of Social Security, providing pension  payments, et cetera, et cetera.  
**[0:42:53-0:42:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:42:53):**  What can you do to help us?  How can you help us succeed and that not one single investor has to carry all of those  costs?  So it means that, for example, it could be on the taxation side that there is a promotional  taxation for truly ecological investments, which is often the case, et cetera.  
**[0:43:12-0:43:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:43:12):**  So this is another piece to watch out for that you don't necessarily have to shoulder  all of the cost alone.  And the last one may be that is one of my favorite demands is that we need a higher  carbon price.  We need a higher price for...  
**[0:43:27-0:43:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:43:27):**  I mean, it recovered a bit over the last months or year or so, but yeah, definitely it's not  nearly the true cost it should be.  We are on a good track.  A fascinating news is that, I mean, in Germany, we have a carbon price of 25 euros or a carbon  taxation 25 euros per ton as of 21 and 55 euros as of 25.  
**[0:43:48-0:43:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:43:48):**  Wow.  So 50 euros per ton is the point where...  It starts to hurt.  Well, it starts to hurt some, but it also...  Yeah, of course.  
**[0:43:59-0:44:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:43:59):**  Forestry can be funded almost purely from carbon revenues.  So this is really interesting.  If this is being translated at some point into the market for carbon compensation, then  we have a very good chance to reforest the planet based on carbon pricing.  And I know Sweden, I think is, do correct me if I'm wrong, somewhere around 100, 140  
**[0:44:23-0:44:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:44:23):**  already euros per ton and they're just increasing.  I mean, it's not a gigantic country, but it shows what is possible.  And the voluntary market, I think the European market in general has been, the price has  been moving up even in this crisis or have been stable and it's sort of back at 25 as  well.  
**[0:44:40-0:44:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:44:40):**  I mean, let's see what happens after.  We started this with Canada left and the whole thing collapsed and it could happen in Germany.  The government's changed and 2025, we never get to 50, but let's say next year, 25 is  a start and it becomes sort of ingrained in the system, too late and too slow, but still.  Yeah.  
**[0:44:58-0:45:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:44:58):**  If we then we need the necessary legislation to translate that into forestry and agroforestry  projects, which is not there today because the voluntary market is much slower than that.  And would that be like the one thing you would change?  I'm asking the magic wand question quite often.  Like if there's one thing you would change tomorrow morning and we all wake up in a world  
**[0:45:16-0:45:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:45:16):**  where Richard has changed something.  Would that be a 50, 100, 150 dollar carbon price or euro or would it be something completely  different?  Yeah.  Could I have two wishes?  
**[0:45:27-0:45:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:45:27):**  Of course, of course.  The one key factor, if we could have a carbon pricing for forestry and sustainable forestry  that is close to, let's say $50 or so, this would be revolutionary and would trigger a  global reforestation initiative like we have never seen before.  This would be a total game changer.  
**[0:45:52-0:45:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:45:52):**  There would have to be a guarantee, though, that it is there for the longer term.  Of course.  Because as you said, in the Kyoto Protocol, the problem was that the price is fluctuating  so much.  There's such a volatility that you never know where you come out of.  
**[0:46:03-0:46:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:46:03):**  And if you invest a million today, you may lose it tomorrow.  So if it's a tax, if it's based on taxation or on a similar kind of rigid system, you  know that, OK, it's here to stay, we're not throwing this out overboard tomorrow.  So that's one.  The other one is more an agricultural one.  
**[0:46:24-0:46:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:46:24):**  I think it would be great, and this is fantasy, it would be great to have a mandatory sustainability  scorecard for all agricultural products and that the sales of products underneath a certain  sustainability threshold should be prohibited.  That forces that all agricultural production is forced into a certain sustainability that  is becoming sensical, that just makes sense.  
**[0:46:51-0:46:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:46:51):**  Like soil health, energy use, inputs.  You delete all the practices that are detrimental and that everybody says...  Basically, you would like to walk into a supermarket with your wand and probably 95% of the products  disappear overnight.  Yeah.  
**[0:47:06-0:47:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:47:06):**  And the few that are, and then giving space to those two and to the others that want to  change.  Anyway, yeah, that would be maybe my second one.  I think you were allowed to have two.  I want to thank, I want to be conscious of your time.  
**[0:47:18-0:47:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:47:18):**  I think we answered honestly the neglectiveness, which is a word I keep struggling, but we  keep improving.  I mean, I think we've answered that throughout the podcast.  You wish there were many more focusing on this and you see the interest growing and  maybe even with the carbon price and with actually the success you're having and some  
**[0:47:34-0:47:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:47:34):**  others that there will be more operators, there will be more asset managers like we've  seen in renewable energy.  I mean, there were a few crazy ones 20 years ago and now there is an industry that is doing  this with prices that obviously are way lower than we could ever imagined and with investments  way higher than we could ever imagine.  
**[0:47:50-0:47:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:47:50):**  I think the neglectedness is a good last point because I think it is changing also radically.  I've never felt this before as a feeder today, that we are on the verge of real change when  it comes to the anticipation and realization of climate change impact.  I think it's with the kids taking to the street, Fridays for Future.  I think this is probably the biggest wake up call that I've seen in a long time in the  
**[0:48:16-0:48:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:48:16):**  perception of people.  I'm not talking about myself because we've been in the bubble for 15 years and people  are finally starting to take some of this seriously, although they wish that it would  just go away.  Somebody please make this go away.  
**[0:48:30-0:48:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:48:30):**  Let's buy some electric cars and get some panels and we'll be fine.  Yeah, exactly.  But still, it's a step.  It's not the realistic way we would like, but it's a step.  To maybe end this on a positive note, if I may, we're seeing the biggest polluters in  
**[0:48:45-0:48:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:48:45):**  the world, huge energy companies will turn into the largest renewable energy producers  in the world.  We're seeing energy companies establishing living carbon portfolios.  This is something they've never heard that notion before.  We're seeing car companies, not just offsets, but real forests.  
**[0:49:05-0:49:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:49:05):**  So there's a huge change going on right now in realizing that this is real, that it's  life threatening, and that everybody, especially industry, who has been calling for tougher  climate regulations for a long, long time, is really coming to the table now.  And our financial investors, especially institutional investors, by necessity, they cannot be pioneers.  They cannot be leaders in this normally.  
**[0:49:31-0:49:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:49:31):**  Their mandate is actually to keep money secure and to pay pensions, so they must by necessity  be followers.  But there is huge progress today in creating the framework actually that allows also step  by step for the biggest investors in the world to come on board for forestry and agroforestry  sustainable investments.  
**[0:49:52-0:49:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:49:52):**  I think that's a perfect note to end.  Thank you so much, Richard, for this deep dive into the world of agroforestry, institutional  investors and what needs to be done and is already happening to really get, let's say,  the larger pots of money flowing into this space.  Yeah, thanks very much for giving me the possibility to air my views here and apologies to all  
**[0:50:14-0:50:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:50:14):**  listeners who got lost in my rambling.  Absolutely not.  I think it was great.  If you found the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  
**[0:50:27-0:50:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:50:27):**  1. Rate and review the podcast on your podcast app. That's the best way for other listeners  to find the podcast and it only takes a few seconds.  2. Share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  3. If this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please join my  Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  
**[0:50:49-0:50:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:50:49):**  You can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or in the description  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I am super excited to share with you the online video course  Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food.  
**[0:51:15-0:51:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:51:15):**  How to put money to work in regenerating soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while  doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to put money  to work in regenerating soils and have been following this space since 2011 and recording  
**[0:51:31-0:51:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:51:31):**  this podcast since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in this space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  
**[0:51:46-0:51:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:51:46):**  What questions should you ask?  What is happening in this space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  
**[0:51:52-0:51:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:51:52):**  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  You, the soil builders and investors in this space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  
**[0:52:08-0:52:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:52:08):**  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management consultants, etc.  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  
**[0:52:29-0:52:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:52:29):**  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very different means.  
**[0:52:43-0:52:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:52:43):**  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  
**[0:52:59-0:53:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:52:59):**  so you don't have to ride along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  if you're a soil builder.  
**[0:53:18-0:53:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:53:18):**  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  
**[0:53:34-0:53:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:53:34):**  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  
**[0:53:51-0:54:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/07/28/richard-focken#t=0:53:51):**  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  