### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2020-00-25)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com slash course, or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  A conversation about scale and business and the key role of decentralized processing in  regenerative agriculture.  
**[0:00:19-0:00:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:00:19):**  Our guest has launched an investment firm, first investing their own capital into accelerating  regenerative farming.  If the food grown with regenerative practices doesn't taste amazing, and if it doesn't  take more money, we will never reach the impact we need.  Welcome to another episode of investing in regenerative agriculture, investing as if  
**[0:00:39-0:00:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:00:39):**  the planet mattered.  A podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  
**[0:00:57-0:01:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:00:57):**  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  In March last year, we launched our membership community to make it easy for fans to support  
**[0:01:16-0:01:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:01:16):**  our work.  And so many of you have joined as a member.  We've launched different types of benefits, exclusive content, Q&A webinars with former  guests, ask me anything sessions plus so much more to come in the future.  For more information on the different tiers, benefits and how to become a member, check  
**[0:01:32-0:01:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:01:32):**  gumroad.com slash investing region egg or find the link below.  Thank you.  Welcome to another episode today with Ed Byrne of Soil Works Natural Capital is a public  benefit company on a mission to accelerate the regenerative food movement by helping  to launch scalable, repeatable businesses that fuel the regenerative economy.  
**[0:01:51-0:01:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:01:51):**  Welcome Ed.  Hey, thanks.  Thanks for having me.  To start with a personal question, why soil?  What does an Irish man ends up in Texas working on regenerative agriculture?  
**[0:02:01-0:02:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:02:01):**  Well, that's a good question.  I think I don't know how far back you want me to go, but we, uh, when we, you know, my  business partner Lou and I started looking, we both have a passion for farming.  I can talk about that if you like, but when we started looking at it and getting a bit  more interested in, should we do something here?  
**[0:02:16-0:02:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:02:16):**  You know, why is, why is food quality getting worse?  Even real food quality getting worse.  You know, why are Westernized economies as they get more money, why does the health go  down and obesity go up and diabetes go up?  And now that we've kind of dug into the space, you realize, you know, it's actually, it's  
**[0:02:31-0:02:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:02:31):**  Michael Pollan's great line.  It's not why you eat, it's what you eat ate and you dig a little bit deeper in there.  And I'm sure you've done this yourself and realize, oh, well, it's not just the quality  of what they eat.  It's how it's grown.  
**[0:02:41-0:02:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:02:41):**  And ultimately it all boils back to the soil.  If the soil is no good, the crops, the grains, the grass are not going to be any good.  And it's logical when you think of it.  It's just, you know, I probably had never gone quite there before.  And when you realize, okay, it's all about the soil.  
**[0:02:55-0:02:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:02:55):**  And then, you know, you dig a little deeper and realize, oh, well, that UN stats of that,  we have 65 harvests left.  Obviously that's a big number to show out there and not true in every part of the world.  But what it is quite scary how much topsoil we're eroding and how our practices are just  making it worse and worse.  
**[0:03:10-0:03:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:03:10):**  And then when you dig in a little more and realize, oh, there's, there's this regenerative  agriculture thing.  It's easier on the land.  It's got less inputs for the farmers, so it should be a more profitable business.  And it restores soil, takes carbon from the atmosphere and makes higher nutrient quality  
**[0:03:24-0:03:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:03:24):**  or nutrient dense food.  And it's not mainstream.  So kind of, you know, as you dig and dig and dig in, you realize this is a real opportunity  and need.  And is there something we can do here?  
**[0:03:34-0:03:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:03:34):**  And we looked around and talked to some farmers and we believe there is, and it's great that  there's more and more people doing it.  And hopefully it can be a little bit of help.  And the analysis of the broken food system and obviously the potential of regenerative  agriculture, many would share, but you didn't stop there.  
**[0:03:49-0:03:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:03:49):**  You went into action mode, but let's ask a question first to you.  So was there one moment you suddenly saw the potential or was it more a gradual process?  Yeah, I'd love to say there's a light bulb moment, but I think I'm always, you know,  I'm from Ireland obviously.  And I spend all my summers and holidays on family farms and my business partner Lou has  
**[0:04:08-0:04:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:04:08):**  a ranch here.  And so, you know, we started, I always had an idea that at some point I'd run a farm  even if it was a hobby project or something in my retirement and, you know, the more I  started looking into it and Dan Barber's book, The Third Plate is just fascinating.  As someone who likes food, forget farming, it's fascinating.  
**[0:04:23-0:04:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:04:23):**  And you look at, you know, I love the approach he takes, which is all about the quality and  taste for consumers.  And I actually, we can talk about that later, but I think that's really important.  And I think that's what drives this movement to a degree.  And then Michael Pollan's book, The Omnivore's Dilemma introduced me to Joel Salatin.  
**[0:04:37-0:04:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:04:37):**  I read Joel Salatin and then Dave Brown.  And so I do think it was a gradual progression from an interest to a hobby to a, maybe there's  a business here too.  Oh, there's a whole ecosystem.  And, you know, and even now I'm kind of semi nervous going on a podcast because the more  
**[0:04:51-0:04:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:04:51):**  you dig, every time you look at one article, there's 10 more links and 10 more people and  10 more funds and 10 more companies.  And so this space for better or for worse, is much deeper than I thought, which is, you  know, that's obviously better, but worse that so few people know about it.  And there is, you know, it is such an active micro community, but it's not mainstream.  
**[0:05:09-0:05:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:05:09):**  It's not even close.  I don't even know if it's on that path yet.  And I think that's where we need to work on.  And because maybe many would have stopped there, started their own farm, maybe bring  forward their retirement a bit and would do that and would stop at that.  
**[0:05:22-0:05:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:05:22):**  And obviously maybe advocate for things, et cetera.  But you decided to take a different approach, bringing a lot of your knowledge that you  have in other spaces, mostly technology to this space.  Can you describe a bit that decision, like you saw the opportunity and then didn't decide  to create your own piece of paradise, but actually said, okay, this is something I want  
**[0:05:38-0:05:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:05:38):**  to work in and spend a lot of my awake hours.  Yeah, there probably was a semi-lightbulb moment on that front.  And, you know, obviously I'd love to have a farm and I'm sure I will at some point,  but we talked to a lot of farmers and they all said to us, you know, we need guys like  you, we need business people in this space.  
**[0:05:54-0:05:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:05:54):**  We're great at making food.  And I think, you know, farmers all go to farmers markets to sell direct and I'm not sure that's  necessarily what they all love to do.  I think it's, you know, chefs are great at making food, but are they all great at running  restaurants?  
**[0:06:03-0:06:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:06:03):**  And I think farmers, independent farmers have to do that, but I don't know what they'd choose  to do if there was a better route to market.  And we just heard this, it's, you know, we need business people.  And so when we look at the whole ecosystem, it's not just, I mean, there are lots of small  farmers and there are more and more people moving to regenerative.  
**[0:06:18-0:06:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:06:18):**  And so meeting on that will be a great hobby and hopefully I'll do it and I'll love it,  but I'm a business person first and I do see the opportunity and I'm passionate about it.  And I think I'd like to think that Lou and I can bring what we've done in scale works  in the last five or six years and in our business careers, we can have an impact here and look,  we're business junkies.  
**[0:06:35-0:06:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:06:35):**  We love business.  If we bring our love of business to a space where there's a real mission and we can see  a real impact of regenerative agriculture succeeding, then we should.  And can you describe a bit what is scale works?  So we said scale works up, I mean, you can probably guess where the Soilworks name came  
**[0:06:50-0:06:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:06:50):**  from, very original.  So we set scale works up six years ago because in the software space we saw that there was  a lot of great product companies being built, being built by engineers and funded by VCs.  And they had great products, but not great routes to market, not great scalable leadership  teams, scalable sales and marketing.  
**[0:07:07-0:07:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:07:07):**  And I think a lot of times founders, especially engineer founders, they love building and  that's great.  They love building and then they get to a point and it's a rare founder who's good at  building and scaling.  And so in scale works we acquire as close to 100% of a company as we can, always a majority  
**[0:07:23-0:07:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:07:23):**  or almost always a majority and bring in a new leadership team, grow the team, focus  on a scalable sales and marketing strategy.  So we've bought, I don't know, eight or 10 companies in the last five years and thankfully  it's gone well.  And you were planning and are planning and are actually doing that partly with the acquisition  
**[0:07:40-0:07:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:07:40):**  of FasterMap, that approach to regenerative agriculture.  Yeah, I don't know that that was our day one plan, but it worked out pretty well.  It's a good bridge from the software world to the regenerative agricultural world by  acquiring a software company.  So we know the software space well.  
**[0:07:54-0:07:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:07:54):**  Lou was actually a user of FasterMap and he connected with the original founders and we  realized, look, this is a really small business, but we think FasterMap is a big opportunity,  not just in, I mean, obviously rotational grazing and pasture management is a huge part  of regenerative agriculture, but I feel like that's the kind of the entryway and having  acres that we help farmers manage, hopefully there's a lot more we can do over time as  
**[0:08:19-0:08:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:08:19):**  we work with those farmers.  And look, we know how to do software.  We were quickly able to build a software team around it and hopefully we can build out the  platform, but hopefully it's a, that's the entryway for us to connect with farmers and  figure out how we can do more on soil, more on carbon and, you know, generally, you know,  
**[0:08:34-0:08:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:08:34):**  build out our, our network and learnings there.  And because you acquired the full company of FasterMap and have changed the team as  they were moving on and otherwise I think FasterMap would have closed and you were interested  that that didn't happen.  So what are you changing with them or what's the next phase in this case for a software  
**[0:08:51-0:08:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:08:51):**  company that you've bought completely?  Well, yeah, we bought it completely.  I hope it wouldn't have closed.  I don't know, but it was like, it wasn't, it wasn't a massively loss making business.  It's a small business, but it had a, you know, tiny team.  
**[0:09:03-0:09:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:09:03):**  So the founders have moved on.  There was only, I think really one other employee and she stayed with us and she's great and  doing a phenomenal job and hopefully having lots of fun.  So we've added four people to five people to the team since we bought it.  And look, step one is, you know, the low hanging fruit, talk to our customers, what's the stuff  
**[0:09:20-0:09:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:09:20):**  you're frustrated with.  And that list is always long.  And so we don't need to be business geniuses to pick up the low hanging fruit and fix the  problems that people tell us they've had or they have.  And then look, you know, it's a privilege to have those conversations and outside of  
**[0:09:35-0:09:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:09:35):**  hearing the kind of immediate things they have is ask what they're doing on their farm.  What else can we do to help?  And then, you know, ask what are, you can see the ideas.  Would you like us to do more on cover cropping?  You know, can we help you manage that?  
**[0:09:49-0:09:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:09:49):**  Would you like to do more on soil metering?  Do you have soil meters?  Would you like to input your data in there?  You know, can we figure out how much carbon is being removed into the soil and sell carbon  credits?  
**[0:09:59-0:10:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:09:59):**  I think there's just look, there's lots to do in the short term, which is just kind of  stick to your knitting and make what we do really solid, better and grow us, you know,  and Pasture Map gets a ton of signups all the time, which is great.  So it's our job to make sure that we work with all those, all those customers or potential  customers and do a good job getting them on board and getting their pastures set up and  
**[0:10:18-0:10:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:10:18):**  then go from there.  And look, the community already knows way, way more than we do.  So it's our job to kind of listen and then prioritize the things you hear lots of times  that we can actually do.  So how would you describe Soilworks then as an entity or as a concept?  
**[0:10:32-0:10:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:10:32):**  How would you describe it?  I guess it's look, it's a, it's an investment entity or company.  Look, our mission is to accelerate the transition to regenerative agriculture.  And so we'll, within reason, anything we can add value in will do.  I think there's, you know, there's lots of, there's lots of funds and big funds emerging  
**[0:10:54-0:10:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:10:54):**  in this space, or at least big funds who are now adding agricultural regenerative agriculture  to their, to their thesis.  So I hope we're not, you know, we're not just a investor of money.  But if we can add value by acquiring a company like Pasture Map and bringing our, our, you  know, our expertise of running businesses to it, if we can start a company, I think  
**[0:11:12-0:11:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:11:12):**  we'll, I think we'll start one or two in the next year.  We're somewhat in progress already.  And if we can invest in some companies where, you know, we can bring a business community  together and hopefully accelerate them.  And I think, you know, the power of bringing a small network together could be great.  
**[0:11:26-0:11:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:11:26):**  So we'll, I think Soilworks is our kind of vehicle to do that.  Hopefully, we'll build a little bit of a brand and that'll attract, you know, smart people  and we can, you know, start having good conversations.  And so far, it's been funded by you and your business partner.  Are there any plans to take on outside capital and to put other people's capital to work  
**[0:11:45-0:11:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:11:45):**  as well?  I should probably have some disclaimers.  We're not actually raising the fund now, but if we were, I guess we'd have to do that.  So yeah, I think we will.  I think we will.  
**[0:11:53-0:11:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:11:53):**  I mean, our capital is not limitless, obviously.  You know, my gut right now is that we'll be, like ScaleWorks, we'll always stay kind of  boutique size where we can actually have an impact.  But you never know.  I mean, this space, I think, especially as farmers have to figure out how to migrate  
**[0:12:09-0:12:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:12:09):**  and transition, that could take a lot of money.  So if the funds, if the other funds exist, great.  I don't think, you know, we don't want to compete with anyone on just dollars in the  bank.  But yes, I think at some point we'll have to raise money and we'll figure out, will  
**[0:12:20-0:12:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:12:20):**  it be a fund or will it be a company?  And I don't know the answer to that yet, but I think we'll do something.  Yeah.  And I like to ask this prioritization question, which I always have to explain a bit.  Using the ITN framework, which is importance, tractability and the lignactiveness, which  
**[0:12:34-0:12:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:12:34):**  I always struggle with.  It's definitely inspired by the effective altruism community that uses it a lot.  I will put a link in the show notes below if you want to know more, but it really looks  at importance, like what is the scale of the problem, tractability, how solvable is it  and how many other people are working on it in a sense, like how much of a difference  
**[0:12:50-0:12:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:12:50):**  can you make?  If you had to describe your approach to investing in and obviously being an entrepreneur in  regenerative agriculture and food, how would you rank it that?  Like, how would you, basically, why did you choose this approach if you would look at  those, those parts?  
**[0:13:05-0:13:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:13:05):**  You know, it's funny when you think about importance, go back to the macro, there's  no more important space.  I mean, regenerative agriculture helps our climate and our food system.  And is there any two bigger problems we have right now than world health and nutrition  obviously being such a big precursor to that and environmental change?  
**[0:13:22-0:13:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:13:22):**  And your approach in that in terms of bringing that business mind and the scalability or  the repeatability as well to the region X space where we are now, will that solve a  lot of the issues that we are all having in terms of that still it's a super tiny sector  and we're sort of fighting for attention everywhere?  Well, look, I actually think one of the, I wouldn't say issues, but one of the neglected  
**[0:13:45-0:13:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:13:45):**  areas so far within the space is that the community is, you know, talks a lot about  it and is getting better and better at the practices of regenerative agriculture.  But I'm a believer that supply follows demand.  And right now I think demand for regenerative produce is, you know, it might not be zero,  but it's pretty low because consumers don't know what it is.  
**[0:14:05-0:14:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:14:05):**  And if you look at, you know, consumer awareness, I mean, the big trend changes, consumer awareness  of the importance of nutrition and high quality food is growing and growing.  Right.  And, you know, you look at just the growth of organic and as we all know, organic isn't  necessarily great for the environment or, you know, might be better than the opposite  
**[0:14:22-0:14:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:14:22):**  method, but it's still not perfect.  And so it's a good start.  It's a start.  Yeah, I think.  And in terms of consumer awareness, everybody knows organic.  
**[0:14:29-0:14:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:14:29):**  They've done a really good job.  We've all done a good job in that.  And I think, I think if we could get regenerative produce or whatever it becomes called to that  level of awareness, then supply will follow demand, more and more farmers will do it,  more and more farmers will migrate.  
**[0:14:42-0:14:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:14:42):**  And so, so what are your plans there?  Because you mentioned we're going to start one or two companies.  I'm guessing now that they're going to be in the food space.  I don't know.  I have some I'm not going to share yet.  
**[0:14:52-0:14:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:14:52):**  Next podcast.  But I don't want to jinx us.  So I don't know, maybe we'll support companies in the consumer space.  I mean, have you seen some in like the food as medicine, the nutrient density, because  it's such a complex story.  
**[0:15:04-0:15:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:15:04):**  I see a lot of opportunity there.  I absolutely believe that the key to getting consumer demand is going to be nutrient density,  health care, etc.  I haven't seen too many examples yet.  Definitely without anybody listening that has them.  
**[0:15:15-0:15:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:15:15):**  But that like food companies that are built around healthy soils, just very simply.  Have you seen some little examples yet?  Like are we getting there?  No, I wish we were.  I think this is just such a small space.  
**[0:15:26-0:15:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:15:26):**  I mean, look, the farmers markets, an example.  Of course.  But there so there you don't know unless you have the bioneutrient meter, then get rich,  which isn't ready yet, because there's no database around.  You cannot really see which tomato has been grown in healthy soils.  
**[0:15:38-0:15:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:15:38):**  Exactly.  And so, you know, you can go online to your local farmer.  But look, the average consumer, even the average educated consumer about the importance of  nutrition is not going to do that.  And it's just it's not it's not easy to get regenerative produce.  
**[0:15:50-0:15:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:15:50):**  And then you got to ask the question, I mean, again, within the regenerative space, is regenerative  produce, is that what consumers want?  I mean, will the consumer care that you're regenerating your land?  I mean, it's great for the environment and the macro view of this food is good for, you  know, it helps someone restore their soil.  
**[0:16:05-0:16:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:16:05):**  But is it good for me?  I mean, did this come from good soil or soil that was just started regenerating a month  ago?  And so I don't know the answers to those.  But I think until those questions are asked and we start once we start getting regenerative  
**[0:16:16-0:16:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:16:16):**  produce in front of consumers, just like in the soft world, they will tell us what works  and what doesn't.  And we can adapt on the fly.  But, you know, when you when you talk when I talk to a friend or colleague or family  member about regenerative agriculture, they just gloss over it.  
**[0:16:29-0:16:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:16:29):**  No idea what that is.  And the exciting part is when you explain it, everyone is fascinated by it.  Then they start kind of their own cognitive bias of, oh, I saw I recognised this.  Is it, you know, was there a conference about this?  Is this person speaking about it?  
**[0:16:41-0:16:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:16:41):**  But then someone says, you know, where can I get this food?  And there's no answer to that yet.  And so there's no good answer to it.  So how would you approach that?  I mean, you are now in soil works, obviously, but as nutrient density is so key and it's  
**[0:16:54-0:16:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:16:54):**  such a horrible word.  What would be the steps there to fastly iterate a minimal viable product, like bringing the  software spirit and work ethics and approach to that?  How would that look like if we apply that to nutrient density?  Well, I kind of think of it as a pyramid of sorts.  
**[0:17:10-0:17:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:17:10):**  I think the top of the pyramid is taste.  I think, you know, people don't want to have medicine.  Medicine tastes horrible because if it tasted good, you wouldn't believe it would make you  any better.  And so I think number one is taste.  
**[0:17:22-0:17:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:17:22):**  You know, it has to taste.  By the way, real food should taste great.  It should taste the best.  And so I think Dan Barber is such a good steward of this community because he goes straight  to I'm going to make the best food for consumers.  
**[0:17:34-0:17:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:17:34):**  And so regenerative produce should be the most tasty food.  It should also be the most nutrient dense.  And so as a buyer for my family, not just a kind of restaurant goer, you look and say,  well, if I'm in the store, I want something that's really nutrient dense and that the  kids are going to like.  
**[0:17:50-0:17:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:17:50):**  And then I think the third part is, oh, this was carbon negative.  Awesome.  I'm so great about this.  I mean, I'm eating meat, which, you know, the world has been telling me is bad for me,  but actually is really good for me.  
**[0:18:00-0:18:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:18:00):**  It's super nutrient dense.  I mean, nothing more I can give my kids is so packed with nutrients.  And it's carbon negative.  Wow, I feel awesome.  And so I think there are lots of kind of, you know, step one, two, three that I think,  
**[0:18:13-0:18:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:18:13):**  look, we'll see.  We'll see what consumers react to.  But you know, you want to get out there and start getting them to react.  I think that's the approach.  Test, test, test and see, I mean, real people that put money on the table, either as customers  
**[0:18:25-0:18:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:18:25):**  for a faster map or as consumers in a shop.  I mean, that's the often what goes, goes wrong as well.  Like people develop things in their silo somewhere and the world needs you idea, but then you  get out and nobody cares about what you develop.  So getting that minimum viable and getting into real markets, I think is key.  
**[0:18:44-0:18:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:18:44):**  And what would you say like to smart, I would say smart investors, let's say they're all  listening to this show.  You've made your first steps, actually your first investments in the space.  What would you tell them, obviously, without giving investment advice, all the disclaimers  here are true to look out for, to look into in terms of regenerative agriculture as you've  
**[0:19:02-0:19:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:19:02):**  been going down the rabbit hole?  It's a good question.  The caveat being that advising smart investors assumes that we're smart investors.  So the extra disclaimer that we might, we may not be in, we're just getting started  ourselves.  
**[0:19:14-0:19:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:19:14):**  So I think when you look ag tech, especially in Silicon Valley, you say, oh, ag tech, we're  investing in ag tech.  And it's, it's our last hundred years of ag tech and the industrialization of agriculture  have been about getting more from less scale, scale, scale, more from less, more chemicals  for more produce.  
**[0:19:30-0:19:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:19:30):**  And I think it has to be the opposite of that.  You know, it can't be more from less, you know, obviously we don't want less, but you  know what our current, you know, all the ag tech we're doing now in software for precision  agriculture.  I just, I just think it's the wrong, it's the wrong way.  
**[0:19:46-0:19:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:19:46):**  It's just making us worse.  And so what we need to do is ag tech, you know, that the, the, the investments in agriculture  need to be on the process and innovation and methodology and logistical side.  I mean, this whole ecosystem, if regenerative agriculture is going to succeed, really needs  to be rebuilt.  
**[0:20:01-0:20:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:20:01):**  We need to go from massively centralized to massively decentralized.  And so, you know, how do we change the regulations there to allow that?  How do we support many small businesses?  How do we build scalable logistics chains that are super decentralized?  You know, I think if there's one positive of the current, you know, world health crisis,  
**[0:20:19-0:20:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:20:19):**  it's that we've seen centralized food systems don't work.  And so maybe, maybe that that'll be an accelerator.  And so, look, I would just say that things that might not traditionally look like scalable  software investments that are very attractive, I think investors need to look at, you know,  what is the investment ecosystem we can do here?  
**[0:20:36-0:20:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:20:36):**  And it shouldn't just be more from less, which is the, which is what has got us into this  problem to begin with.  And I mean, this is a question that maybe is very relevant in a couple of years, but  what if you be in charge of a one billion dollar investment fund?  How would you break that down and how would you, or maybe not maybe put everything in  
**[0:20:52-0:20:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:20:52):**  one thing?  What would you do with that starting today?  I almost want to say that I wouldn't want that.  I mean, I'm not convinced that big dollars make big change.  I think, you know, we see that in the software world all the time.  
**[0:21:03-0:21:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:21:03):**  You know, the more money companies raise is definitely not a predictor of their success.  I mean, just look at the innovator, Selena, right?  I mean, small companies that innovate big companies all the time.  And so I'm not, I actually think, you know, constraints are a great, great, great driver  of innovation.  
**[0:21:19-0:21:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:21:19):**  I think, you know, I saw the software farmers are super constrained financially, I'm like  everything else and look at how scrappy and innovative they are and getting there, they're  making their farms work.  And so if I have to have a, that much money to spend, I think one, you know, you could  put a lot of it into just the, how do you finance the transition and the migration?  
**[0:21:37-0:21:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:21:37):**  I know you're doing some, some work on this as it is.  And so, you know, how do we give, you know, since the government isn't doing it yet, how  do you, how do you help farmers move from regenerative or from, from conventional to  regenerative?  And then, look, you know, that's a big fun.  
**[0:21:51-0:21:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:21:51):**  So I draw the stack of what is the ecosystem in agriculture.  And then I think within each set, each, each, the current food system from, from farmer  to consumer, every step along the way is likely to have to change or likely to change.  And hopefully, you know, getting the farmer closer to the consumer.  So outside of quality, the farmer makes more money.  
**[0:22:10-0:22:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:22:10):**  I think that, you know, the consumer doesn't necessarily have to pay more.  Right.  That'd be a nice win win.  And so I think you could look at each part of that ecosystem or that, you know, food  system stack or agri-food system stack and there's innovation going to happen in each  
**[0:22:22-0:22:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:22:22):**  area.  And so, you know, if you had that much money, you could maybe have lots of little microphones  and a poor fuel on each area.  Is there something in all of the different stacks, like basically from farm to fork to  plate at the end, something you find most interesting or most exciting at the moment,  
**[0:22:39-0:22:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:22:39):**  because obviously that could change in six months or two months, et cetera.  Is there something or you recently discovered that you didn't see or know, because every,  I agree, every little piece has to change.  So it's also difficult to choose where to focus on and what to learn because they're  so different from slaughtering to sending to shipping to processing to growing.  
**[0:22:55-0:22:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:22:55):**  I mean, it's all different industry, basically, and all very complex.  Is there something that caught your eye recently in one of those stacks that really excites  you?  Yeah.  I mean, I think processing is a big area.  
**[0:23:06-0:23:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:23:06):**  I mean, you know, like centralized processing, it makes, you know, it's semi-uneconomical  or untenable really for farmers to compete because they can't get access to centralized  processing plants, which means they can't get that economy of scale.  They have to go to smaller local state producers who are vastly more expensive.  So the meat's just more expensive, full stop, straight away, nothing to do with quality  
**[0:23:26-0:23:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:23:26):**  or anything else.  And it's only sellable within state lines.  And so I think, you know, decentralized processing.  So, you know, many, many small plants and mobile processing on farm, you know, so animals  never have to even get into a truck, which is, you know, one, good for their quality  
**[0:23:44-0:23:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:23:44):**  of life and two, the quality of meat is often predicted by the stress of an animal.  So less stress is going to be good from the top of the pyramid, bit of taste.  And so, you know, while that's technically possible, you want to be able to sell, you  know, across state lines and lots of grocery stores will only take USDA inspected.  And so how and I don't know how innovation helps here because technically it's possible.  
**[0:24:04-0:24:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:24:04):**  But how do we lobby or get the USDA to change their approach that they'll allow inspections  over, you know, camera or some other, you know, some other way of doing it, that they  don't have to have a person implant, which just makes the barrier to massively decentralized  processing too high and too expensive.  Yeah.  
**[0:24:20-0:24:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:24:20):**  Just to give a bit of background in many of these plants, especially the large centralized  ones obviously are closed right now or partly closed because of COVID because they turned  out to be a hotbed and there always needs to be a USDA person onsite when you slaughter.  But of course, if you have a very small mobile slaughter unit that travels from farm to farm,  it just doesn't make any economic sense that there is a person they are paid by the slaughter  
**[0:24:43-0:24:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:24:43):**  house to see every single animal.  But still you need that in terms of getting into the larger contracts and they need to  be USDA approved.  So there's this quadrant basically that makes that technically possible, but practically  not feasible yet.  
**[0:24:57-0:25:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:24:57):**  But of course, maybe in the current situation, there could be movement because with pressure,  everything becomes fluid if it's big enough of an issue.  Well, of course, if you actually did get, you know, a massively decentralized processing  or mobile processing units across the states or across the world, let's say across the  US, then the selling across state lines wouldn't really matter because every state produces  
**[0:25:19-0:25:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:25:19):**  enough meat anyway.  So by and large, you'd be able to do it that way.  So that's one interesting area, I think.  And OK, so we're taking away your one billion dollar investment fund, which you didn't want  in the first place.  
**[0:25:30-0:25:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:25:30):**  That is OK.  Yeah.  But we give you a magic wand and the magic power to change one thing in actually the  larger agriculture industry.  What would you do?  
**[0:25:38-0:25:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:25:38):**  Well, I mean, look, the easy answer is just ban all chemicals, maybe give a three year  kind of approach to ban all chemicals.  But I think if I had a magic wand, I think all consumers know what regenerative light  is right now and understand it.  And then I think demand would drive supply.  
**[0:25:51-0:25:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:25:51):**  And they will start knocking on the door of anywhere where they buy the current food and  start asking questions on soil health, etc.  Yeah.  And look, the other thing is, I mean, as a consumer, I think if I had a magic wand, you  want on both sides, supply and demand, especially on investment side, to focus on quality, not  
**[0:26:05-0:26:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:26:05):**  quantity.  I mean, I said that before, I guess, but we've been 100 years of quantity.  Does anyone really believe we have a quantity issue with the amount of food waste?  I mean, I just we don't have a quantity issue.  We have a quality issue.  
**[0:26:16-0:26:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:26:16):**  And I think every study said is that we can make enough quality food with regenerative  practices that and that would solve so many problems.  And so if every side of the stakeholder table from producer, supplier and consumer realized  quality matters, I think, you know, we wouldn't necessarily have to pay a lot more because  that scale, I think we can make that work and that would change the world massively.  
**[0:26:37-0:26:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:26:37):**  We keep coming back to scale.  It's also a bit of a, I wouldn't say dirty word, but some people are scared of scale  because you get once we're scaling this regenerative agriculture movement, we lose some of the  complexity, etc., etc.  What would you say to that?  
**[0:26:49-0:26:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:26:49):**  I think that it shouldn't scale, it should all be small scale, family run farms and it  should actually all be smaller.  I think that that can be scaled.  I don't think it has to be big farms.  I mean, look at Uber.  
**[0:27:00-0:27:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:27:00):**  Uber is a massive company, but it's super decentralized.  All they are is Airbnb or take any of these.  They have a central purchasing platform that connects you or a central platform that connects  the consumer to the supplier.  Right.  
**[0:27:15-0:27:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:27:15):**  In which case, you know, sometimes it's me and I want to get it right to the airport.  But why can't we do that for farmers?  I mean, why doesn't scale doesn't necessarily mean centralization, especially in the current  world we live in where on my mobile phone I can open up an app and I can order online  or order from a farmer or have a central store that connects me to local farmers and they  
**[0:27:32-0:27:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:27:32):**  deliver the next day.  I don't know what the solution should be, but I think I absolutely think we should have  loads of small farms.  I don't think big farms, I think big farms that always have a weird, you know, a weird  kind of diseconomy of scale will kick in at some point.  
**[0:27:47-0:27:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:27:47):**  And maybe it is my own passion because I like my family are small farmers and I'd like to  be a farmer too.  But I think we can.  I'd love to see, you know, I think 100 years ago farmers were wealthy and that now farmers  go bankrupt at a scary rate.  
**[0:28:01-0:28:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:28:01):**  And so many farmers have off farm jobs.  I mean, what a joke.  The most important thing for our health and world is that we can eat.  I mean, you know, regardless of the quality of food we have to eat and the people producing  our food are treated so badly and make so little money.  
**[0:28:13-0:28:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:28:13):**  I mean, it's ridiculous.  And so I think, yeah, I think we can, we can scale the logistics, which means we can have  lots of small suppliers, right?  So I do believe that decentralized farming can scale and regenerative from scale because  you need less inputs.  
**[0:28:29-0:28:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:28:29):**  I mean, the wonderful thing about it is you don't need all the chemicals.  So you can be a regenerative farmer at any size and hopefully make money because your,  you know, your input cost goes way down.  Hopefully the quality of your output goes up.  Maybe the volume goes up a little bit and maybe the price you get goes up either because  
**[0:28:44-0:28:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:28:44):**  of the quality or because you've removed so many parts of the, you know, so many middlemen  from the chain.  So anyway, long answer, but, but I think this absolutely can scale, but it can scale, you  know, by billions of suppliers.  And I love to ask this question that is definitely inspired by John Kempf, but what do you believe  
**[0:29:00-0:29:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:29:00):**  to be true about regenerative agriculture that others don't?  It could be the scale one, but it could also be a completely different one.  What do you believe to be true that others in regenerative agriculture don't believe  to be true?  I feel like it's such a leap of overconfidence to say, I'm not a regenerative producer myself.  
**[0:29:14-0:29:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:29:14):**  We've been in this space for maybe learning it for two or three years and saying that  there's something that, I mean, every day you learn something new.  So look, if I had to pick something, I'd say it is that business is not evil.  Regenerative agriculture, it's great that, you know, there should be a fair price and  that, you know, uh, ethics of the, of how we treat animals and farmers are there.  
**[0:29:32-0:29:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:29:32):**  But this, this, it has to be a business, right?  This isn't a philanthropic project.  Regenerative farmers have to make money.  Farmers have to get high quality food that they demand that they're prepared to pay for.  And so, you know, I don't know if that's something that people debate or not, but if they do,  
**[0:29:44-0:29:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:29:44):**  then that's my, that's my one belief.  Oh, they definitely do.  But is there a reason why you picked being a public benefit company and not a foundation  or basically a non-profit?  Yeah.  
**[0:29:54-0:29:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:29:54):**  I mean, I don't think that's even a question.  I mean, like the question was, are we, are we a company or a public benefit company?  A public benefit company is a far profit company that has a mission outside of, of just, of  just creating, creating wealth.  And so, but a foundation or a, or a philanthropy has, you know, they give away money and I  
**[0:30:12-0:30:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:30:12):**  mean, giving away money, it'll help farmers move maybe, but, but how is that going to  create sustainable long-term businesses?  If, if we can't make money at this and we think we're not going to scale it, it's as  simple as that.  If consumers don't want it and love it, they're not going to buy it.  
**[0:30:26-0:30:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:30:26):**  And if they do, people, more and more farmers are going to move to it and then new people  look into it and then other parts of the ecosystem will change.  I mean, I think, I think trying to make this a kind of altruistic, let's say, you know,  don't worry about making money.  We'll just make great stuff.  
**[0:30:38-0:30:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:30:38):**  We'll never work.  You know, the best way to, to, I won't say beat, but the best way to force the food system  to change outside of consumer demand is by business, right?  I mean, like this, there should be profit all the way along and farmers should make  more money than they have ever before.  
**[0:30:53-0:30:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:30:53):**  And so I absolutely think this has to be driven by business.  Which I think is a good answer to that question.  I think that definitely not, I mean, many would agree listening to this and some probably  weren't.  So I think it's a really good answer to the question.  
**[0:31:05-0:31:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:31:05):**  And I want to thank you for your time.  I think we covered a lot.  I don't think it's the last time we talked because I think there's as you're so, I wouldn't  say fresh in this space, but new at least to be public about this.  I mean, you've just bought Pastrum app.  
**[0:31:18-0:31:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:31:18):**  You're revitalizing a lot of things.  And from the sound of it, you're going to start one or two companies this year, which  I'm very interested in, but whenever that, that is shareable and open, I would love to  check in and see because I'm super interested in the food as medicine or the tasty food  side of things and the consumer side of things, because I think there's the key to, it flips  
**[0:31:36-0:31:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:31:36):**  the question to, okay, if we all start asking for this on a large scale, farmers will change  and the whole food system will change.  And that's a very interesting insight.  So thank you for that.  So totally agree.  
**[0:31:46-0:31:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:31:46):**  Look forward to chatting again.  Thanks very much again for having me on today.  If you found the investing in regenerative agriculture and food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  
**[0:31:59-0:32:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:31:59):**  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast.  And it only takes a few seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you, and if you have the means, please  join my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  
**[0:32:18-0:32:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:32:18):**  You can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture, or in the  description below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  
**[0:32:45-0:32:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:32:45):**  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to put money  to work in regenerating soils, and I've been following the space since 2011.  And recording these podcasts since 2016.  
**[0:33:02-0:33:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:33:02):**  We thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  
**[0:33:15-0:33:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:33:15):**  And what questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  
**[0:33:21-0:33:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:33:21):**  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  You the soil builders and investors in this space, the soil builders, people working in  this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers, vehicle builders, crowd investing,  platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food companies, permaculture, key line  
**[0:33:39-0:33:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:33:39):**  designers, holistic management consultants, etc, etc.  People that are building soil at scale, and the investors who are putting their own money  to work through their family office or as private individuals, or people who are putting  other people's money to work through foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies,  etc.  
**[0:33:58-0:33:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:33:58):**  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you.  And I'm very aware that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very  
**[0:34:10-0:34:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:34:10):**  different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you.  And if you have the means to consider paying what you think it's worth, thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes, plus PDF slides,  
**[0:34:28-0:34:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:34:28):**  so you don't have to ride along.  We're gonna look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find, or what kind of investors you could  find if you're a soil builder.  
**[0:34:47-0:34:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:34:47):**  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're gonna look at nutrient density, landscape design, and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  
**[0:35:03-0:35:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:35:03):**  Unfortunately, that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea, or whatever you're drinking, click on  
**[0:35:20-0:35:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/08/25/ed-byrne#t=0:35:20):**  the link below, sign up, and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  