### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2020-00-10)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  Welcome to another episode of investing in regenerative agriculture, investing as if  the planet mattered.  
**[0:00:21-0:00:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:00:21):**  Podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  
**[0:00:42-0:00:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:00:42):**  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  In March last year, we launched our membership community to make it easy for fans to support  our work.  
**[0:00:59-0:01:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:00:59):**  And so many of you have joined as a member.  We've launched different types of benefits, exclusive content, Q&A webinars with former  guests, ask me anything sessions, plus so much more to come in the future.  For more information on the different tiers, benefits and how to become a member, check  gumroad.com slash investing region ag or find the link below.  
**[0:01:18-0:01:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:01:18):**  Thank you.  Welcome to another interview.  Today a check in interview with the co-founder of Teak Origin, a food data company which  enables businesses and consumers to answer critical questions about their food.  When is the right time to harvest?  
**[0:01:30-0:01:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:01:30):**  What are the post-harvest conversion nutrient levels?  Are we getting what we're paying for?  And how can food be used as its own label?  And much more.  We interviewed Greg more than a year ago, and I'm very, very happy he's back.  
**[0:01:42-0:01:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:01:42):**  He's one of the most listened episodes we have.  And I'm looking forward to check in with them and see where this whole nutrient density discussion  has been going over the past year.  So welcome back, Greg.  Thank you very much.  
**[0:01:53-0:01:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:01:53):**  It's good to be back again.  And to start with a short reminder for whoever listened to the episode last time or maybe  didn't, and I will obviously link it below.  What is Teak Origin?  Essentially what we're doing is we're building the world's most up to date reference for  
**[0:02:09-0:02:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:02:09):**  nutrition.  And the reason why we're doing that is because until now there really hasn't been a scalable  or an easy way to measure the nutrient density in our food.  Of course, in the past, you could always send food off to a laboratory to be analyzed and  it would be expensive and it would take a lot of time.  
**[0:02:26-0:02:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:02:26):**  Of course, it destroys the food, but none of that information ever got aggregated.  And so it would always be done for a specific client or a specific need, but we never got  to see that information compiled and compared to one another.  So essentially what we've been working on now for a number of years is we do the lab  work that you would normally do in a lab, but then we translate that into the field  
**[0:02:50-0:02:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:02:50):**  so that a user, a non-technical user, whether it be on the farm or in a warehouse or in  the back of a store, can basically take an instrument and scan an item of food and within  a few seconds understand very accurately what the nutrient density of that particular food  is.  So basically without me, let's say I'm working in the back of a big supermarket and a big  
**[0:03:11-0:03:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:03:11):**  pallet of apples comes in.  Without me taking a slice of the apple, sending it to a lab, waiting for the result, etc.,  what you're allowing me to do is that I have a small handheld device scan a slice of the  apple or whatever way that works.  And because of the lab work you've done before, it gives me basically the context of the apple.  
**[0:03:29-0:03:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:03:29):**  It gives me where that apple lands in terms of nutrients.  Is that a fair example?  Yeah, that's a great example.  And I think it's really important to say that what we're doing differently, and we've only  learned this the hard way because we didn't start it out this way, is we're doing the  
**[0:03:43-0:03:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:03:43):**  chemistry piece of that.  And so we tried to sort of overcome the chemistry challenge of having to do the lab work, but  what we quickly realized is that nowhere in the world did it exist, you know, an accurate  source of information.  So even if you could take an image of that apple, or even if you could use some form  
**[0:03:59-0:04:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:03:59):**  of AI, the information that we were comparing it to was essentially garbage.  And so we've had to go and do the chemistry and build this updated reference so that you  can indeed do what you just described.  And in that case, it's good enough that I just scan the apple with a device and I'm  not doing the chemistry part.  
**[0:04:16-0:04:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:04:16):**  How come you make it possible that I don't have to send this slice of the apple to the  lab?  So an apple is a good example.  So we'll take an apple and in the case of apples, we have to actually go to the variety  level.  
**[0:04:24-0:04:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:04:24):**  So we'll say gal apples, and we'll identify, let's say, maybe there's 200 things inside  of an apple that can be measured in terms of nutrients.  But in reality, a handful of those things really matter.  Nutrients and moisture and vitamin C and malic acid, and in some cases, it's fats or antioxidants  and other foods, but it's number 300.  
**[0:04:42-0:04:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:04:42):**  It's usually eight to 20.  We'll identify what those key nutrients are.  Then we just go into our lab and we'll analyze hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of samples  of gal apples in this particular example, until we understand the chemistry as good  as any other food lab does.  
**[0:04:57-0:05:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:04:57):**  We take that information and we translate it to data models.  And there's two types of models.  There is a classifier model that allows us to identify that this indeed is a gal apple  without us having to tell an instrument or a user that it is.  And then if we say, okay, hey, I know this is a gal apple, then the next type of model  
**[0:05:14-0:05:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:05:14):**  is a prediction model.  Now that I know this is a gal apple, I'm going to go ahead and make a prediction of those  individual nutrients that I've studied so diligently in the lab.  And this instrument that we use, it's a handheld spectrometer.  It's a multi-channel spectrometer, industrial grade.  
**[0:05:30-0:05:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:05:30):**  It's not one of these, you know, some of these consumer devices that you see out there.  And by the way, we don't make the device.  It's an off the shelf instrument made by other instrument companies.  It gives you about 93 to 98, depending on the situation, percent accuracy to what you  would normally see in the lab.  
**[0:05:47-0:05:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:05:47):**  So that's great for nutrient density.  You don't need to be at a hundred percent for nutrient density because today we're at  zero.  So it's far better, exponentially better than what we have today.  Now, what we wouldn't claim is we wouldn't want to look for allergens or pesticides or  
**[0:06:01-0:06:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:06:01):**  things like that, because hey, 93% isn't good enough in those cases.  So this is why we're focused right now on nutritional density.  And it basically tells you this apple is, so we identified what type of apple, what  variety, and then it tells you compared to the others, it's relatively full of nutrients  or it's at its peak or its top.  
**[0:06:20-0:06:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:06:20):**  What does it tell you in that prediction model?  It'll compare it to a standard.  So when we build the models, we default to the USDA standard just because we're a US  company, but in reality you can compare it to any standard.  So we've compared it to the French nutrition label standard, UK, some companies have their  
**[0:06:36-0:06:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:06:36):**  own standards in terms of quality that we can compare it to.  So essentially what you'll say is, Hey, here's what we think is actually in this apple.  And Hey, here's what the standard, whatever standard that might be says is supposed to  be there.  Here's the difference.  
**[0:06:49-0:06:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:06:49):**  So it says there's supposed to be so many milligrams of vitamin C or you know, this  level of glucose or sucrose or this amount of moisture or antioxidants.  And here's what's actually there.  And it gives you the individual differences between those two things.  And then it gives you an overall score.  
**[0:07:04-0:07:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:07:04):**  It says, Hey, based on the levels of these nutrients, Hey, we think that this Gala apple  is about 76% of what you expect to be inside of a Gala apple, depending on that standard.  And do you see like me being in the back of the supermarket with this palette of apples,  a huge variety, like a huge difference in different apples of that same box or that  same palette or that same shipment.  
**[0:07:27-0:07:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:07:27):**  Is that important or is that relevant?  Have you seen that?  I mean your work with supermarkets?  Not really.  So I don't have to scan a hundred.  
**[0:07:34-0:07:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:07:34):**  Nope.  Yeah, that's right.  Yeah.  You can scan, you know, 10 and that's a good point because you know, you could scan one  and the user will get a real time answer to say, okay, Hey, here's the nutrient density  
**[0:07:43-0:07:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:07:43):**  of this particular apple, which is interesting, but far more interesting is sort of how that  apple then compares to all the other apples being scanned around the world.  So the aggregated data is becoming much more interesting to retailers in that particular  case than it is that individual apple.  But that's right.  
**[0:08:00-0:08:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:08:00):**  You can scan one or you can scan 10 and that's again, far more accurate than what you're  doing today.  And then the question is where do those differences come from?  Well, so that's the question that we need to answer.  So phase one of Teak Origin has been all about sort of establishing the baseline.  
**[0:08:16-0:08:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:08:16):**  So that baseline has been how accurate are the existing sources of information, meaning  nutrition labels or retailer websites.  And probably the answer is not very accurate.  That's right.  I think it was the title of the last interview.  
**[0:08:29-0:08:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:08:29):**  There are hardly any nutrients in your food left or something like that.  Yeah.  Of course, went for a nice one, but it was more or less the conclusion of the interview.  And then how well are, you know, major supermarkets, which of course is the primary way we mostly  get our fresh foods, how well are they delivering nutrition and at what price?  
**[0:08:45-0:08:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:08:45):**  And then how does where something is produced determine nutrient density?  So those are kind of the first things we wanted to look at, which we've been collecting now  hundreds of thousands.  And the freshness, if I remember correctly from that interview, saying that the faster  moving supermarkets in general, but that was obviously before you were releasing a lot  
**[0:09:02-0:09:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:09:02):**  of data, like the fresher the fruit in this case and the vegetables in many cases, the  better the amount of the more amount of nutrients left because freshness is something that just  goes away very, very quickly and the nutrients go with that.  That's right.  Yeah.  
**[0:09:18-0:09:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:09:18):**  Once the food is harvested, it's essentially degrading.  And so it's, you know, it's a race against time essentially.  And of course, how it's stored and how it shipped, those things all have an impact on  it.  But ultimately it's a race against time.  
**[0:09:27-0:09:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:09:27):**  And so the first phase has been, let's get to the update part.  You've been very busy.  I mean, if you look at the website, you're publishing the big database and research that  we talked about last time, but it wasn't live yet when we were recording.  And also when we released it on comparing a lot of fruits and vegetables in US supermarkets,  
**[0:09:45-0:09:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:09:45):**  but also in France and Canada, if I'm right, can you share a bit about that?  Quite a big project and quite an ambitious one.  Yeah.  So not Canada yet.  So we're doing the top 18 supermarkets in the US.  
**[0:09:54-0:09:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:09:54):**  We just launched last month in the UK.  So we're doing all the supermarkets and online delivery services in the UK only because it's  a smaller market.  And then we've done a couple of special projects in France and then we'll do Singapore.  We were going to launch Singapore next month, but we decided to wait till after through  
**[0:10:11-0:10:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:10:11):**  the holidays and do that in January.  And the reason why we're doing Singapore, the US and UK is those are obviously interesting,  what we'd call beachheads to enter into these regional markets.  But more importantly, by choosing those three locations, we now will have a snapshot of  produce from 90% of the countries where these foods are produced.  
**[0:10:32-0:10:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:10:32):**  So we'll have the most complete global picture of the top produce items in the world.  And when you say we do that country or we do the top 18 supermarkets like in the US,  what does it actually mean?  So our teams every day just go out as you would as a shopper.  And we walk into all these different stores around the countries and we just buy these  
**[0:10:51-0:10:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:10:51):**  foods and we buy a minimum each time we go of 10 samples of each type of food at the  different retailers.  And then we bring them back in the era of COVID, either to our homes and or a central  office and we use that instrument that you and I just talked about a few seconds ago  to measure the nutrient density of all these foods.  
**[0:11:11-0:11:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:11:11):**  And then all that information gets combined on a daily and weekly basis.  So we've started at the market level, hey, what's being delivered?  Now we then sort of aggregate all the information and then we go to retailers and we say, hey,  here is the state of nutrition for your fruits and vegetables, but also the rest of the market.  So your top competitors.  
**[0:11:31-0:11:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:11:31):**  And so here's how well you're doing against the market.  Inevitably they'll have questions like you just asked.  Well, OK, well, why are some of these things happening?  And then that leads to a follow on piece of work with that particular retailer or retailers  to say, OK, well, now let's dig into your supply chain and figure out where this is  
**[0:11:47-0:11:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:11:47):**  breaking down faster than we're expecting, because we obviously don't.  So that's the business model here.  Like you're we talked about it last time as well.  You might bring some bad news to some of these players, but also giving them the opportunity  to with you, obviously digging into their supply chain to start finding why their apples  
**[0:12:05-0:12:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:12:05):**  or their avocados are not at par with their top competitors.  That's exactly right.  Yes.  And how has been the response so far of supermarkets?  I think overall it's been very positive.  
**[0:12:16-0:12:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:12:16):**  I think people are keen to have this information.  It's unique insights that they haven't been able to see before.  There are kind of two things that if you can say retailers have an emotional response,  the two things that have evoked sort of the most emotional responses have been the comparison  of nutrient density over price.  
**[0:12:32-0:12:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:12:32):**  That always gets everyone's attention because there's some surprises there.  Like retailers, like maybe we talked about before, that aren't known for quality, if  you will, or freshness, but are known for their price.  They're actually delivering high levels of nutrition versus the competitors that are  known to have higher quality products.  
**[0:12:51-0:12:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:12:51):**  So that's a surprise to a lot of people.  Yeah, I think we discussed that whole foods versus the faster moving ones like Walmart  or Aldi as they sell fast, meaning their stuff is generally more fresh and thus holding more  nutrients in showing in this research.  Yeah, that's right.  
**[0:13:10-0:13:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:13:10):**  Which is surprising.  But it's also, I think the one thing that we've learned over this, I mean on this whole  journey, but certainly the last year with getting as much data as we've collected so  far is it's really complex.  It's complicated.  
**[0:13:22-0:13:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:13:22):**  There are no really straightforward answers.  So like we were just looking at blueberries the other day and we compared winter blueberries  through the months of January and February in both the UK and the US.  And most of those blueberries were from South America, as you'd imagine, because it's the  season there.  
**[0:13:37-0:13:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:13:37):**  Of course, so they're being shipped thousands of miles to the end market.  And those blueberries were far more nutritious than summer blueberries were in the same markets,  even though most of the blueberries were sort of locally or regionally sourced.  So most of the blueberries in the US were US grown blueberries over the summer and the  UK, they were either UK blueberries and overall nutrition was quite a bit higher in the winter.  
**[0:14:01-0:14:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:14:01):**  And like things like vitamin C, which are great, it's a great indicator of how something  is surviving the supply chain journey was almost 2x.  So things like that are just sort of counterintuitive that we never expect to see.  And so anyway, to your question, these things are really interesting to the retailers.  And then when you start digging, what do you find?  
**[0:14:21-0:14:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:14:21):**  Like are there different types, different ways of growing them?  Because yeah, you expect the long distance to destroy most of nutrients.  In this case, it's not happening.  Yeah.  So what we saw in that one example, blueberries, they were leaving the farms, if you will,  
**[0:14:38-0:14:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:14:38):**  in Chile with higher levels of nutrients to begin with.  And because they are in the business of exporting 100% of their products to far points in the  world, they had an extremely efficient supply chain.  So they were just getting to the end markets efficiently and quickly.  So that just seemed like that was partly the reason.  
**[0:14:58-0:15:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:14:58):**  Whereas in the case of the US, there were other modes of transportation.  So maybe it wasn't air or fast ship, it was trucking, maybe stored extra time.  It would go from small farm to consolidator, consolidator to major warehouse for big retailers  and then that major warehouse to more stores.  So there were just more touch points for whatever reason in locally produced things.  
**[0:15:21-0:15:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:15:21):**  But then you look at something else and it's completely different.  And of course, for large supermarkets who are carrying so many different items, it's  a never ending story, but a very interesting one.  Yeah, that's right.  And we touched upon it last time and I don't know if you have made, I mean, it's been a  
**[0:15:36-0:15:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:15:36):**  crazy year, obviously, the connection to which obviously we discussed a lot on this podcast  to soil health, soil management or the farming side of things.  Have you made any steps there in going all the way down through the supply chain to see,  okay, why maybe these blueberries left with a higher level of nutrients to begin with  or on the apple side of things or avocado side of things?  
**[0:15:57-0:16:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:15:57):**  Have you been looking into the soil side of things at all?  Or is that something that's on the agenda for the coming years?  That's right.  That's part of the next phase is now how do production methods, shipping and storage methods,  how do they influence nutrient density and the degradation of nutrition?  
**[0:16:15-0:16:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:16:15):**  But we do have a lot more information and insights than we had the last time we talked.  So this summer we had a chance to study organic strawberries from Vermont farms here in New  England where we're located.  And it was interesting because on average, so I'll speak in general terms to save time,  those organic strawberries were 100% more nutritious than what was expected to be there.  
**[0:16:38-0:16:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:16:38):**  So data that we've seen from other strawberries and or the nutrition label that was twice  as much of the key nutrients were present.  In the case of the French tomatoes that we've recently looked at over the summer and in  some cases US tomatoes and biologic and organic equivalent, they were on average about 80%  more nutritious right off the farm than what you'd expect to be there.  
**[0:17:02-0:17:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:17:02):**  And then just in the last few days, because it's still apple season, again, in both France  and the US, we've seen apples that are 422% right off the farm more nutritious than the  expectations.  So what you would expect on the label.  And those expectations, are they based on organic apples or that's the general US or  
**[0:17:22-0:17:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:17:22):**  France label?  Okay, this is what this type of apple should be because we've done some lab work a long  time ago.  Yep, just the general.  So basically the basic models, like the labels are like what we expect is generally quite  
**[0:17:35-0:17:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:17:35):**  far off.  Is that a conclusion we can draw?  Well, it is, but then what's then sort of discouraging or what we have to dig into now  with both ourselves as a company, but also now our retail partners, is that when you  look at those same foods, now, of course, it's not the same food, meaning from the same  
**[0:17:50-0:17:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:17:50):**  supplier, you know, the same actual pieces of fruit, but the same type of food, strawberries,  tomatoes and apples in the supermarket.  So when you look at organic, from the major supermarkets, we see almost no differences  between conventional and organic.  So by the time it's gone through these big supply chains, they've sort of been equalized  
**[0:18:09-0:18:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:18:09):**  for whatever reason.  And I can't tell you why today, because what you were mentioning before was a farm, so  on the farm, actually immediately like harvested tomato, harvested apple and measured there.  And you're saying when it gets to your organic supermarket or the organic aisle in your supermarket,  most of the difference, like the 420% difference or all the other is basically has disappeared.  
**[0:18:31-0:18:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:18:31):**  And we don't know why yet, which is a crucial question because you're producing more nutrients  as a farmer and those nutrients never get to the plate.  That's right.  So you're not getting credit for doing this great work of producing these foods.  Some of that's natural.  
**[0:18:45-0:18:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:18:45):**  I mean, so obviously nutrients degrade over time once it leaves the bush or the tree or  the farm, but obviously it's degrading in some cases at much faster rates than it should  be.  And so sort of that's the next Holy Grail moment of figuring out why and where, and  then being able to fix that.  
**[0:19:02-0:19:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:19:02):**  And yeah, unless we go and harvest ourselves and eat it straight off the tree or the plant,  which won't happen anytime soon, we need to figure out how to get those nutrients to our  doorsteps.  Yeah, that's right.  And what's interesting is this isn't organic or regenerative practices, but something else  
**[0:19:17-0:19:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:19:17):**  we discovered in the last few months around avocados, because you had mentioned avocados.  Just because I saw them on your website, not because they are always on my mind, but yeah.  Yeah.  Well, I mean, but they're all the rage now, right?  I mean, hey, it's, you know, it's a healthy food and you see them everywhere now.  
**[0:19:31-0:19:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:19:31):**  Everyone's talking about avocados and how hard they are to get and how expensive they  are.  So over the last few years, as fat has no longer been sort of enemy number one and people  have started to eat healthy fats, of course, we've been producing avocados to have more  of those unsaturated fatty acids in them and it's worked.  
**[0:19:48-0:19:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:19:48):**  So we're seeing much, much higher levels of healthy fats inside of avocados than the previous  lab work was done 20 years ago.  So that's good news.  But the unintended consequences of that are that the calorie count in avocados now is  more than 2x.  
**[0:20:06-0:20:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:20:06):**  Okay.  Wait, basically you're saying that it's great because we get more of the good fat.  The reason why we eat avocados over there in all the nutrient books and the diets, et  cetera, is there's much more.  We've been growing avocados for more of those fats, which is great, but obviously the amount  
**[0:20:21-0:20:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:20:21):**  of calories that we count in avocado too, if you're counting calories has been based  on like 20 year old research and that's also completely off.  Completely.  So if you're using a nutrition app or you're Googling how many calories are in avocado  or you're using a retailer website or the nutrition label, you're saying, okay, well,  
**[0:20:38-0:20:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:20:38):**  hey, I'm going to eat this avocado on my toast and I get 300 calories.  Great.  In reality, you're probably getting close to 700 calories for that medium sized avocado.  And so again, not saying don't eat avocados, but these are things that need to be updated  and we need to know these things to factor into what we're actually putting into our  
**[0:20:54-0:20:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:20:54):**  bodies.  Cause that's a massive.  I mean, you could be doing your perfect diet you think because you're tracking it in your  app, et cetera.  And actually you're eating, you're getting more than two X the amount of calories in,  
**[0:21:05-0:21:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:21:05):**  which obviously ruins your calorie count if you would be counting your calories.  Well, that's right.  Even if you're not counting calories, if you ate two avocados in a day and got 1400 calories,  I mean, I mean we can only consume so many calories even if you're not conscious of it.  So yeah, that's a big deal.  
**[0:21:19-0:21:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:21:19):**  It's a big deal.  And that's only the avocado, which is all the rage, but still not our staple food.  Imagine others that are way more consumed and potentially also quite off in terms of  nutrients, but also in terms of calories.  Yeah, that's right.  
**[0:21:33-0:21:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:21:33):**  Sometimes we'll talk to folks in the academic world or nutritionists.  We have a nutritionist on staff and we'll talk about vitamin C and apples a lot.  And they'll always look at us and say, well, no one measures vitamin C and apples.  We don't think about vitamin C when we think about apples.  But the reality is in some cases we'll see apples like the example I just shared a couple  
**[0:21:51-0:21:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:21:51):**  of minutes ago that'll have more vitamin C in them than fruits like strawberries or citrus  that we're eating specifically for vitamin C. So it's these old ways of thinking, this  old mentality we got to get out of.  And what has surprised you the most over this year of releasing and also doing a lot of  this, releasing a lot of this data and doing a lot of this study?  
**[0:22:09-0:22:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:22:09):**  What's been the biggest, the biggest, not aha moment, but the weirdest thing that came  up?  I think some of these examples that I just shared with you, but I think the most revealing  is just how complicated this really is.  It's you kind of hope going into this world, Hey, one is going to work.  
**[0:22:24-0:22:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:22:24):**  And then two, Hey, we're going to identify something that is a clear path to solving  it.  Hey, we're just going to, if you produce it differently, if you produce it in this region  or in this method, or we go back to seasonal or, Hey, if you just change the way something  was stored or the way something was shipped, or if we can sell it faster.  
**[0:22:42-0:22:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:22:42):**  And the reality is it's messy and it's always a combination of all these different things.  And it's slightly different for each food and maybe even each harvest.  And so that's the next level is okay.  Well now how do we go fix that together?  I think we talked about this sort of in theory, the last time we got together of, Hey, nothing  
**[0:22:59-0:23:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:22:59):**  leaves the farm at a hundred percent.  And the whole entire supply chain is built around the fact that food leaves a harvest  site at a hundred percent.  And then you do some math and it degrades from there, but it leaves at 10% of what should  be there.  
**[0:23:12-0:23:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:23:12):**  Or sometimes it leaves at 700% of what should be there.  And so I think that is going to become more and more important to be able to establish  that baseline effectively, efficiently on the farm, because then it drives every other  decision from that point forward.  Yeah.  
**[0:23:27-0:23:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:23:27):**  And it even drives it.  I mean, it starts to drive potential price decisions as soon as your clients and others  are starting to say, yeah, but actually I am supposed to paying for apples to reach  this level.  And I now can tell that it didn't, or at least when they arrived here, they were basically  
**[0:23:42-0:23:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:23:42):**  empty and basically water and sugar.  As we discussed last time, I'm still scared that interview was really changed my image  on apples and spinach and some other things.  But as a supermarket, I'm paying for certain things and I'm not getting it.  And as a farmer, that relationship changes completely, but you're going to ask a lot  
**[0:23:58-0:24:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:23:58):**  of questions as soon as you can do that measurement, both on farm during the transport and also  at the arrival, basically at the back of the supermarket or as a huge warehouse.  A hundred percent.  That's absolutely right.  I think one of the things that's been interesting to see is a lot of retailers are worried about  
**[0:24:14-0:24:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:24:14):**  sharing this information with their customers and rightfully so.  And we have been as well, because the last thing we want to do is send a message and  say, Hey, stop eating avocados or don't eat bananas or whatever.  We don't want that to be the message.  It's more about, Hey, this is what you're actually getting.  
**[0:24:28-0:24:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:24:28):**  And so, Hey, maybe you need to try different fruits at different times or eat more of this  or less of that or whatever.  So it's more just about having a much more detailed understanding of what we're actually  consuming.  But I think what the retailers sort of underestimated was that customers liked that.  
**[0:24:44-0:24:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:24:44):**  They liked that empowerment.  So I won't say the name of it, but a retailer that isn't known for really delivering transparency  and looking out for the nutrient density of their customers necessarily learned very quickly  that, Hey, just by being open and giving our consumers the ability to make their own decisions,  Hey, this apple is the best for pie baking.  
**[0:25:08-0:25:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:25:08):**  Hey, it may not be the most nutritious, but this might serve the purpose if that's what  you're coming for.  Or, Hey, this might be the best apple to put on your child's lunch, or this might just  be the best overall value.  Giving the consumer credit for that and letting them make that decision, raise the level of  
**[0:25:23-0:25:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:25:23):**  trust in that particular retailer.  And ultimately I think we'll have a positive impact on their business.  So I was really telling for them and it was really telling for us that that indeed worked.  They didn't run away and say, Oh, well now that you're being truthful, I don't want to  deal with you anymore.  
**[0:25:38-0:25:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:25:38):**  No, and also because if somebody else does it, if one of their top 17 competitors does  it and they don't and people shop at different places, if they can, they will start asking  questions because you probably want to at least know, but it's encouraging to see that  consumers at least, even if it's ends up being a relatively empty apple, they appreciate  the openness.  
**[0:25:58-0:26:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:25:58):**  And in terms of this is all being fresh produce, et cetera.  Have you done any work?  I don't know that, or are you planning any work on the processed food side?  Like as soon as it stops being an apple and turns into something else before we buy it,  is that an area of interest?  
**[0:26:14-0:26:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:26:14):**  I can imagine incredibly complex, but is that an area of interest for tick origin?  Eventually?  Yes.  So I think kind of the way it works, at least in our minds from a scientific standpoint,  is once we develop all these models for the main fresh foods, then that gives us a high  
**[0:26:30-0:26:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:26:30):**  degree of confidence and accuracy to them to go look at processed foods that are made  up of a combination of these fresh foods.  But until you understand the individual components of an apple and then you understand apples  and then apples go into applesauce, et cetera, et cetera, it's really impossible to get a  high degree of accuracy by looking at mixed foods.  
**[0:26:48-0:26:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:26:48):**  Now you can do it in the lab, of course, you can prepare samples and do all kinds of removing  the moisture and things like that.  But from a field interrogation standpoint, we're not there yet.  But that is absolutely on our radar screen.  And we think that we'll be able to do that someday or somebody will.  
**[0:27:02-0:27:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:27:02):**  Yeah.  That sounds extremely important, especially as there's a lot of discussion, obviously,  on processed food in general and how the processing, of course, depends on the levels, et cetera.  That could be one of the reasons why there's so few nutrients left.  But obviously, until you measure and eat and until you know the different pieces, it just  
**[0:27:23-0:27:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:27:23):**  doesn't make too much sense to actually say those things, which obviously are shared widely.  To switch gears a bit, I've been asking this question a number of times, but I'm pretty  sure not when you and when we were interviewing a year ago.  So I've been experimenting with using the ITN framework, which is used extensively in  effective altruism, which stands for importance, tractability and neglectiveness.  
**[0:27:46-0:27:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:27:46):**  And in terms of importance, I think we covered that also last time, like what's the scale  of the problem and why is it so important to focus on actually knowing what is in your  food in terms of tractability?  Like, is it solvable?  Is it fixing?  
**[0:27:57-0:28:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:27:57):**  It seems like you're that's the phase two of T origin after measuring, okay, how do  we explain these things?  And are they changeable?  Am I right when I summarize it like that?  Yeah, I think that's right.  
**[0:28:08-0:28:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:28:08):**  I think that's a fair assessment.  I'd say technologically and scientifically, it's completely solvable.  I think these problems, the solutions exist.  We don't need any new tech to come.  We don't need any new tech.  
**[0:28:18-0:28:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:28:18):**  That's right.  But as I was saying before, it's extremely complicated.  It's complex.  And so it's, there's not a magic silver bullet.  It's not a magic solution that just says, okay, we've invented this, so therefore problem  
**[0:28:28-0:28:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:28:28):**  solved.  And it's going to take a lot of highly coordinated efforts and patience to fix some of these  problems.  But you can't do any of it until you have this common language that sort of is.  Until we agree, basically.  
**[0:28:40-0:28:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:28:40):**  Yeah.  Well, until we agree.  That's right.  So the farmer is speaking the same language as the supply chain person who's speaking  the same language as the store person who's speaking the same language as the consumer.  
**[0:28:49-0:28:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:28:49):**  Until that happens, I think we're all still running around like crazy and scattered and  there's no concentrated effort to solve this problem.  And in terms of neglectfulness, which I always stumble upon, how has that shifted over the  last, let's say year and a month since we talked?  Have you seen more?  
**[0:29:05-0:29:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:29:05):**  I mean, I've been talking about it a lot, but obviously we live in our little bubble.  Nutrient density.  Have you seen changes in the discussions you're having on the consumer side, but also the  company side, the big retailers you talk to in terms of this focus on what is actually  in our food?  
**[0:29:21-0:29:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:29:21):**  Has that shifted at all?  And if so, where and how?  Incredibly so.  So a year ago when we were talking and having some of these.  Always happy when that answer comes back, like not because you could also say no, not  
**[0:29:32-0:29:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:29:32):**  at all.  And then it's sort of false that, but it's good.  Like, please go ahead.  Completely.  So yeah, Hey, a year ago and Hey, I came out of retail.  
**[0:29:39-0:29:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:29:39):**  And so the conversations that we were having with either customers or potential customers  were all about, Hey, will this reduce waste and save me money?  And can I use this tool to renegotiate contracts or Hey, can I use this tool to communicate  to my customers that I am indeed better than my competitors?  And it was very heavily commercially oriented with, Hey, no problem.  
**[0:29:58-0:29:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:29:58):**  Maybe it's the business they're in.  And ultimately if it gets better food to people, fantastic.  When COVID hit the conversation, at least specifically around sort of being able to  assess nutrient density and in our specific technology, the conversation shifted to supply  chain resilience.  
**[0:30:14-0:30:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:30:14):**  Hey, can I qualify food and or a food supplier from somewhere else in the world without having  to send a team there or without having to send food to a lab?  Because all the food labs in the world were shut down for several months.  So could I send one of your instruments and have a supplier assess food?  I get the results and say, okay, thumbs up.  
**[0:30:32-0:30:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:30:32):**  I'll go ahead and buy this from you.  So that was a very short period of sort of just highly reactionary moments of just trying  to keep food on the shelf.  But now in the last few months, we have seen a wholesale shift like I've never seen before  with all my years in doing this towards nutrition and its direct impact on health.  
**[0:30:52-0:30:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:30:52):**  And everyone I'm talking to, whether it's on the for-profit, you know, retail side or  working with big institutions, I think the general consensus is that we're at a place  now in terms of like the importance of nutrition that everyone expected we would be in five  years or maybe even longer.  So I think if one positive thing has come out of this pandemic is everyone from a business  
**[0:31:16-0:31:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:31:16):**  and from a personal standpoint are really focused on improving or maintaining our health.  I'm very happy to hear that because if you follow, let's say the normal news, et cetera,  I'm always discouraged about the lack of discussion on health and the connection to nutrients  and what we eat and what we don't eat and how, et cetera.  Like it's really obviously focused on the masks and washing your hands and all this  
**[0:31:38-0:31:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:31:38):**  measures to not get this virus or others, but it's hardly, but it's obviously the mainstream  or the TV news you follow.  It's hardly ever about the food we eat or what else can you do to make sure you're less  vulnerable or how sick actually are we all or what's the big discussion on healthcare,  which I think we are all having in our bubbles, but I'm very happy to hear that in the retail  
**[0:32:01-0:32:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:32:01):**  bubbles, et cetera, that discussion is also happening because it's such a crucial one.  Yeah.  I think it's fair to say, I mean, there are probably 10 retailers that before COVID you  would probably never say that they had a grand vision around this, but they're talking about  it now and Hey, they're probably talking about it because their customers are talking about  
**[0:32:16-0:32:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:32:16):**  it, but nonetheless they're talking about it.  Which is amazing.  Yeah, it's amazing.  And what's great about these companies is they have the scale to bring better food to  people faster.  
**[0:32:24-0:32:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:32:24):**  So yeah, I think it's a win for the entire food system.  No, and I've seen, I mean, I've seen the numbers of many, I mean, direct to consumer brands,  but also farmers.  I mean, they've all gone through the roof, especially at the beginning, obviously when  everybody was scrambling to get access to food and suddenly we were thinking, who do  
**[0:32:41-0:32:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:32:41):**  we know who has eggs or vegetables, et cetera?  Where can I buy something?  But many of those customers stayed in, not all, not the 300% growth that many had in  a few months, but many stayed for price, for quality, for convenience, for taste, for whatever,  for the connection and in the local food market, it has been a huge shift as well.  
**[0:33:01-0:33:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:33:01):**  Let's see how many have done numbers that they didn't expect for the next three, four  years.  So we're probably in a place where we thought to be in five years or so in many places of  the market.  And of course it's been an enormous hit for many other places of the market, like the  
**[0:33:14-0:33:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:33:14):**  restaurants and hotels.  And if you've been selling to them, you are and were probably in deep trouble.  Just devastating.  That's right.  Many won't open again, but we'll see in the next years if this has been a general good  
**[0:33:28-0:33:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:33:28):**  thing or at least happy accident within a huge pandemic and a huge suffering, but at  least a focus on food and health.  I'm happy to hear that the big retailers are starting to pay attention a bit faster than  we thought they would.  Yeah, me too.  
**[0:33:40-0:33:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:33:40):**  No, that's knock on wood that that continues.  Now that's true.  But at least a lot more people, at least in lockdown, if you were in lockdown, started  cooking again and started looking at different things and probably paying a bit more attention  to food, which helped a lot of awareness to grow.  
**[0:33:56-0:34:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:33:56):**  To ask another question I didn't ask last time for sure, because I think I introduced  it relatively recently, but I'm very curious about your answer.  What if you would be in charge of a one billion dollar investment portfolio tomorrow morning  or this morning even?  We're recording this on Friday, so you can actually have the weekend to think about it.  
**[0:34:12-0:34:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:34:12):**  Let's say Monday morning, you're in charge, you wake up and you're in charge of quite  a large investment portfolio.  I'm saying a billion not because I think it's a perfect number, but I see a lot of interest  into the space coming from larger investors.  And I think the sector as a whole, we need to start thinking about larger numbers, not  
**[0:34:30-0:34:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:34:30):**  because investment is perfect, not because we we all need to raise a lot of money, but  because there's going to be pressure on the sector and to reach the impact we want to  have.  We need to be comfortable with a lot of zeros.  So what if you would be in charge of an investment portfolio like that on next Monday?  
**[0:34:46-0:34:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:34:46):**  What would you focus on and how would you put that to work?  Well first of all, I question the decision of anyone who put me in charge of that.  But let's say nonetheless, I ended up with it.  It's interesting because a couple of years ago, a few of us just got together who are  super passionate about food system change.  
**[0:35:01-0:35:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:35:01):**  And we said, you know what, just for as a fun design exercise, let's build what we think  would be sort of the utopian food system.  Hey, if we could start from scratch and just say, hey, how would this thing work from the  beginning to the end?  And that conversation broke down so quickly because we understood right away that there  
**[0:35:17-0:35:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:35:17):**  were so many biases that each one of us had.  It was so complex and it was just so confusing to kind of get around social norms and cultural  beliefs and just the complexities of how food is delivered from one place to another that  we said, you know what, it's impossible to do here on Earth.  So let's do it as if you were traveling to space and needed to build a closed loop food  
**[0:35:37-0:35:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:35:37):**  system for Mars.  And none of us have any aspirations of being astronauts or going to another planet.  But it became so hard to do here that we said, OK, let's just move to another planet and  do it.  And we were able to kind of say, OK, hey, at least academically, here's all the things  
**[0:35:51-0:35:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:35:51):**  that would be needed to sort of deliver optimal nutrition, safety, resource utilization and  pleasure to a specific population.  So if I had a billion dollars, I guess this is shooting from the hip here, I would probably  take a million dollars of that and I would try to stitch together here real solutions  that already exist in places around the world of what's working from inputs to the farm,  
**[0:36:17-0:36:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:36:17):**  to the supply chain, to how food is being delivered, how workers are being treated,  how people are actually getting the nutrition that they actually need or actually want while  food is still enjoyable.  And when you say stitch together, what do you mean by that?  I just mean trying to build like a we talked about earlier, sort of one of the issues in  
**[0:36:34-0:36:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:36:34):**  terms of how solvable is this problem is that we're all operating in silence.  And if we had more time on the podcast, I would say, hey, a lot of that is attributed  to the investment model and how we actually fund some of these innovations.  We have time.  This is not a strict format.  
**[0:36:47-0:36:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:36:47):**  So why is that the investment model like at the base of some of these issues?  Now I'm going to dig, of course.  I think the investment model that we rely on today for food system change was built  for another era and another industry, the tech industry.  I think it's built for software and hardware.  
**[0:37:04-0:37:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:37:04):**  Of course, there's some software and hardware solutions in food, but it's meant very much  to say, hey, you get a little bit of money, you show a little bit of traction, you get  a little bit more money, you show a little bit more traction, et cetera, et cetera.  And sometimes it works and sometimes you stop at one of those points.  The challenge with doing that in food is kind of what we've been talking about now for the  
**[0:37:23-0:37:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:37:23):**  last 30 or 40 minutes is that that creates silos.  So if I'm investing in a company that's trying to increase yields, then there's a whole ecosystem  of companies that are focused on yield expansion.  And there's another silo around shipment and there's another silo around tracking and tracing  and et cetera, et cetera.  
**[0:37:43-0:37:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:37:43):**  But there are a few exceptions, of course.  Things are changing, but in general, they're not.  There are no investment models that say, hey, I need to put all these things together.  So I'm not going to invest in this little company and this little company that I'm going  to make them compete for investment dollars.  
**[0:37:57-0:37:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:37:57):**  I'm going to make them compete for talent.  I'm going to make them compete for the same customers and may the strongest survive.  Great.  And 10 years from now, we'll find out who really is the best at improving yields, but  we don't have 10 years.  
**[0:38:08-0:38:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:38:08):**  So I would take a million dollars of that billion dollar fund and I would try to stitch  together some of those most promising solutions into a single solution.  And it may be hypothetical and it may be only in pilot form, but if I can get 10 things  to work together or at least identify what is needed for them to work together, then  I think the other 999 million dollars of that could be used to then scale that solution.  
**[0:38:30-0:38:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:38:30):**  But to put a billion dollars and invest it in a hundred different places and hope that  at the end of the day, three or four of those solutions or companies survive, that's just  a broken model in my mind and it's not going to solve any of the major problems that we're  facing.  So you would really try to apply a portfolio approach, but with a much longer horizon or  
**[0:38:49-0:38:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:38:49):**  at least not the usual competing within the portfolio or competing with outside the portfolio.  Do you have an example of that, how to make that that you stitch together 10 solutions?  What could that be?  Well, again, we couldn't come up with that before.  So we came up with it like, hey, this is what you would do if you landed on a foreign planet  
**[0:39:07-0:39:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:39:07):**  that had hostile environment and limited resources and you needed to keep a population happy  and alive and safe for a prolonged period of time.  And we had to do that again in sort of this simulated environment.  So I don't have good examples of that, but that's what I would do with the first million  dollars is find those examples.  
**[0:39:25-0:39:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:39:25):**  I mean, I know there are thousands of companies out there in each one of these little silos  that are doing great things, but today they don't find one another.  They can't, they don't have the time to look up and say, okay, well I'm going to go and  connect my work with someone else.  That's just not the reality of the food system we live in today.  
**[0:39:40-0:39:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:39:40):**  You're either focused on your existing problems or trying to make that existing solution work.  Maybe you have a nice conversation at conferences and when we were used to be able to go to  conferences, but that's it.  That's it.  Then you walk away and you're like, okay, I'm back in survival mode.  
**[0:39:54-0:39:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:39:54):**  Now I got to go raise money or I got to go hire someone or get this customer deal or  survive.  And it's really tough.  And I understand that's the nature of business, but we're talking about major problems here  that are affecting humanity and threatening our planet.  
**[0:40:07-0:40:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:40:07):**  And so it requires a different approach and a different investor or a different investment  approach as well.  That's right.  And it's food.  So there's always going to be a market.  
**[0:40:15-0:40:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:40:15):**  There's always going to be a return on that investment.  Hey, the better you can connect all these dots and make it work more efficiently, there's  always going to be a return on that investment because people need to eat.  So it's not a risky investment.  It's just a complicated process and it's a complicated investment and we're not good  
**[0:40:29-0:40:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:40:29):**  at complicated.  No, that's definitely true.  That's why no one gives me a billion dollars, by the way.  Maybe after they listen to this, they think, ah, but actually, right.  I mean, for me, one of the interesting parts is the amount of money that tries to get into  
**[0:40:43-0:40:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:40:43):**  the space using the old model and in many cases using the software model, especially  on timing and horizon and indeed the competition.  And it's going to be challenging.  But what I'm seeing most is that the amount of money that tries to enter the space is  growing exponentially.  
**[0:40:58-0:41:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:40:58):**  The amount of investable and obviously that depends on the model you're using as an investor.  The amount of investable companies or projects or et cetera is definitely not there.  So there's going to be a lot of competition.  Hopefully, let's say the company's on the ground.  I don't know if you can affirm to that, can at least they can pick the investor or they  
**[0:41:14-0:41:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:41:14):**  have a bit of choice or hopefully in the next year to have a bit of choice of what money  they take on, what kind of money and what kind of conditions comes with that and not  having to always go for the fund or if you see fund that needs to exit in a relatively  short period and meaning putting a lot of stress on the company.  So I'm hoping that that competition helps at least for the companies to pick the right  
**[0:41:35-0:41:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:41:35):**  type of growth capital or the right type of capital to basically be appropriate for them.  I hope so.  And before you press record today, I know we were talking about some others that are  out there and they have different investment thesis.  And so, yeah, change is happening.  
**[0:41:48-0:41:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:41:48):**  I just it needs to happen with a sense of urgency and at the pace that the problems  are growing.  Absolutely.  And that's not happening yet.  There's definitely hope and there are signs of change, but as always, change is slow.  
**[0:42:00-0:42:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:42:00):**  If you would like to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and  agriculture, find our video course on investing in regenerative agriculture dot com slash  course.  This course will teach you to understand the opportunities to get to know the main players,  to learn about the main trends and how to evaluate a new investment opportunity.  
**[0:42:20-0:42:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:42:20):**  Like what kind of questions to ask.  Find out more on investing in regenerative agriculture dot com slash course.  And what do you believe to be true about regenerative agriculture that others don't believe to be  true?  I was actually inspired by by John Kempf, who asked this question usually about traditional  
**[0:42:37-0:42:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:42:37):**  agriculture and who, by the way, shared our previous interview in his newsletter and made  it explode, basically.  So suddenly there was a huge uptake around Christmas, I think last year, and we didn't  understand where it came from until I saw the newsletter of John.  So if you're listening, John, thank you for that.  
**[0:42:52-0:42:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:42:52):**  But the question, what do you believe to be true about region ag or region agriculture  practices that others don't believe to be true?  Oh, boy, I would never claim to know anything that I would think that other people don't  know, considering the level of passion.  Where do you have another opinion or where do you have another angle to it?  
**[0:43:07-0:43:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:43:07):**  Here's what I believe is true and has to happen for regenerative agriculture to become truly  mainstream and have the impact that we all hope it has.  I think as individuals, as consumers, I have to be able to say, hey, how does this directly  affect me and my family, not just the long horizon of planetary and human health?  So what does this mean for me today and what can I do differently as a result of something  
**[0:43:33-0:43:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:43:33):**  that you're doing that has a positive effect on my life?  And it's obvious and yet it's not obvious because we're still not directly answering  that or we're still not able to directly answer that question.  So I don't know if that's a dancing around what you asked me, but I think that has to  be the driver of all the decisions, investments, innovations, all the work we put into regenerative  
**[0:43:54-0:43:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:43:54):**  agriculture has to be around an individual being able to answer that question confidently.  It has to be better for me and my family, basically.  Which comes back to the nutrient discussion we obviously had in the last 47 minutes and  the key questions around measuring that, which I think it's a very fair answer.  Not dancing around it at all.  
**[0:44:14-0:44:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:44:14):**  Yeah, there's so many important elements of food, but at the end of the day, fundamentally  we're eating to stay alive and survive.  And so it has to come down to that the basic questions have to be answered.  Hey, is this good for me or not?  Now, beyond that, we all have different values and we can apply those values and there's  
**[0:44:30-0:44:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:44:30):**  lots of other important things, but today we cannot answer the most fundamental question  about a piece of food in our hand.  And that is what's inside of it.  So I think we have to be able to do that first.  Which is so extremely shocking, even after two interviews with you.  
**[0:44:45-0:44:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:44:45):**  I want to thank you so much.  Be conscious of your time.  And thank you so much for this check in, as always, extremely interesting.  And you've been up to a lot in a year.  And I hope to be checking in with you again to see what has been happening in your nutrient  
**[0:45:00-0:45:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:45:00):**  density world.  Well, we certainly appreciate the opportunity to talk about what we're doing.  So thank you so much.  And we'd be happy to come back whenever you would have us.  Thank you.  
**[0:45:08-0:45:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:45:08):**  Thank you so much, Greg.  If you found the investing in regenerative agriculture and food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast.  
**[0:45:22-0:45:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:45:22):**  And it only takes a few seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you, and if you have the means, please  join my membership community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on gumroad.com slash investing with your neck or in the description  
**[0:45:43-0:45:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:45:43):**  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  
**[0:46:07-0:46:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:46:07):**  Why are we doing this course after 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the  question how to put money to work in regenerating soils?  And I've been following the space since 2011 and recording these podcasts since 2016.  We thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  
**[0:46:24-0:46:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:46:24):**  How have we built our decision making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  What questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  
**[0:46:34-0:46:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:46:34):**  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  
**[0:46:42-0:46:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:46:42):**  You, the soil builders and investors in the space.  The soil builders, people working in the space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers, vehicle  builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food companies,  permaculture, key line designers, holistic management, consultants, etc.  People that are building soil at scale.  
**[0:47:02-0:47:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:47:02):**  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  No.  
**[0:47:17-0:47:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:47:17):**  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you.  And I'm very aware that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very  different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  
**[0:47:34-0:47:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:47:34):**  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to write along.  
**[0:47:47-0:47:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:47:47):**  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co investors you could find, or what kind of investors you could  find if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  
**[0:48:09-0:48:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:48:09):**  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  
**[0:48:23-0:48:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/10/greg-schewmaker-2#t=0:48:23):**  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking, click on  the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  