### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2020-00-17)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  Welcome to another episode of investing in regenerative agriculture, investing as if  the planet mattered.  
**[0:00:21-0:00:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:00:21):**  Podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  
**[0:00:42-0:00:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:00:42):**  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  In March last year, we launched our membership community to make it easy for fans to support  our work.  
**[0:00:59-0:01:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:00:59):**  And so many of you have joined as a member.  We've launched different types of benefits, exclusive content, Q&A webinars with former  guests, ask me anything sessions, plus so much more to come in the future.  For more information on the different tiers, benefits and how to become a member, check  gumroad.com slash investing region ag or find the link below.  
**[0:01:18-0:01:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:01:18):**  Thank you.  Welcome to another interview today with Pierre Biel, co-founder of Varelex and Bleu Blanqueur.  Bleu Blanqueur is an association created in 2000 to promote a responsible agriculture  with the objective of improving nutritional environmental quality of our food.  In order to feed humans well, it's necessary to start by looking after our crops and the  
**[0:01:37-0:01:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:01:37):**  health of our animals.  This is the founding principle.  Of course, we have a lot to discover here.  So the association brings farmers, companies, doctors, scientists and consumers, that's  a mouthful together.  
**[0:01:48-0:01:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:01:48):**  And it has a presence worldwide, although it was born in France.  Welcome, Pierre.  Thank you.  So we met through and or we met virtually through an interview of John Kempf, which  I'll definitely link below.  
**[0:01:58-0:02:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:01:58):**  But I would love to for anybody that didn't listen to that, to have a short introduction,  first of all, to you, like what brought you to agriculture?  And of course, then we'll unpack Bleu Blanqueur and we'll dive deep into a lot of things from  omega three to six to the diet of animals to methane, etc, etc.  But first of all, what brought you to agriculture and to spend your working life in that?  
**[0:02:19-0:02:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:02:19):**  I decided to go to agricultural studies when I was very young, because it's a question  of family history, etc.  So I became an agronomist in the 70s.  And my first job was in animal production.  It was a period of intensive agriculture.  
**[0:02:39-0:02:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:02:39):**  And it was not my roots.  It was not the way we produce it at this time, pigs, milk, eggs, etc.  It was not exactly the way I dreamed when I was young.  And in 92, with five friends, we created a company, an animal nutrition company, name  is Valorex.  
**[0:02:59-0:03:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:02:59):**  And it started with an idea that we have to be less dependent on the soybean importation  from America, from Brazil and from the United States.  Because of agronomy, just to create a balance in the soil to produce more protein seeds  in France, less corn, to have balanced diets for animals using protein seeds is better  for the soil.  
**[0:03:24-0:03:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:03:24):**  So we started from the soil, because when you use the protein seeds, like lupine, horse  bean, peas, etc, you put nitrogen in the soil from the air, so it's less fertilizer.  A lot of nitrogen remains in the soil for the wheat you do after.  It's exactly what I learned in the agricultural studies in the first years, doing rotation.  During one year, you make pea, and after, or alfalfa, and after, you produce wheat,  
**[0:03:54-0:03:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:03:54):**  etc.  And this is very old, nothing new.  But just to recreate the link, so to be short, we also used a technology to cook the seed,  because these crude seeds are not very digestible for the animals.  And we started to say to breeders, to farmers, okay, it's more expensive than soybeans,  
**[0:04:17-0:04:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:04:17):**  that imported soybeans, but maybe it's better for you, for the soil, for the animals, etc.  And the farmers are technical people.  They don't believe you if you don't have a lot of proofs of data.  So we published our first paper in the scientific press in 1995.  We created the company in 1992.  
**[0:04:37-0:04:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:04:37):**  And in 1995, it was the first paper with the French National Research Institute for Agronomy.  And it was an improvement of the fertility of the cow.  When you use a mix of lupine, pea, linseed, compared to soybean, we improved the fertility,  which is quite important for a dairy farmer.  And somebody in the research institute had an explanation based on the fact that in grass  
**[0:05:07-0:05:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:05:07):**  and linseed, you have omega-3 fatty acid.  And in corn and soybean, you have more omega-6 fatty acid.  And the balance between omega-6 and omega-3 was important for the fertility of the cow.  And just to go back one step, because when you said the first years of studying agriculture,  it was about these rotations, it was about the local legumes, etc. for the feed.  
**[0:05:31-0:05:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:05:31):**  And then sort of when you started working, the soybean import started.  That was more or less the moment or the period where a lot of this import started.  And you mentioned you weren't very happy with that.  That triggered starting your own company.  Is that correct?  
**[0:05:45-0:05:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:05:45):**  Absolutely correct.  Starting from the soil, not necessarily from the health of the animal, or also the health  of the animal?  We started from the soil.  And there was an event, only old people like me remember that in the 70s, there was a US  
**[0:06:01-0:06:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:06:01):**  embargo on soybean.  And for all the French farmers, it was terrible because the price of the soybean increased  so much.  And so they started and we started realizing that maybe producing energy crop in Europe  and then protein crops from the US or from Brazil is not a good solution.  
**[0:06:23-0:06:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:06:23):**  It's risky.  Yeah, it's risky.  And so the omega 3,6 ratio is something we're going to come back to a few times.  But so this person in this research institute basically accidentally started the movement  because this is something you didn't know.  
**[0:06:37-0:06:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:06:37):**  You found out that that might be the case why the fertility of these cows was improving  because it's the ratio, not necessarily the quantity of omega 3 and 6 that is important,  if I understand correctly.  But please explain a bit why is this ratio omega 3 and 6 so important for the cow or  the animals in general and also us?  
**[0:06:57-0:07:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:06:57):**  Okay, so I will go back to a Nobel Prize in 82.  In 82, the Nobel Prize was attributed to three researchers, two Swedish and one English.  It was about something that was a surprise for them in their research.  You know, in the human body, it was Nobel Prize for Physiology and Human Medicine.  In the body, there was a lot of antagonist molecules.  
**[0:07:25-0:07:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:07:25):**  For instance, you have some molecules like insulin stored the sugar in the body, in the  cells and other molecules like, I don't remember the name now, and some molecule, distal, some  other molecule, and the sugar.  And the balance is always important.  But what was funny was the omega 6 and the omega 3, they have to work in a certain balance,  
**[0:07:50-0:07:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:07:50):**  but we don't synthesize them.  The insulin is synthesized by a man, but not the omega 6, not the omega 3.  And the ratio between omega 6 and omega 3 is very important for inflammation.  For instance, omega 3 are roughly, omega 3 are anti-inflammatory.  Omega 6 are pro-inflammatory molecules.  
**[0:08:12-0:08:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:08:12):**  Same for the aggregation, the platelet aggregation.  Omega 6 are pro-aggregation.  Omega 3 are anti-aggregation.  Same for the fertility.  You need some prostaglandin for the cycle at certain moment.  
**[0:08:27-0:08:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:08:27):**  Back to the cows, for the fertility of the cow, you need omega 6 at a certain moment.  You need omega 3 at another moment.  But when there is an imbalance in the diet of the cow, as well as in the diet of the  man, then the problem occurs.  We started with this little door on the fertility of the cow, but the story is always the same.  
**[0:08:53-0:09:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:08:53):**  Like at this time in 95, the imbalance doesn't come from the body.  The imbalance comes from the diet.  It comes from the plate, if you remember, or comes from the balance.  When a cow eats grass, we use linseed.  We decided to use linseed, which is not a protein seed, because we knew that the fatty  
**[0:09:14-0:09:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:09:14):**  acids of linseed are the same as the fatty acids of grass.  But we didn't know the properties.  It was just a way of thinking that it's the same as in grass, and in corn and soybean,  it's not the same.  Corn and soybean are quite rich in omega 6.  
**[0:09:30-0:09:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:09:30):**  So the link between harmony in the nature and the environment and the balance in our  body did exist.  After in the 30 years later, we just measured the impact of a renewed balance on the animal  health, human health, and also soil health.  That's why I like to talk about this nice story.  
**[0:09:57-0:10:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:09:57):**  On a daily basis, it was not always exciting, but when you have a look on these last 30  years, it's very exciting because we did a lot of research work on balancing the soil,  balancing the animal diet, and balancing the human diet.  And when did you, because you opened this small door on the ratio omega 3 omega 6, which  is absolutely crucial because you would sort of think omega 3 is good for you, omega 6  
**[0:10:25-0:10:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:10:25):**  is bad, let's get as much.  But it's not the case.  You need both in limited quantities, but you need especially the right ratio.  But you saw that in a cow and you saw that in fertility ratio and you thought, okay,  that's interesting.  
**[0:10:37-0:10:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:10:37):**  You start probably changing your feed and changing the feed you're selling as a company.  But that's quite a step to go from there and building a successful company to help dairy  farmers work with their fertility and improve to go from there to what it means for us.  Where was that step?  Where did you open the second door basically to human health?  
**[0:10:56-0:11:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:10:56):**  So let's go back to 1992, I created the company.  1995, that's the first trial with the impact and fertility of the cow.  And so still discussing, I'm used to say when you are in the research area, you do an experiment  because you have a question and you expect an answer.  Generally, at the end of the experiment, you have half of an answer and two or three new  
**[0:11:22-0:11:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:11:22):**  questions.  And in the first period, you say, okay, at this time, internet didn't exist, so I go  to the library of the university and I read a lot of things on Omega-6, Omega-3, the balance,  etc.  And we have the idea of saying, well, if it's important for the cow, maybe the nutritional  
**[0:11:42-0:11:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:11:42):**  quality of the milk can also be enhanced and better for human health.  So in 1997, we started always with this National Research Institute, a big experiment on the  impact of animal feed on the nutritional quality of the milk, the egg, meat, etc.  And we published it.  And then I met a second funny story.  
**[0:12:08-0:12:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:12:08):**  I met a cardiologist in a congress and he told me, well, it's interesting what you do,  but not so much because of course, you have more Omega-3 in the egg or in the milk, you  have less.  But what will happen when the man eats the egg or drink the milk?  Will this interesting Omega-3 will be used by the metabolism or they will be oxidized  
**[0:12:33-0:12:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:12:33):**  as a common source of energy?  You cannot say anything, any claim.  So you proved that you could change through the feed of the animal, you proved you could  change the ratio to get to the ideal ratio in an egg, in the meat, in the milk.  But this doctor was saying, what does it do to us?  
**[0:12:51-0:12:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:12:51):**  We knew we improved the ratio in the plate.  But what happened in the body?  You have to do a clinical trial.  Sounds funny.  Clinical trial, we were a small company of 20 people.  
**[0:13:02-0:13:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:13:02):**  So we found the money, we were funded by the French state and the local government of Brittany.  And we did this clinical trial.  This was probably the most exciting period of my professional life because we never knew  what will happen.  We took two groups of volunteers, healthy volunteers, two groups of 40 people and they  
**[0:13:24-0:13:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:13:24):**  received exactly the same diet, same quantity of egg, butter, meat, cheese, etc.  And we did blood samples.  Only the animals had not the same diet.  When we read the paper, it was difficult because so we said diet for the animal diet and regimen  for the human regimen to be clear.  
**[0:13:45-0:13:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:13:45):**  So it was the same human regimen with different animal diet.  And we did blood samples to the volunteer every two weeks.  And after only one month, it was a double blind crossover trial, very strong in terms  of statistic.  We completely changed the composition not only of the blood, but also of the composition  
**[0:14:07-0:14:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:14:07):**  of the red blood cells, which means all the cells of the body change not according to  the human regimen, but according to the animal diet.  So two steps longer in the food chain, there is a strong influence on the composition.  You are what you eat or what you ate.  Yeah, but we are not exactly what we eat.  
**[0:14:28-0:14:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:14:28):**  We are also what the chicken eats.  What the chicken you eat and eaten before.  Yeah, absolutely.  So that was fantastic and that was the second step of my professional life because with  the investigator, the medical doctor who did the study and my friends from the research  
**[0:14:46-0:14:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:14:46):**  institute, we said it's fantastic in terms of the public health because usually nutrition,  let's say before us, nutrition was eat more that and less that.  Eat more broccoli, eat more kale, eat less, blah, blah, blah.  But you proved that it's not more that, it's how it's grown.  Exactly.  
**[0:15:09-0:15:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:15:09):**  That actually influences the outcome.  So it opened new doors in terms of public health, that's what say my friend.  And they convinced me not to continue in a company project.  But I remember they said you cannot say you improve the public health, but you will do  it only you and you will not invite your competitors to do it.  
**[0:15:36-0:15:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:15:36):**  If you speak of a climate or public health, you cannot do it alone.  You cannot keep it in a for-profit in a company.  You need to open it up.  Yeah.  So we created this Blub Blonker Association after the first clinical trial.  
**[0:15:49-0:15:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:15:49):**  And where are you now?  20 years later, Blub Blonker is massive.  You're in many different countries.  But just to give an idea, what is Blub Blonker and where are we in 2020 in terms of impact?  Because it's been an enormous impact, especially in France and Belgium and other countries  
**[0:16:05-0:16:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:16:05):**  you're starting now, but especially your home countries.  It's a really big movement.  Yeah, it's probably because we had no money at the beginning.  So we created the...  We hear that a lot in this podcast, like you get very creative if you have no money at  
**[0:16:18-0:16:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:16:18):**  the beginning.  Not probably.  If I did this job in a big pharmaceutical company, probably it will not be the same.  So we started with an association.  It's quite complicated to go from the, let's say, from the cow to the consumer.  
**[0:16:36-0:16:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:16:36):**  If you take in all the countries of the world, you have in the stores, you have what they  call omega-3 milk.  Omega-3 milk is usual milk from a factory and you put two drops of a fish oil inside  and begin... it's very easy to do from the industrial side.  But for us, it was more complicated because you have to separate the milk coming from  
**[0:16:57-0:17:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:16:57):**  grass-fed cows from the milk coming from corn-soy-fed cows.  Industry people don't like it.  It has to be a completely separate product, basically.  It has to be the whole chain because the milk cannot be mixed without a milk because you  lose your health qualities.  
**[0:17:14-0:17:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:17:14):**  Exactly.  Of course, the dairy companies didn't like the idea because the cost was so important.  So we created the association with seven sectors, the plant producers, people of Rinsi, Alpha  Alpha, Lupin, etc.  One member is a company or a cooperative or an association.  
**[0:17:37-0:17:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:17:37):**  So the plant producer, then the breeders, then the animal nutrition company, all my  competitors, the Valorex competitors at this time.  Then the processors, which mean dairy companies, meat companies, then the retailer.  And the last one was the consumers.  I forgot one.  
**[0:17:57-0:18:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:17:57):**  The seventh was the on-farm processors, the farmers, processors, etc.  And this was the first pillar.  The second pillar was what we call the communities.  It was consumers, farmers, medical doctors, chefs, which is quite important in France,  but without any economic interest in the study.  
**[0:18:19-0:18:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:18:19):**  And the third one was the scientific board.  And all these three pillars sent their people to the administration council.  So it was very interesting to learn, to hear from the others.  I think in my professional life, one of the most difficult things was to break the walls  between a scientist and a farmer, which was a consumer and a medical doctor, etc.  
**[0:18:45-0:18:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:18:45):**  Everybody, I don't know if it sounds in English, but in French, there was a writer, Pierre  Rabhi, who talked about the Taylorization of the soot.  Everybody does well in his own compartment.  Nobody makes the full soot.  All these people discussing together, it was very interesting.  
**[0:19:03-0:19:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:19:03):**  So this was the creation.  The governance was very important.  And today in France, it's between 5% to 10% of the different animal sectors, 10% of all  the pig produced in France, 7% of the eggs, etc.  Now we have also wild fish.  
**[0:19:25-0:19:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:19:25):**  I learned a lot of things when you say there is a lot of omega-3 in the sardines, but it  depends when it's fished.  It depends when, where, it depends on the oil you use to cook the sardines, etc.  Like always, it's not eat more sardines.  It's what kind of sardines, where they're caught, how, etc.  
**[0:19:46-0:19:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:19:46):**  Just to unpack one thing, and there are so many things to think about, but just when  you mentioned the vegetable proteins, the growers of that, and the grass-fed cows, these  are like the supplement they get?  Or how are the cows, or many of these cows are 100% grass-fed?  Or how does that work for the simple non-farmer listening to this?  
**[0:20:04-0:20:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:20:04):**  Why do they need lupine or flaxseed or something else that you mentioned?  Well, thank you.  It's a very important point.  Because the more important things to my eyes, it's the measurement.  Once you said the scientific board of Bleu-Blanquer, say, okay, a Bleu-Blanquer milk, it's with  
**[0:20:27-0:20:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:20:27):**  a ratio omega-6, omega-3 of one to one.  So after the farmer can choose the better way for him to produce this milk.  The obligation of results.  Which is key.  Just to iterate it again, the obligation of results is something that sets it apart from  
**[0:20:46-0:20:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:20:46):**  almost any other certification body.  Like organic is based on practices, but not on results.  Most other things, fair trade, etc., are based on practices, not on results.  I'm a farmer, I have chickens, and I grow eggs.  I'm only certified if my eggs contain this and this ratio of omega-3 to 6, because that's  
**[0:21:07-0:21:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:21:07):**  what you're looking for.  There could be many other things, but the omega-3 to 6 is a very good trigger, because  it shows everything else basically that I have been doing around the chickens.  And it's very difficult to cheat with.  But I need to show these results, otherwise I cannot be called Bleu-Blanquer eggs.  
**[0:21:23-0:21:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:21:23):**  Yeah, and you know the marketing people love to claim free-range eggs.  Free-range eggs, you see a lot of grass on the egg box, but not in reality.  When you analyze the egg, the ratio between omega-6 and omega-3, at least in France, it's  about 40.  And 40 is 30.  
**[0:21:44-0:21:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:21:44):**  For Bleu-Blanquer eggs, it's 5.  When it's 5, you're sure I have laying hands in my garden.  I know when I give them grass, when I cut grass and I give them, the ratio omega-6 to  omega-3 is 1 to 1.  When you give cooked, clean seed to the laying hands, you have the same ratio of 5 to 1.  
**[0:22:07-0:22:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:22:07):**  So just to say free-range or organic, I mean, you called it somewhere, I think in the interview  on, if they get organic soy, obviously you can call them organic eggs.  But they're like an inflammation bomb, basically, if you buy the normal ones you buy in the  supermarket because they don't have the obligation of result.  They don't need that ratio of 3 to 6 that you need to, or that your farmers need to  
**[0:22:29-0:22:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:22:29):**  show.  And we discussed with some grass-fed organization in the world.  It's quite complicated because I think it's fantastic grass-fed, but if you have the obligation  of results, if you have the measurement, the better.  Of course, it will give an added value to the product.  
**[0:22:47-0:22:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:22:47):**  It's grass-fed, great.  And because it's grass-fed, you have a good omega-6, omega-3 ratio in the egg or in the  meat or in the milk.  But sometimes it's difficult because the people have in mind that the obligation of means  description is enough.  
**[0:23:05-0:23:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:23:05):**  We don't think so.  We have people in the Bleu Blancor.  When I started Valorex, it was 100% organic.  So I know quite well some people of the organic movement.  And we say we have the same vision.  
**[0:23:21-0:23:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:23:21):**  We have a lot of people that produce organic and Bleu Blancor.  We say in the toolbox, we need a lot of things.  Obligation of means is something.  Obligation of results is something else.  And if you can have the two together, it's fantastic.  
**[0:23:36-0:23:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:23:36):**  And is it easy to measure this ratio of 3 to 6?  Because that's something, I mean, it's amazing to have obligation of results if it's easy  to measure for me as a farmer or if it's incredibly expensive.  I'm not going to be playing with the 1 to 5 ratio.  I'm not going to be buying different seeds.  
**[0:23:52-0:23:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:23:52):**  I'm not going to be changing my management because it's too difficult basically to get  that done.  But in this case, is it easy?  It's easy.  You mentioned in the people you interviewed, our common friend, Dan Kittredge in the US.  
**[0:24:06-0:24:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:24:06):**  And we discussed a lot about making the measurement easy.  It's a fantastic tool.  If you can measure today for Bleu Blancor, fatty acid profile, costing in the lab with  the official method, it costs about 150 euro per one sample, a little less.  But we developed spectroscopies.  
**[0:24:30-0:24:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:24:30):**  We did research also on technology because we think to tomorrow it will be less and less  expensive.  I bought the device, the nutrient meter when it came out.  Yeah.  The first version, the 3D printed one.  
**[0:24:42-0:24:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:24:42):**  Well, it's not expensive and it will be less and less.  But it's key.  But it's so, so different if you harness this into us.  Once you say, okay, that's the objective, that's the obligation of results.  After do what you want, not exactly everything, but we also have obligation of means.  
**[0:25:03-0:25:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:25:03):**  For instance, all the additives, the chemical additives, etc. are forbidden.  But you can choose grass, you can choose linseed, you can choose alpha alpha.  You can source all the source of omega-3s that are correct for you.  And it's fantastic to see that the farmers changing their systems from year to year to  adapt to the blue-blanc curve obligation of results.  
**[0:25:27-0:25:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:25:27):**  And you're getting stricter or not?  It's a moving 20 years ago or where is the result and the obligation of means?  Do I need to keep improving as a farmer?  Are you making it more tricky or do you want me to keep improving my practices?  We change all the time.  
**[0:25:45-0:25:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:25:45):**  After discussion between the consumers, the farmers, the price is very important because  once again, when you deal with public health and climate, you cannot say I do it only for  the 10% of the people who can buy it.  You have to do it for everybody.  The accessibility, we did things quite interesting for tomorrow, but of course, we incorporate  
**[0:26:07-0:26:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:26:07):**  new demand about animal welfare, about the link to the local production, etc.  But we want the farmer to be paid for it.  And second, the consumer have an accessibility to this product.  We have an agreement with the French government, which is not bad.  They encourage the same.  
**[0:26:26-0:26:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:26:26):**  You can write the blue-blanc curve is supported by the French Ministry of Health, Environment  and Agriculture.  But we have to prove that the over cost is not over 5% of the same product.  So basically when I buy an egg or let's say a piece of meat of a pig, the difference in  price between conventional, let's say, relatively extractive soybean grown, etc. and the blue-blanc  
**[0:26:52-0:26:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:26:52):**  curve certified is maximum 5%.  Yeah.  And it's generally less.  Which is amazing.  Yeah.  
**[0:26:59-0:27:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:26:59):**  Can I say what is my dream today?  Absolutely.  Absolutely.  I think that measurement is the first key word for blue-blanc curve.  The second is accessibility.  
**[0:27:10-0:27:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:27:10):**  So we did with this 5% maximum over cost during this last 20 years.  And in 2016, we created a fund to encourage what we call the agro-environmental transition.  The idea is to receive money for the fund, which is directly given to the farmer according  to the quantity of CO2 reduction in his production.  So measurement, we measure this reduction and the farmer receives money directly from  
**[0:27:48-0:27:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:27:48):**  companies, for instance, telephone companies, banks, etc.  To say simply that maybe it's too simply, but today the rich people, they are concerned  at least in France by health and the environment, when I was young, the rich people were fat  and the poor people were not.  Today it's the opposite.  
**[0:28:11-0:28:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:28:11):**  The other way around.  Yeah.  And for these people who don't really need this high quality product, they have the money  to buy it.  And the poor people, they are condemned to what they call in France the premier prix,  
**[0:28:25-0:28:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:28:25):**  first price, which is low cost food.  The poverty premium.  Yeah.  Yeah.  And our dream is to use this fund to give money to the farmer.  
**[0:28:36-0:28:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:28:36):**  So they produce in a better quality system.  They are paid for it, but the price of the product remains the same.  The concept with the retailer chain in France, I'm very happy of this because it's the money  of the rich people, but used to make the poor people eating in a very good quality.  And if you have not only 10% of the people who eat well, but 80% for instance, then you  
**[0:29:06-0:29:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:29:06):**  really have an impact on the climate, the public health, etc.  There's so much to unpack in that.  To start with, just to give an idea of size of like last year or the last year you have  data, Blancor certified products.  What kind of value was that in total?  
**[0:29:24-0:29:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:29:24):**  Well, in euro, the Blancor money, Blancor has 25 employees and the money comes from  the economical member.  If they use the collective brand, they pay 0.2% of the products sold with the brand to  Blancor.  So we have a budget in Blancor of something like 3 million euro, but the global turnover  
**[0:29:53-0:30:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:29:53):**  of the brand last year, 2019, was over 2 billion euro in France.  And France is about 80% of the turnover.  And after in 11 other countries, Europe and a few other countries.  So 2 billion euros, it start to be something significant.  And to unpack the ecosystem service payments you mentioned, you developed actually a measuring  
**[0:30:25-0:30:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:30:25):**  framework for methane, because that's obviously a question immediately, but people say, okay,  great.  Animal protein can be not necessarily medicine, but definitely a prevention tool for inflammatory  diseases, which are many of our rich world diseases at the moment.  But what about the environmental cost?  
**[0:30:44-0:30:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:30:44):**  What about the methane?  What about, I mean, we are all, I wouldn't say brainwashed, but definitely bombarded  with messages that animal protein is the worst thing you can do.  It's worse than buying a Hummer and driving it all day long.  So what is, it's a bad way of setting up the question, but what is your response to like  
**[0:31:02-0:31:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:31:02):**  the animal, the environmental impact of animal protein?  You've done a lot of research into that and actually you've been paying farmers to change  their practices by taking rich people money, which I think makes you like the Robin Hood  of agriculture, but can you explain that 2016, you got some awards for that as well.  And you actually, you started again with measurement and how to compensate farmers for this.  
**[0:31:24-0:31:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:31:24):**  And in this case, it was specifically about the thing we always discuss, which is methane.  And again, it came down to feed of animals, which is, I think is fascinating, but explain  a bit that process and how that came about.  Yeah.  So maybe I'll come back at the beginning of the story.  
**[0:31:39-0:31:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:31:39):**  I said in terms of health and nutrition before the blocker, the only message that was heard  was eat more that and less this, et cetera.  I think it's the same for environment today.  The main message is eat less meat, eat more protein seeds, et cetera, et cetera, more  legumes and quite true.  
**[0:32:04-0:32:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:32:04):**  But there are also huge difference in terms of carbon footprint between the different  way of production.  We started with the methane of the cow.  We started in 2001.  The first paper was in 2001.  
**[0:32:20-0:32:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:32:20):**  At this time, you didn't hear so much about the climate change, but there was another  researcher, it was her idea to say, she made a little paper, not in a big scientific newspaper.  She gave cooked linseed to goats and she had the idea of measuring the pH in the rumen  of the goat, so animal health, to measure the nutritional profile of the milk, so human  health, but also to go inside the rumen to measure the methane emitted by the goat.  
**[0:32:57-0:33:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:32:57):**  She made a lovely paper about is it possible to improve in the same time footprint.  It's fantastic.  Was it possible?  Yes, we decreased the methane.  As you said before, what is important is the measurement.  
**[0:33:16-0:33:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:33:16):**  From a biological point of view, the link between omega-3, methane emission, the composition  of the milk, it's very clear, there are thousands, hundreds of, maybe not thousands, but hundreds  of papers on this.  When a cow or ruminant or goat, grass or linseed or alfalfa, she has omega-3 in the rumen and  this omega-3 has a negative impact on the bacteria that produce methane.  
**[0:33:47-0:33:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:33:47):**  From this idea, it was quite easy to build an idea so you can measure in the milk the  environmental footprint of the milk.  Without having to measure the methane that comes out.  We did that with new papers in the scientific press with the link between the methane emission  and milk fatty acid composition.  
**[0:34:12-0:34:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:34:12):**  The first paper was in 2009.  We saw a correlation and we decided to create a method.  We put it to the French Ministry of Environment in 2011.  The experts approved the method.  Then in 2012, the United Nations Framework Convention for Climate Change was approved  
**[0:34:37-0:34:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:34:37):**  again.  Today, we give money to farmers according to the measurements, which is a very good  measurement.  You measure the milk and you know how many grams of methane.  What's the difference between a normal milk I buy that is grown, or even organic that  
**[0:34:54-0:35:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:34:54):**  is grown on mostly soy, compared to a Blancquer one where the ratio omega-3 and 6 is big?  What's the range between those two?  From 20% to 30% less methane emission, and methane emission is half of the carbon footprint  of the milk.  That's significant.  
**[0:35:11-0:35:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:35:11):**  Yeah.  We continued.  Two weeks ago in France, there was an official database on the footprint of a different product.  Now, they did it, for instance, for chicken.  You have the carbon footprint of a conventional chicken, organic chicken, a red label chicken,  
**[0:35:31-0:35:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:35:31):**  a Blancquer chicken.  The Blancquer chicken compared to conventional is more than 30% less carbon footprint, which  for the reason that we don't use imported soybean, and we use protein seeds.  When you use protein seeds, you use less nitrogen fertilizer, so you produce less nitrogen  in the product side, which is a very strong warming effect, etc.  
**[0:36:03-0:36:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:36:03):**  To go to the conclusion, it's not only eat less meat, it's also take care of the way  meat is produced.  If I took my example, eating 30% less chicken, okay, it's interesting, but eating the same  quantity of chicken with 30% less carbon footprint, it's absolutely the same results.  Of course, I don't say we have to eat less meat and less animal products, for sure.  
**[0:36:32-0:36:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:36:32):**  At least in Europe and in North America, in the rich countries, we have to eat less, but  we also in the same time have to take care of the way this meat and animal products are  produced.  It's the same for nutrition and environment.  It's not only consumer behavior.  
**[0:36:52-0:36:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:36:52):**  The farmer behavior is at least as important as the consumer's behavior.  They hold the key for our health.  Can you say something about a paper that you were working on?  I don't know if it came out yet because you published many, many.  I would definitely link to your research page on the website, but on breast milk, on pregnant  
**[0:37:11-0:37:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:37:11):**  women, you were setting it up when John Kempf interviewed you.  I don't know if it's already published, but can you say something about that research  study?  It's not published because the experiment is not finished.  We had to stop because of this COVID.  
**[0:37:27-0:37:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:37:27):**  Too bad.  Can I give you a bit?  We're starting a new very...  Of course.  No, no.  
**[0:37:34-0:37:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:37:34):**  This is the one I know, but if you have something more exciting, please share.  The breast milk was really interesting for me because it's not only the link between  we took a volunteer mother that practice breastfeeding to the baby and we measured the composition  of the breast milk and we measured also the composition of the gut flora of the baby inside  the sheet of the baby.  
**[0:38:01-0:38:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:38:01):**  I don't know the other word, the faces.  It's not only a link between what happened in the first step of the food chain to the  plate and to the blood and the milk of the mother, but also to the next generation, to  the baby.  When the COVID story appeared at the beginning of this year on the television, I was watching  
**[0:38:28-0:38:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:38:28):**  the television like everybody, and they were talking of the Cetokine storm.  I realized that people don't die from the virus itself.  They die from what they call the SDR, acute respiratory disease.  Yeah, it's a syndrome, something like that.  You have too much inflammation, you have too much Cetokine storm.  
**[0:38:53-0:38:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:38:53):**  Comes back to the inflammation discussion.  Yeah.  After you look at what happened in the world, and you see the countries like Japan, South  Korea, Hong Kong, but also in Europe, Finland, Portugal, Norway, countries where they eat  a lot of fishes with a lot of omega-3, and not so many victims.  
**[0:39:18-0:39:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:39:18):**  Japan is really something interesting because they have 10 deaths per million habitants,  when in France we have 450 or 500.  You're saying it could be a connection to the omega-3, omega-6.  Did you see a lot of, I mean, it was actually one of my questions.  Did you see a lot of extra interest in Bleu Blancre in this discussion as food, as prevention,  
**[0:39:45-0:39:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:39:45):**  maybe not food as medicine, but definitely food as prevention?  Have you seen something shift in the last nine months, eight months, whatever, when  this hit?  Not at all.  It's terrible because everybody in France is talking about the new drug, about the new  
**[0:40:02-0:40:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:40:02):**  vaccine.  It's like in agriculture, I'm used to say in agriculture, now it's impossible to say  there is a new pest.  We have to build a new pesticide.  But in human health, it's still like that.  
**[0:40:14-0:40:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:40:14):**  New pest, new pesticide.  Wow.  So we're behind in human health compared to agriculture.  I think so.  I really think so.  
**[0:40:21-0:40:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:40:21):**  I had the chance sometime to discuss because we designed two new clinical trials, one was  a patient with symptomatic problem of the COVID and another one with old people in terms  of primary prevention.  And when I discussed with the university hospital in Rennes in my time, of course, the nutrition  professor agreed with me.  
**[0:40:56-0:40:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:40:56):**  It's an inflammatory disease, COVID.  It's not only a virus problem.  And kill the virus is probably interesting, but reduce the symptoms.  He told me, maybe I'll tell you this because I think it's a fantastic comparison.  This professor of nutrition told me, Pierre, you know, the scurvy disease, it was the disease  
**[0:41:20-0:41:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:41:20):**  for the sailor.  Yeah, I know it in Dutch.  The sailors that span basically sailing to Asia at some point started to have serious  issues and they fixed it.  But of course, you can tell me probably it's different with vitamin C.  
**[0:41:32-0:41:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:41:32):**  Yeah, it's the same story.  One sailor, then two, three, and one of the, so they said it's probably an infectious disease.  And at this time, they treated it like this.  It was in the 16th century and it was a Dutch and then an English doctor that realized that  lemon juice, with lemon juice, the symptom disappeared.  
**[0:41:59-0:42:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:41:59):**  And of course, lemon juice is not a drug, it's not a vaccine.  And they take two centuries to realize that it was only a syndrome of vitamin C deficiency.  And I think it's, this guy said it's probably the same.  Of course, there is a virus, there is a disease, but probably the large deficiency, you know,  it's not only interesting to say omega-3 is interesting for inflammation, but also to  
**[0:42:29-0:42:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:42:29):**  say in France and all the Western countries, we only eat half of our needs in omega-3.  About 70% of the omega-3 comes through animal products.  And animals were used to eat a lot of omega-3 through grass and now they eat a lot of omega-3  through corn and soybean.  So the deficiency is very high.  
**[0:42:56-0:42:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:42:56):**  They eat a lot of omega-6 now through corn.  They eat a lot of omega-6, yes, sorry.  So we went from a lot of omega-3 in grasses to a lot of omega-6.  And if you measure our blood now of an average person in France or in the Netherlands or  in Germany, most of us have a, the ratio of 3 to 6 is completely off.  
**[0:43:17-0:43:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:43:17):**  And so your study, these two clinical trials are going to look at people with symptoms  and let's say the elderly that hopefully don't get it, but to prevent or to see if a diet  of better ratio is going to help.  The first one with people who are sick, it's a 20 days study.  Difficult to organize, you realize with all the problems.  
**[0:43:40-0:43:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:43:40):**  But I'm quite sure we'll do it.  I really hope it because the results are good.  People will see that the solution is not only the new drug or the new vaccine.  I will tell you something funny because to finance this trial, I asked to the French  officials because they had a lot of subsidies, money to make clinical trials, et cetera.  
**[0:44:10-0:44:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:44:10):**  And so we explained with the university doctors and the professors what we want to do.  And at the end, they said exactly like if omega-3 was a drug or a vaccine, they say,  can we have a look if the French government can have a look on the stores of the stocks  of omega-3?  And my friends say, yes, you have to nationalize all the officials.  
**[0:44:37-0:44:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:44:37):**  And the grasslands.  Yeah, and the grasslands.  In the mind of the people, when it's human health, it's a drug or a vaccine.  It's fascinating.  Yeah, it's really fascinating.  
**[0:44:50-0:44:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:44:50):**  So we don't see it very well.  I'm very busy with it.  Fascinating and disturbing at the same time.  Yeah.  People don't accept it for animals.  
**[0:45:01-0:45:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:45:01):**  They don't accept it for the land.  They accept for them to find the solution only on the chemical way.  As you say, it's fascinating and disturbing.  And for me, if I'm optimistic, it's a fantastic way to prove what nutrition can do.  When I discuss with these people, this professor at the university hospitals, they say the  
**[0:45:25-0:45:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:45:25):**  problem is nobody's finding a clinical trial with nutrition.  Yes, Danone, Nestle, the big companies, they do it for one molecule they have patented,  but not for everybody.  Not with real food.  And that is also not accessible.  
**[0:45:42-0:45:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:45:42):**  I want to be conscious of your time and finish with a few questions because I think we can  spend, and I would love to check in, obviously, when the results are going to be published  on this, because I think it's something we all talk about the importance of nutrition  and the importance of how the food you eat has been grown or what you ate, but to see  that actually in clinical trials, to see it in randomized control ones, to see those  
**[0:46:06-0:46:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:46:06):**  results relatively quickly.  You talked about a month in one of those first trials and to see the impact of some relatively  small changes in feed in some cases can have.  But I want to switch a bit to the finance or the investment side of things and ask you  a question which you maybe never thought about until I asked it in the pre-interview.  
**[0:46:25-0:46:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:46:25):**  But if you wake up tomorrow morning and you have a billion euros in your bank account,  but you're an investor, so you cannot give it away, but you have to invest it.  Could be very long term and could be 50 years, 20 years, whatever you want.  How would you invest that one billion euros?  So I understand I cannot take the money and go to the biomass with my wife.  
**[0:46:44-0:46:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:46:44):**  It's not an issue.  If your investments go really well, then you can if you want.  But first you have to get to work.  What would you focus on?  Probably because it was our last conversation, but probably offending clinical trials because  
**[0:46:59-0:47:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:46:59):**  nobody does that, which makes it by definition very, very important.  I mean, there's a framework I use to look at that.  And like it looks at the importance of the problem.  In this case, it's extremely important.  Our nutrition deficits, our nutrition issues.  
**[0:47:14-0:47:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:47:14):**  It looks at if it's fixable, which you've shown, but it also looks at neglectiveness,  like how many other people are doing it.  And you're very clear and nobody's looking at clinical trials of nutrition.  And why it's so important, because I think the consumer, everybody in the world, I started  with the biology, biochemistry, et cetera.  
**[0:47:37-0:47:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:47:37):**  And now I'm very interested in human science, like sociology, math, psychology, et cetera.  The consumer, they pay more, somebody says it's the omnivores dilemma.  We are anxious because if you're a koala, it's not very difficult.  You only eat eucalyptus.  If you're a panda, you're et cetera, et cetera.  
**[0:48:03-0:48:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:48:03):**  The omnivorous people, we are very anxious about food.  And the real question for the consumer's behavior when he changes food, is it good for me?  Is it good for my health?  People are very anxious.  They are very lost.  
**[0:48:22-0:48:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:48:22):**  They don't know what to do.  But if we can provide all the proofs that yes, if you eat blue blocker.  Do you think that's enough?  Let's say you finance a hundred studies or a thousand studies with a billion dollars  or a billion euros.  
**[0:48:43-0:48:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:48:43):**  How do you, I mean, you've done that as well.  Is that enough to really get this from 10% or to five or 7% of the, let's say the animal  protein in France to get to 60, 70, 80%?  Is proof enough or do we need more than proof?  Because you've proven it already.  
**[0:49:00-0:49:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:49:00):**  You've showed it.  It's not enough.  It's just your question was about how to use this money.  And I'm happy that we can do things without money, but for some kind of things you really  need money.  
**[0:49:13-0:49:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:49:13):**  Now I think we have enough people involved in this question that if we really can bring  results that it's linked to human health and they have to take care of this, then they  will pay this 5% more for the eggs, for the salads, for everything.  Because we already do it through medicine.  We already do it through our taxes.  
**[0:49:36-0:49:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:49:36):**  Obviously we do it for superfood that everybody suddenly buys for very crazy prices that don't  do anything or a lot.  And if you pay 5% and you actually get a health benefit, it seems like a really good deal.  And this is the key.  I think the nutritional, the health benefit is the key to pay a little more.  
**[0:49:55-0:50:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:49:55):**  A little is the maximum 5% as I said before, but it's enough to change things on the farmer's  side.  If you receive this money through the fund that we created, of course if I have 1 billion  euros tomorrow, I will probably put it in my fund and then give it to the farmer to  change the way of producing.  
**[0:50:20-0:50:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:50:20):**  But going through the consumer interest, I will not have 1 billion euros every year.  So to use it as a transition fund as we do, of course not with 1 billion euros, but with  the, I don't know.  In the future, in the future.  In the future.  
**[0:50:35-0:50:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:50:35):**  I will probably use it for this transition fund.  Two things I tried to do correctly.  First is probably to fund these nutrition clinical trials to provide the proofs.  Second is to put money in the fund to pay the farmers for the improvements they do in  the way they produce with less carbon footprint, etc.  
**[0:50:59-0:51:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:50:59):**  And after, once you get the results of the trials, I think you will not need to fund  the farmer to produce.  The transition is done and it's probably, I hope, I'm still young so I will probably  see people be concerned and attentive to the nutritional and the environmental quality  of their food.  
**[0:51:19-0:51:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:51:19):**  All kinds of people, not only the 10% of the very involved.  So clinical trial and the transition fund.  And when you say fund, because many people hear different things when we say fund.  I mean, I've interviewed a number of transition funds actually that invest with farmers to  transition their practices and then the farmer pays back.  
**[0:51:40-0:51:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:51:40):**  In this case, it's a payment, but the farmer doesn't pay anything back.  Or did I get that wrong?  No, the farmer don't pay.  Okay.  So it's a grant to the farmer.  
**[0:51:50-0:51:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:51:50):**  It's a payment for ecosystem services coming from.  Exactly.  In this case, a rich person because you have a lot of money when you have a billion euros  on your bank account or big banks or telecom companies, like you said.  Well, it's a question I didn't know, but I think the two things are important because  
**[0:52:07-0:52:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:52:07):**  it's transition fund.  It's only a transition.  At the end, if you have the results of the trials, I think people, because I discussed  with people that say, I eat only free range eggs.  I said, okay, so you take care of the welfare of the hands.  
**[0:52:26-0:52:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:52:26):**  Absolutely not.  But if hands are stressed, they will not give good eggs for me.  And that's typical.  It's not only a sentence.  I think the real interest of people who pay more, it's their own benefit.  
**[0:52:42-0:52:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:52:42):**  It's like this.  We are not so altruist as we would like to be.  It's their own and maybe their family.  That's why I'm doing these interviews and focusing on nutrient density, because if we  can unlock the consumer demand, which you clearly have done with over 2 billion of sales,  
**[0:52:58-0:53:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:52:58):**  then because just as a final, I always say final question, it's never true, but as a  farmer in my interest as a farmer, how much is the extra payment I get through, let's  say I'm raising pigs or eggs in terms of percentage, more or less what it makes it worth for me,  but what do I get extra for basically raising it in this way and being tested on results?  Well, I don't know, but I will give you an example, a true example of pig production,  
**[0:53:26-0:53:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:53:26):**  which is the number one for Bleu Blancqe.  To produce a pig is about 100 kilos and the cost of the Bleu Blancqe specification to  have the obligation of results correct is about 2 to 2.5 euro per pig.  Okay.  No more soybean, no palm oil, no linseed, etc.  
**[0:53:50-0:53:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:53:50):**  And the average payment for the farmer is between 4 to 4.5 euro per pig.  So they receive money to be in accordance to the obligation of means and results and  they receive what we call an incentive because if you produce better quality, it might be  more.  And with this two extra incentive euro, you can do other things for animal behavior, for  
**[0:54:18-0:54:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:54:18):**  animal welfare, for environment, I don't know.  And this is the way we did.  At the beginning, Bleu Blancqe brand was not known by the people who didn't pay more for  it.  And then more and more, we can go from 0% of the cost to 1, 2, 3, etc.  
**[0:54:37-0:54:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:54:37):**  Then the farmer received more money and they can improve things.  That's a transition too.  I really believe in transition and the question about the way to finance it at the large scale  is really interesting.  It's things we think about.  
**[0:54:55-0:54:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:54:55):**  We're going to unpack that in another podcast.  I want to thank you Pierre so much for your time this morning.  I know you have a lot of other things to do.  Thank you, first of all, so much for your work, for sharing.  I will link to as much as possible in the show notes below for people to find out more,  
**[0:55:09-0:55:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:55:09):**  to see if there's a local version of Bleu Blancqe in their country and other ways to  get involved and to understand more of the connection between what you ate and what you  ate ate on your personal health, but also definitely on the planet as a whole.  Thank you so much.  Thank you.  
**[0:55:26-0:55:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:55:26):**  If you would like to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and  agriculture, find our video course on investinginregenativeagriculture.com.  This course will teach you to understand the opportunities to get to know the main players,  to learn about the main trends and how to evaluate a new investment opportunity, like  what kind of questions to ask.  
**[0:55:47-0:55:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:55:47):**  Find out more on investinginregenativeagriculture.com.  If you found the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few  
**[0:56:06-0:56:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:56:06):**  seconds.  Share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  If this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please join my membership  community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on cambrot.com.com or in the description below.  
**[0:56:27-0:56:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:56:27):**  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food.  How to put money to work in regenerating soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while  doing it.  
**[0:56:52-0:56:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:56:52):**  Why are we doing this course?  After a hundred interviews and more than a hundred hours of audio asking the question  how to put money to work in regenerating soils and have been following this space since 2011  and recording this podcast since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in this space over the last years?  
**[0:57:10-0:57:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:57:10):**  How have we built our decision-making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  What questions should you ask?  What is happening in this space?  
**[0:57:20-0:57:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:57:20):**  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  
**[0:57:28-0:57:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:57:28):**  You, the soil builders and investors in this space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management consultants, etc.  People that are building soil at scale.  
**[0:57:48-0:57:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:57:48):**  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  No.  
**[0:58:02-0:58:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:58:02):**  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  that among the listeners of this podcast we have people with very different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  
**[0:58:22-0:58:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:58:22):**  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to ride along.  We're gonna look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  
**[0:58:38-0:58:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:58:38):**  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  
**[0:58:58-0:59:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:58:58):**  We're gonna look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  
**[0:59:12-0:59:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/17/pierre-weill/#t=0:59:12):**  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  