### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2020-00-24)
**[0:00:00-0:00:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com slash course or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  Welcome to another episode of investing in regenerative agriculture investing as if the  planet mattered podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and  
**[0:00:25-0:00:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:00:25):**  agriculture space to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil,  people, local communities and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  
**[0:00:44-0:00:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:00:44):**  And it's time that we as investors, big and small and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  In March last year, we launched our membership community to make it easy for fans to support  our work.  And so many of you have joined as a member.  
**[0:01:01-0:01:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:01:01):**  We've launched different types of benefits, exclusive content, Q&A webinars with former  guests, ask me anything sessions plus so much more to come in the future.  For more information on the different tiers, benefits and how to become a member, check  gumroad.com slash investing region egg or find the link below.  Thank you.  
**[0:01:20-0:01:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:01:20):**  Welcome to for sure a wide ranging interview with friend of the show back after a while.  I think it was probably the beginning of the year, the end of last year.  I'm so happy to have him back here.  He's the chief innovation officer at HowGood, but so much more, including a farmer, obviously  applying regenerative practices.  
**[0:01:36-0:01:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:01:36):**  Welcome back, Ethan Soloveyev.  Thank you, Kim.  Great to be here.  So we have a lot of things to get through and I know you have a hard stop, so we're  going to start immediately.  
**[0:01:45-0:01:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:01:45):**  Let's start with some news as we've done a number of news episodes last year and there  is actually a lot of news.  This is not going to be a full news episode.  We're going to talk about HowGood, what you've launched and everything that's happening  there, but let's get a few, let's say big headlines.  
**[0:01:57-0:02:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:01:57):**  We're talking the 16th of November, 2020.  What's on your mind in terms of region egg or region business in general?  Regeneration is moving very quickly now.  I think we have been in an exponential growth curve for quite some time and wow, can we  see it, especially in the last few months.  
**[0:02:16-0:02:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:02:16):**  There's been some major announcements by really large companies.  Cargo, you know, one of the big four commodity agricultural companies in the world announced  that they were going to 10x what General Mills had said a few years before and they said,  we're putting 10 million acres into regenerative agriculture, or I think they use a similar  language of we're going to advance regenerative agriculture on 10 million acres.  
**[0:02:38-0:02:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:02:38):**  That's pretty significant.  Almost at the same time, might even have been the same week, Walmart announced that it was  going to be a regenerative company.  They didn't even say regenerative agriculture.  They just said we're going to be regenerative company.  
**[0:02:51-0:02:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:02:51):**  And that was surprising, shocking, even hard to believe, certainly, especially I think  because they were not following the trend that had been happening.  So it was like, there's this linear thing and we'll see it later this year when we update  our regenerative agriculture industry, Matt.  I was going to ask you about it.  
**[0:03:07-0:03:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:03:07):**  So there's going to be an update, which is good.  Yes, absolutely.  There's been a growth in the number of companies saying regenerative ag, regenerative ag, regenerative  ag.  And this is almost like a mycelial thing went sideways and went over there.  
**[0:03:18-0:03:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:03:18):**  And we saw little clues of it from the Forum for the Future, did their regenerative agriculture  report funded by the Walmart Foundation earlier in the year.  So there's a little like sense of it.  But then all of a sudden, Walmart comes out and says, we're going to be a regenerative  company.  
**[0:03:33-0:03:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:03:33):**  And what they talked about with that was a good bit of ecological stuff.  They said we plan to be net zero, we're going to conserve this many millions of acres.  But they didn't actually say much about regeneration, certainly not from the deep regenerative business  perspective that has also been growing very quickly.  And so I'm very fascinated to see if they can pull it off.  
**[0:03:55-0:03:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:03:55):**  My hunch is they won't be able to because they haven't really seen any signs except  for a little bit from the CEO that they can think regeneratively.  But it is a clear sign of the growth of the buzzword.  Yeah, we're in the hype cycle, definitely climbing up the hype mountain at the moment.  Actually, and whether or not Walmart does regenerative agriculture or figures out how  
**[0:04:17-0:04:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:04:17):**  to become regenerative, which I hope they do, but I think they have a long way to go  in the business side to do that.  That was a major signal to all of their suppliers and to all of the major companies.  That if you have ingredients, if you have brands that are using ingredients that have  been grown using one to 20 regenerative practices, you can knock on the door and say, look, guys  
**[0:04:39-0:04:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:04:39):**  and girls, we have something you should be selling this because...  And even beyond that, like the general customer awareness that regenerative, what is, I don't  even know what that word means.  Now Walmart saying it, so many CEOs are now thinking, wow, what is that?  So I think one of the things that means is that any interest that we've seen so far in  
**[0:04:58-0:05:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:04:58):**  our work on regenerative agriculture, on regenerative business, on decision-making, on supply chains,  any work you've done on investing in regenerative agriculture, there is a big wave of interest  coming in our direction.  And I don't know, maybe you've experienced a bit of this yourself.  No, absolutely.  
**[0:05:15-0:05:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:05:15):**  I think the podcast was already, I mean, the community and the podcast was already on,  let's say the way up in terms of just sheer amount of downloads, sheer amount of inbound  emails, people reaching out, people calling into the webinars we're doing, the Ask Me  Anything, the people on LinkedIn, et cetera, but definitely COVID and the focus on food  and the focus on environment, especially in our, let's say extended bubble has helped  
**[0:05:37-0:05:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:05:37):**  that like every interview we've published so far has been doing better than the one  before.  And also the ones going back actually are still gaining quite a lot of listeners.  And it's really compared to a year ago, it's a huge, huge growth in sheer number of interactions,  number of listeners, number of people reaching out and number of, not just the number of  
**[0:05:57-0:06:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:05:57):**  people, also the kind of people like really experienced finance people reaching out, like  I want to set up a fund or I want to invest in this and this.  And I've listened to a lot of the episodes and what do you think about that and that?  So there's a lot happening that you maybe don't see on the podcast, like in the public  podcast one, because we publish max one a week, but there's a lot happening on the background  
**[0:06:15-0:06:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:06:15):**  as well.  And there's a lot of interactions happening and investments are happening.  There are people using the podcast as a deal flow source, because it turns out it's a great  way not to do the diligence necessarily, but to build trust.  Like if you spend an hour, an hour and a half with me and a guest, you have a good understanding  
**[0:06:30-0:06:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:06:30):**  if you find that guests and the company interesting or not.  And then you can reach out and people do it like investors reach out.  I know family offices and private investors that reach out either through me and I'm always  happy to introduce, but also directly.  And that's why we do it, like to make money flow to the people that are building things  
**[0:06:45-0:06:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:06:45):**  to regenerate soil scale and oceans, let's not forget.  So it's definitely, I feel that where the wave is catching up, like we're on the surfboard  and you feel that you're going up, although you cannot see it because everything else  is going up as well, but it's starting to bubble a lot faster and more vividly than  it has done.  
**[0:07:02-0:07:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:07:02):**  I mean, since I started following this space in 2011.  It's very exciting.  It's very exciting.  And I think, I mean, it makes me wonder if the, like, if the actual entrepreneurs generating  deals, generating projects, investable opportunities, if that will even grow as fast as the demand  
**[0:07:18-0:07:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:07:18):**  grows.  No, I think it's, you're right.  I think there's a shortage of, I think the money part is exploding.  Like a lot of people trying to get in and we can talk about if they're investing in  a regenerative way.  
**[0:07:28-0:07:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:07:28):**  I mean, many of course are looking for the typical return, the typical speed, the typical  time horizon, et cetera.  And I hope people learn or see that that's not the case here.  Like this, we're talking about real economy.  We're talking about nature.  
**[0:07:41-0:07:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:07:41):**  We're talking about a lot of things that take a longer time or different time horizons.  But I think what we're missing, I'm not missing, but what we absolutely need more of is people  building things in this space.  And by things, I mean, entrepreneurial farmers, I mean, funds, investment vehicles, companies,  food companies, technology, everything else that we need for this revolution is going  
**[0:08:02-0:08:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:08:02):**  to require companies to build things.  And we definitely need more of that because there's going to be a lot of money trying  to get into the space and we need places to put it.  It's almost kind of like, maybe we should start a like a venture studio or something  that actually, you know, we can see it very clearly from both of our perspectives and  
**[0:08:18-0:08:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:08:18):**  we should just start building the companies and maybe raise the fund to do that.  That would be fun.  That would be fun.  We're let's say in the background, we're playing with a few things.  I know a few people that are on the venture studio model and trying to bring it to Regen  
**[0:08:30-0:08:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:08:30):**  Eigenfood.  Shout out to the ones that are listening and know that I'm talking about you.  Hopefully an interview soon.  That's definitely an invite.  And it's, yeah, we need a lot of people that have experience.  
**[0:08:40-0:08:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:08:40):**  I was discussing it this morning with a very successful entrepreneur that turned his attention  and of his team to food and ag.  And we need very experienced people that are experienced too, that have built stuff, that  have gathered teams that have raised potentially money, or at least have built companies.  Could be big, could be small without experiencing building things.  
**[0:08:57-0:09:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:08:57):**  We need them desperately in the Regen Eigenfood space because we're going to need, we're running  out of time and soil.  So we're going to need people that have experience in building larger organizations, could be  NGOs as well, but we need people that have built organisms that can make this change  happen.  
**[0:09:14-0:09:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:09:14):**  So I'm inviting anybody to reach out if you're building such things.  And because there is money in the space, there's going to be a lot more if the wave is correct.  Not all of it is going to be applicable and relevant, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.  But it definitely is a very interesting moment for the sector, honestly.  Just picking up on something you said before about money looking at regenerative things,  
**[0:09:35-0:09:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:09:35):**  but maybe not doing it in a regenerative way.  I thought I would also just call out a small paper published last month that was on this  exact topic of not just what do you invest in, but how do you invest and what's the deeper  why that motivates how you invest on four different levels from a more sort of extract  value to a do less harm to I want to do a bit of good to an actually regenerative way  
**[0:10:01-0:10:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:10:01):**  of investing.  And so that paper is called Food System Investing in a Regenerative Economy.  And it's part of this larger collaborative that I imagine your listeners would be really  interested in, which is called the Regenerative Economy Collaborative and is a community of  practice that is writing on the concept of a regenerative economy from a regenerative  
**[0:10:19-0:10:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:10:19):**  paradigm.  So not just taking an older perspective of finance and saying, well, let's look at regeneration  and write about it, but actually a group of people who have been in some people for 40  years thinking and working in a regenerative way and saying, OK, what if we apply this  way of thinking to the economy?  
**[0:10:38-0:10:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:10:38):**  And so there's been some really cool foundational articles on what it means to be an economic  shaper looking at modern portfolio theory, modern financial theory around regeneration.  So there's a bunch of cool articles of which the one I wrote is just a small piece on these  different levels of investing.  I really like the article.  
**[0:10:55-0:11:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:10:55):**  We'll link it below in the show notes on the website where you can find show notes.  I think it's a crucial point because we cannot apply, quote unquote, traditional investing  because it's not so traditional.  It's relatively recent.  But let's say the model we've been, even the funds we've been using to invest in software  
**[0:11:12-0:11:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:11:12):**  companies.  I mean, it's I think it's ridiculous to imagine that that would work in food companies that  make food as medicine.  Like it's a completely different set of variables.  And then if you apply regenerative thinking to it, you really go four or five, six steps  
**[0:11:26-0:11:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:11:26):**  further.  And I think we it's a continuum in a sense that we have definitely a number of investors  that really, really think deeply about it.  But a big group of like are maybe at step three or four, like they're thinking, OK,  so it was interesting.  
**[0:11:39-0:11:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:11:39):**  Agriculture has to change.  Maybe I have to change slightly how I invest and then slowly you get sucked into it.  I think some people are listening.  No, no.  What I'm talking about.  
**[0:11:48-0:11:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:11:48):**  And it's definitely a much deeper process than simply moving a bit of capital from one  agriculture practice to another, which is absolutely necessary.  Let's remove as much as possible.  But this goes a lot further, which one of the reasons why I like this so much because  you have to start changing the way you think and operate to really imply or imply all the  
**[0:12:09-0:12:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:12:09):**  regenerative practices you want to like it.  You cannot escape the deep philosophical questions almost.  Which is amazing when you talk to farmers that are applying regenerative practices,  especially if they've been doing it for a while.  They're a few of the most philosophical people you ever meet because they really thought  
**[0:12:23-0:12:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:12:23):**  about this stuff.  They thought about emergence.  They thought about how they see it every day.  They thought about observing.  They see nature operating and you cannot help but become very, very philosophical.  
**[0:12:33-0:12:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:12:33):**  I can tell though that we haven't talked for a while because now you're using this term  regenerative practices like it's a thing that doesn't exist.  It doesn't work.  There's no such thing as a regenerative practice.  I know.  
**[0:12:44-0:12:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:12:44):**  I switched from saying regenerative agriculture just as there's no definition, which I keep  pointing to your amazing article on the agriculture continuum.  As a farm that are applying practices, in this case building soil, but that's too long.  So I say regenerative practices, which is also incomplete.  Why don't you say regenerative approaches?  
**[0:13:02-0:13:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:13:02):**  Regenerative approaches is better because when you say practices, that just means the  farming practices that are the best practices everybody does, which doesn't actually work  because they're different in different places.  What a regenerative approach is can actually be the mind and the principles and the decision  methodology and all of that.  
**[0:13:19-0:13:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:13:19):**  And then they may also do some practices, but when you say regenerative practices, it  makes everybody think there's a checklist of regenerative practices.  I just got to do them and then I'm done, which is like the antithesis of I'm allergic to  that idea.  I would try to pay attention to that.  
**[0:13:32-0:13:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:13:32):**  I'm trying to stop saying regenerative agriculture as like, okay, this is regenerative farmer.  I get really allergic when people say that and try to be like, there's not such a thing.  You can be applying practices for the people that don't want to go too deep into the stuff,  but your right approaches is a better term.  At least in English, there's probably better words in all sorts of language, including  
**[0:13:53-0:13:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:13:53):**  the indigenous languages from all over the world that we're doing regenerative agriculture,  horticulture, regenerative life ways for so many thousands and millions of years.  But English is a kind of funny, tricky language.  And so it's all the more important to be that much more focused on it.  But that actually connects to a point that I was going to make just before you started  
**[0:14:12-0:14:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:14:12):**  saying practices again, which is what you were saying about how investors shift and  how they can kind of change.  And you were talking about these different steps and I laid it out in four levels.  I think one of the key things to have that happen, and I'm going this direction because  I think both you and I are working on this, is not just to have it be like an idea that  
**[0:14:32-0:14:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:14:32):**  you read an article and then go do, but to actually grow communities of, I was about  to say practice, communities of practice.  I know, I know, approach, you didn't say approach.  So, you know, communities of practice, communities of integrity, of people who are working together  over time, who commit to coming together to be working their mind, not just talking about  
**[0:14:55-0:15:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:14:55):**  practices, but noticing how do I think, how do I work disrupting that inner regenerative  paradigm that is so key for long-term change because it does take time.  And I think it takes community in order to help evolve up those layers or step through  those steps you were talking about.  Yeah, it's super interesting you bring it up because one of my, I would say one of my  
**[0:15:15-0:15:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:15:15):**  day jobs, that's not true, I spent about a day a week at Tonic working with a lot of  impact investors.  And we just launched the working group specifically on regenerative ag and food.  And it's going to have, I mean, we just launched it, so we don't know how long it's going to  continue, but it's going to have that, at least we're planning to continuous touch points.  
**[0:15:32-0:15:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:15:32):**  And it's part of a lot of other work we're doing to basically take impact investors on  our journey.  And this is a group of impact investors has a deep interest in soil and food.  Some are new to the space.  Some are much more experienced and have made a number of investments, but they're all have  
**[0:15:47-0:15:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:15:47):**  expressed the interest to make more investments.  And we're going to do it together.  We're going to share the flow to diligence and looking at, we at Tonic are facilitating,  we're not doing the investments or the diligence, but bringing our members together that have  a deep interest in this specific topic and facilitate the connections, the learnings,  
**[0:16:03-0:16:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:16:03):**  mistakes, and everything else to slowly start moving more of their portfolios.  They are moving more of their portfolios towards this end.  Of course, we're going to see a lot of different things and a lot of different levels of regeneration,  a lot of different levels of approaches, and that's all fine, but it's also a very big  internal work, which I think through doing deals and looking at things, you're going  
**[0:16:22-0:16:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:16:22):**  to discover a lot of things about the internal work that actually needs to happen on the,  almost in the backend.  Yeah, totally.  And in a similar vein, you know, my work at HowGood is working primarily in the food system  with agriculture, with supply and with some of the largest companies in the world.  
**[0:16:40-0:16:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:16:40):**  And so I have recently launched a regenerative supply innovation working group because so  many companies, both really cool, tiny startups and small but established players.  And then some of the really largest companies in the world have said, we want to do regenerative  agriculture, we want regenerative supply, but there isn't a lot out there.  And so, you know, just like we were talking about, where do we buy our ingredients?  
**[0:17:05-0:17:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:17:05):**  Where do we go to?  Exactly.  The demand is growing much faster than the supply.  And so I just launched an invite only community and asked people to commit for a full year  to come together and work on supply in this innovation working group format that we do  
**[0:17:23-0:17:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:17:23):**  using regenerative business technology.  So it's not, you know, the same kind of multi-stakeholder complex, lowest common denominator approach  that is so prevalent.  There's lots of examples out there.  So I'm doing really great work, but this is a regenerative business way of thinking, but  
**[0:17:40-0:17:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:17:40):**  we're going to have this group that's actually ending up being about 30 different companies  from the largest to the smallest.  And are you looking at specific ingredients or looking at their specific questions around  ingredients or how would that?  Basically the curriculum is designed around each company.  
**[0:17:56-0:17:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:17:56):**  So everybody's going to be bringing their own supply system.  I'm not offering any content.  I'm not going to tell you how to do rice regeneratively or sugar or monk fruit or apples.  I'm not doing any of that content.  Apples you would know actually.  
**[0:18:09-0:18:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:18:09):**  Exactly.  That's where it gets hard is I have to...  Just as a side note, if you don't know, he's an apple farmer as well.  So I'm going to be inviting processes and interactive work and sharing some of the regenerative  thinking frameworks so that each of the companies will work on and develop their own supply  
**[0:18:26-0:18:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:18:26):**  system.  Because if it were just so easy to say, oh, well, here's a regenerative supplier, there's  a regenerative supplier, then I just do that and tell people where it is.  The reality is the supply isn't out there.  And so you have to work in a regenerative way with your company, with the procurement  
**[0:18:40-0:18:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:18:40):**  team, with the R&D team, with the marketing team, and then actually develop your supply  system to match your company, to match your products, to get it out of the marketplace.  And that's not something you can do in a one-off workshop.  That's something that needs a community of people thinking and figuring out how to do  it over time.  
**[0:18:59-0:19:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:18:59):**  And Walmart is part of that, or you haven't said any of that yet?  I can't say exactly who's participating in any of these fully super confidential invite  only.  But still 40 players is a good amount.  30.  
**[0:19:11-0:19:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:19:11):**  30 players, but still huge and small players for sure.  And there's going to be an 80-20 rule, but that is a year, potentially a lot of change,  which some of it they might've done by themselves.  It's not a way you run a control group, but I would be surprised if it didn't speed it  up.  
**[0:19:25-0:19:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:19:25):**  It doesn't like significantly cut down a lot of these things to make it very concrete.  Very interesting.  Yeah.  And I think the commitment is key.  Some people say, Oh, can I just come and try it out?  
**[0:19:37-0:19:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:19:37):**  I'm not sure if I'm going to get value out of it.  Let me just come for one session.  I say, no, you can't do that.  And they pay as well for the full year.  Like it's, yeah, so it's a full education.  
**[0:19:48-0:19:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:19:48):**  You have to commit, you've got skin in the game and you're going to, I say, you have  to show up for all 12 sessions.  And they say, Oh, can I just swap out for a different person?  Cause I can't make this.  So I said, no, you can't do that because it's not like I'm delivering.  
**[0:20:00-0:20:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:20:00):**  I'm not giving you the knowledge.  So that you can watch the webinar recorded.  Exactly.  I'm developing you as an individual person in your capability to see systems and work  towards regeneration and thinking in a regenerative way.  
**[0:20:12-0:20:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:20:12):**  And you have to show up and you have to do the exercise and you have to be thinking on  it in order for that to happen.  You can't just have somebody come in and get that and transfer it.  It's like it's actual human development, but it's about how humans learn over time.  And these are the people who are decision makers that will guide the work that these  
**[0:20:28-0:20:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:20:28):**  companies do.  Super, super cool.  Very interesting.  So I can't say a lot about it, but I wanted to say a little bit about it and also just  say, you know, this one is full and starting this week, but I think based on the interest,  
**[0:20:39-0:20:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:20:39):**  we'll do another one in six months or something like that.  And so, yeah, another cohort.  Yeah.  Very.  So they should, if they want an invite, they should reach out to you.  
**[0:20:48-0:20:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:20:48):**  Exactly.  And then what is Lattice?  I mean, one of the reasons we're doing this check-in interview, and there are always 6  million others, but one of the main reasons we connect often, but we connect to let's  do a check-in is Lattice.  
**[0:21:01-0:21:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:21:01):**  And part of HowGood, can you explain what it is and why it's such a game changer for  the sector?  Yeah, I'm really excited about Lattice.  This is an impact platform.  It's software as a service that brings together basically the last 14 years of HowGood's research  
**[0:21:17-0:21:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:21:17):**  on global supply systems, agriculture, environment, human rights, labor risk, animal welfare,  and brings it all into one database and then puts it immediately into the hands of decision  makers at primarily food producing companies.  There's also Health and Beauty coming, but one large Health and Beauty company has gotten  exclusivity so there won't be Health and Beauty available broadly for a while.  
**[0:21:42-0:21:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:21:42):**  But for food, you know, we're launched and getting it out there.  So I think maybe for listeners who haven't heard about HowGood, I should just say a little  bit there and that'll give context for Lattice.  So HowGood is a tiny venture backed startup that has built the world's largest database  of product and ingredients sustainability.  
**[0:22:01-0:22:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:22:01):**  So we look at 127 individual different sustainability metrics.  We have 33,000 different ingredients, chemicals, and materials in the database.  So that's everything for food.  It's everything for Health and Beauty.  That's everything for packaging.  
**[0:22:16-0:22:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:22:16):**  And then we've pulled over 450 different data sets, which are a huge array of things from,  you know, life cycle assessment data to NGO reports to academic publications.  We've pulled and centralized and harmonized all of this data so that we can rapidly assess  any ingredient and any product in the industry.  We've got a million products already in the database at the individual UPC level, thousands  
**[0:22:43-0:22:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:22:43):**  and thousands of...  Meaning this specific peanut butter and this specific...  Exactly.  Steak, olive oil.  Steak, this specific granola bottle.  
**[0:22:53-0:22:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:22:53):**  Mostly supermarket focused, right?  That's the...  Exactly.  So we have a million of those.  Well, I mean, HowGood started in small natural food and specialty.  
**[0:23:02-0:23:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:23:02):**  So we have a huge number of those really, you know, cutting edge products, but then  we're also working with large players like Ajo Deljes, which has 2000 stores in the US,  4000 stores in Europe.  And you know, we have 95 or greater percent coverage of every single thing in their stores.  So it is broad scale, but then we also are always keeping our eyes on what's popping  
**[0:23:23-0:23:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:23:23):**  the cool innovative brands that are out there and assessing those also.  So for years we've done this, assessing individual products.  But what happened was we realized we're gathering more data than the retailers themselves were  using.  And so then we thought, okay, somebody must be interested in this finer grain data in  
**[0:23:40-0:23:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:23:40):**  not just like, is this a great product for the world or is this just a good product for  the world?  But like how many kilograms of CO2 equivalents per kilogram of this material?  How much water in a stressed area is being used?  What is the specific labor risk and working conditions in the supply chain of all the  
**[0:23:55-0:23:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:23:55):**  20 ingredients in this product?  And so we partnered with Denone and developed this platform called Lattice that basically  takes all of that information and puts it on the screen in front of you at the click  of a button.  So if you're a product developer and you're interested in a new ingredient, I don't know,  
**[0:24:13-0:24:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:24:13):**  sumac or acerola cherry or a monk fruit, but you don't know anything about it, your procurement  team is overloaded, doesn't have time to look into it, your sustainability team's working  on the report, you got to get some information and make a decision about your product.  You just click into Lattice, you type in that ingredient, it pops up and then you can get  any one of these many, many different metrics and instantaneously understand them.  
**[0:24:36-0:24:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:24:36):**  But you don't have to have a degree in ecology or human rights or life cycle assessment in  order to understand it because we use the spectrums.  So just like you've been working on the regenerative agriculture spectrum, we use this concept  of a spectrum from the most degenerative to the most regenerative and have a simple color  scale between them and lay that across greenhouse gas emissions, water, biodiversity, soil health,  
**[0:25:03-0:25:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:25:03):**  labor risk, processing.  So very quickly, without looking at any decimals or really having to know that much, you can  see the colors and go, oh shit, there's a red spot here.  That's high water usage.  Oh no, there's cocoa from West Africa, there's a high labor risk.  
**[0:25:20-0:25:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:25:20):**  So you can very quickly see and then you can improve the product.  So it's great for baselining, right?  You could baseline an entire thousands of products, product portfolio in a matter of  weeks and just have an actual baseline there.  And then you can go into an individual product and say, well, what if I changed out this  
**[0:25:40-0:25:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:25:40):**  almond?  What if I changed out this apple instead of getting a conventional one from China?  What if I got a regenerative one from Chile?  Or what if I got a fair trade organic one from Ecuador?  And then immediately it changes the metrics.  
**[0:25:57-0:26:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:25:57):**  So you can see real time, you don't have to wait six months, you don't have to hire an  outside consultant to check on it.  You just make that change and boom, you can see how the product improves.  And how deep does it go in a sense like, okay, I'll change the one from Chile to Ecuador  for instance.  
**[0:26:11-0:26:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:26:11):**  Is it, I don't think it is, but I'm asking, is it at a farm level in a sense?  Because between farm and farm, obviously it could be enormous differences.  Neighbor and neighbor is a whole different game.  Maybe not because of the labor risk and political risk.  The risk, yes, the actual practices and approaches are different.  
**[0:26:28-0:26:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:26:28):**  How granular do you get with almonds or apples or these ingredients as the difference could  be whatever X?  We can get all the way down to farm level.  If the data is there, I think.  If the data is there.  
**[0:26:42-0:26:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:26:42):**  It's not that you're going to Ecuador and say, okay, this farm is here and that farm.  That is not how goods work, but much of that data is available and through our partners  and through something that's happened more and more, which I want to talk a bit more  about around supply, we're getting more and more detailed data down to the farm level.  But the majority is not the majority starts at these heuristic levels of granularity and  
**[0:27:06-0:27:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:27:06):**  industry averages.  So our approach is we take and can use the most granular level of data that is available.  So if you are a company and you know, you're sourcing from this farm and you have soil  tests and you have modeling from any of the other platforms from cool farm, cool from  the S.A.I. from granular, from anything you have, we can take that very detailed data  
**[0:27:28-0:27:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:27:28):**  and put it into the system and then you can pop it up next to the industry average, next  to the state average, next to, you know, the all the farms that are using organic certification  in that region.  So you can see these multiple layers of detail.  One of the challenges that I think is out there in the world is that many people think  
**[0:27:46-0:27:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:27:46):**  you have to have that farm level data for every single point in your supply chain.  And that's impossible.  You just nobody has that yet.  And so then people are stuck.  They stop and they say, well, we could never know all that.  
**[0:27:58-0:27:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:27:58):**  So we're not going to make any decisions.  That is a that's a waste of time.  We don't have time for that in the world right now.  We need to clean up way faster and then get better over time.  Exactly.  
**[0:28:07-0:28:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:28:07):**  So we give you highly accurate directional information right from the start.  Because if you swap like the worst two or three ingredients and you swap them for a  lot better one, for sure, like your average score changes dramatically because it's in  the worst ones where probably the most negative impact is and not just the top one or two  ingredients you use and you're you're super happy about because they already fair trade  
**[0:28:28-0:28:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:28:28):**  and organically certified and ROC, et cetera, et cetera.  Exactly.  So we'll work with whatever data is there.  And then over time, like if you don't know anything about many times, you know, various  companies that we have talked to and work with, they don't actually know where their  
**[0:28:44-0:28:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:28:44):**  supply.  They don't know where in the country it's coming from, which is understandable because  of the opacity and complexity of the global supply system.  So that's where you start.  We start there and we can actually many times companies will come to us and say, you don't  
**[0:28:56-0:28:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:28:56):**  know where our sugar is coming from.  We haven't told you that.  They say, well, yeah, so where is it coming from?  They say, well, we don't know either, but let's go check with our suppliers and say,  OK, before you go, let me tell you this.  
**[0:29:06-0:29:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:29:06):**  We think based on where your manufacturer and the scale and what your manufacturing,  you are most likely sourcing that cane sugar from Dominican Republic and go ask your suppliers  that.  And then they'll come back and they'll say, how did you know that's where we were sourcing?  And that's the power of the heuristics that How Good is Built is even if you don't know,  
**[0:29:26-0:29:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:29:26):**  we actually probably do know where it's coming from and some details about how it's produced.  And then over time, if you can get more details from your supplier or directly, then we can  add that in and the system gets more and more precise.  But there's no excuses for not getting a look at it now and starting to make decisions in  the right direction.  
**[0:29:46-0:29:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:29:46):**  You have to start mapping.  We're just as honestly as impact investors.  There's no excuse now for not mapping your portfolio and have a good understanding of  what you actually invested in.  And there might be some nasty surprises and skeleton in the closet.  
**[0:29:59-0:30:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:29:59):**  You thought, I'm really still part of that fossil fuel company.  And how did I actually and they probably have more damage than your amazing few angel investments  into something solar, et cetera.  You can never do like clean up, get to a good baseline and start going deeper from there.  But the cleaning up part or getting into a good overview, like having an understanding  
**[0:30:18-0:30:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:30:18):**  what you actually own.  I know Lisa Pritzker always like actually do a good research into what you own and then  start from there.  But unless you know that, unless you know what kind of ingredients you're even buying  and where they're from, where do you start going and improve from there?  
**[0:30:33-0:30:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:30:33):**  Very interesting.  And I'm sure one of the things your listeners are thinking about right now is, could you  combine forces with what Koon just said and what Ethan was talking about and do how good  software for investments?  And I'm going to say yes, but don't email me about it right now because I saw a button  
**[0:30:50-0:30:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:30:50):**  on there for investors.  Actually, there's so much interest and we are working on it.  It's harder with investment portfolios than it is with food products because you know,  so many funds, you can't see exactly what it is.  Or even if you know what the funds are investing in, you can't see exactly where the holdings  
**[0:31:06-0:31:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:31:06):**  are.  So I've been doing some, I've done some methodology and been working with some really cool folks  thinking about this to build out some of the modeling portfolios that would basically allow  you to type in a ticker symbol and then see what the impact is in all of these different  metrics.  
**[0:31:20-0:31:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:31:20):**  So that's on the way.  It's not here yet.  The public side is probably easier because there's so much data on the private side is  where it gets really, really common.  It's what we see at least internally, like we're mapping a lot of the portfolios of our  
**[0:31:32-0:31:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:31:32):**  members, which they share with us voluntarily, obviously.  And it's really, really difficult to, and we're building some pieces, I will put a link  in on Tonic Tracer.  We're building some pieces of software on that on both sides.  So basically let the investor declare why they made that investment, both on the impact  
**[0:31:47-0:31:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:31:47):**  theme level and the SCG level, because it could be very, very different.  And then going to the investment or the investment fund and ask the same thing like, what are  you tracking?  What are your metrics?  What are your KPIs?  
**[0:31:57-0:32:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:31:57):**  And hopefully if we do that enough times, then we don't have to ask that fund again  because they already mentioned it.  So we get a database with at least all the impact funds and let's say the larger direct  deals, et cetera, that have declared what they are tracking.  Are they tracking inequality?  
**[0:32:10-0:32:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:32:10):**  Are they tracking CO2?  Are they tracking of their portfolio companies, of their company themselves, et cetera, et  cetera.  So not every single investor who is going to reach out again and ask, okay, are you  tracking that?  
**[0:32:20-0:32:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:32:20):**  Can you please go back?  That needs to be, I wouldn't say centralized, but database somewhere because we need to  know and pension funds need to know, investors need to know, and it needs to be tracked.  You'd be surprised how much of it is tracked and how sometimes how little of it is tracked.  Like, okay, just seeing the inequality data, like how many female founders do you have  
**[0:32:40-0:32:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:32:40):**  in your fund?  And many people have not even asked that question ever.  And it's really, it starts with that question, just asking it.  Well, and then this can actually connect something to, which is the next level of Lattice.  So my role is chief innovation officer.  
**[0:32:54-0:32:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:32:54):**  So we've designed Lattice two years ago.  It launched with Danone as a primary partner.  There's a bunch of others that are coming online.  There's also a number of other companies that are using the data that sits behind Lattice  even to communicate publicly.  
**[0:33:06-0:33:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:33:06):**  So Chipotle restaurant, fast casual, excellent restaurant here in the U S with really high  quality standards on its sourcing is also using the data behind it and they're putting  it on their receipts.  Every time you buy a burrito or you buy a bowl, you actually get some numbers about  the relative amount, less of CO2 that went into the atmosphere.  
**[0:33:25-0:33:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:33:25):**  It's powered by how good data is powered directly by how good data.  So there's a lot more use cases of this.  This is also something I see that's happening, not just how good is doing this, but that  sort of information insight on carbon footprint is going to be growing very, very, very quickly.  True price did a pop-up shop in Amsterdam.  
**[0:33:42-0:33:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:33:42):**  Like what is this coffee actually cost and what does this, and they put like the real  cost and then the actual climate cost plus social, et cetera.  And I think there's a discount discount supermarket in Germany that has been communicating the  real price, which you would never expect from this country, but they have been communicating  the real cost actually of your chocolate bar, of your bag of potatoes, of your, and I made  
**[0:34:02-0:34:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:34:02):**  quite some headlines.  I will see if I can find a link.  Expect to see this growing significantly and how good has some other offerings that are  about to launch in this space.  But the thing that we're really heading towards that I'm now turning my attention onto is  
**[0:34:18-0:34:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:34:18):**  how do you build up the supplier side of our database so that when you find out, Oh, a  fair trade organic chocolate is actually going to score a lot better in the system.  Well, what suppliers, what co-ops have fair trade organic chocolate at the scale that  you need it to produce or, Oh, you want, you know, a dry farm Spanish almond.  Well, where do you actually get that?  
**[0:34:40-0:34:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:34:40):**  So now what we're building out and the first thing we're going to do, and the reason I'm  mentioning it here is because some of your listeners are from the production and supply  side of things.  We're not going to try to boil the ocean and put every single supplier in the world of  every type of material that's out there.  
**[0:34:56-0:34:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:34:56):**  We're going to start with the regenerative supply.  So anyone who's out there who's actually producing high quality or even heading toward transitional  to regenerative, we're going to get you into the database first so that our partners, small  brands and large bands can click in and say, Oh, exactly here, this will make my product  better, but where do I get this?  
**[0:35:16-0:35:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:35:16):**  Here's a link to, you know, this supplier or that supplier that might actually have  that available.  And that's the next thing I'm working on building is the supplier side of the database.  Super exciting.  We have to check in way more often than this, and we have to be very conscious of your time  
**[0:35:30-0:35:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:35:30):**  because you have another call coming up and I want to ask the last question that I've  been asking, but I never asked you is what if you would wake up tomorrow and you have  a 1 billion, we mentioned it with a bit with the venture studio, but what if you would  have a $1 billion investment fund and you'll be free to invest it, whatever you like, what  would that portfolio look like?  
**[0:35:49-0:35:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:35:49):**  I think I would launch a venture studio for each major climate geographic zone in the  world and have them centered in that place on a farm.  Yeah, probably on a farm.  Like one of the things about regenerative agriculture is that it is unique to each place  and expresses the essence of each place.  
**[0:36:10-0:36:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:36:10):**  So I think, you know, starting one in each major geographic climactic zone would be a  good, like a Mediterranean one and a deep tropics one and a, you know, like colds tundra  one, right?  You'd have each of those, but then one of the things that those would be tasked with  doing is understanding the different life sheds, not just watersheds.  
**[0:36:32-0:36:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:36:32):**  Watersheds is like a, it's the wrong way to think about it, separating out water from  the rest of life.  But it's easy when a drop falls here and where does it go?  I mean, people, it's a linear thing.  Yeah.  
**[0:36:41-0:36:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:36:41):**  Right.  So we'd be able to see a whole life shed, the economic, historical, cultural, biological,  ecological, spiritual, psychological, you know, entity of life.  So we'd find those different life sheds all over the world and support each of them to  be growing investment communities within them.  
**[0:36:59-0:37:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:36:59):**  So the most powerful thing I would do with investment is multiply the investment by growing  these life shed centric investment communities.  And I read a little bit about this in the article we talked about.  Okay.  That's one thing.  
**[0:37:10-0:37:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:37:10):**  I think it's a good approach and I wouldn't, I don't think I'd spend any money on the government  side of things on policy.  A lot of people think policy is a good idea.  I agree.  I think it's really important.  
**[0:37:18-0:37:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:37:18):**  It's not for me.  I'm going to take a business route.  A lot of people are doing it.  I think if you look at the, my decision making framework or my, it's of effective altruism,  et cetera, is it neglected?  
**[0:37:29-0:37:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:37:29):**  Is it, is I think the most crucial question and policy, I'm very happy other people are  doing it.  Let's say a lot of people decide why you're not interviewing people of the European Union,  et cetera.  It's just not for me.  
**[0:37:41-0:37:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:37:41):**  And I think luckily a lot of attention is going there, but sorry, go ahead.  I think, well, I think you and I both have a bias for action.  And so we see that the investment states and the business phase are places where action  can happen quickly without getting a lot about.  And so that's actually where I would put some of the rest of that billion dollars is use  
**[0:37:59-0:38:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:37:59):**  it as an instrument to get deep connection with the CEOs and boards of the major companies  in the world that have to do with agriculture.  Because when you can get CEO and board level thinking change on not just like, oh, we should  do regenerative agriculture, but as we discussed earlier, you know, I want those people committing  to an amount of time in a room each month together with their top people, regenerating  
**[0:38:29-0:38:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:38:29):**  how they think about agriculture, about supply, about investment, because that is what will  quickly shift the whole.  And you can look at, I think Paul Polman, you know, from Unilever now has something  that is basically aiming to do this.  I wouldn't do it exactly the same way and it would be more from a regenerative place,  
**[0:38:46-0:38:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:38:46):**  but something along those lines I think would be a really, really key.  And then I probably invest, there's a bunch of just purely to make money off that billion.  There's a whole bunch of, I think really cool farmland investments that are more mature  that we don't need as much research.  We don't need as much, you know, venture development, but there are perennial cropping systems in  
**[0:39:06-0:39:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:39:06):**  each climate in the world.  And I would do, you know, a regenerative real estate model similar to, you know, or along  the lines of what Paul at SLM and some of the other great folks that you've interviewed  in the funds are doing.  But there's a couple of tweaks towards perennial crops that I would focus on and then also  
**[0:39:24-0:39:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:39:24):**  continue to think about the investment value of the real estate itself and finding ways  to monetize that as well as the production.  Because I never really want to be trying to pull investment money off of farmers back,  but I think there's some tested ways we could get a lot.  So that would be probably like 50%, 30%, 20% I think is how to do that.  
**[0:39:45-0:39:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:39:45):**  So if anybody has a mirror laying around, you can also definitely reach out to Ethan  and it will be a fun manager tomorrow morning.  It will be a lot of fun.  I like the question because I mean, you're used to think about numbers and larger numbers,  but some people in the space are not.  
**[0:40:00-0:40:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:40:00):**  And I love that decision making where, okay, what would you focus on because you cannot  do everything and a billion is large enough to sort of say, okay, a million doesn't really  matter.  So I really need some kind of structure and decision making framework and focus to do  this.  
**[0:40:14-0:40:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:40:14):**  Otherwise it just, I would just get drowned and it triggers interesting thoughts.  It's not because it's a billion, it could be a hundred billion, it could be a hundred  million.  It doesn't really matter.  It just needs to be a large amount enough to trigger somebody to say, okay, I need some  
**[0:40:25-0:40:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:40:25):**  kind of prioritization.  Otherwise I just get lost.  And with that, I think we're done for this session.  We're going to be back soon.  I think, I don't think it should last.  
**[0:40:35-0:40:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:40:35):**  It should be as long as we did last time.  I think it's almost a year at the end of last year when we did the map, actually, there  was when we did the map launch.  So we should check in around that again.  Any last thoughts for this version?  
**[0:40:46-0:40:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:40:46):**  I do have one last thought that's in a different direction than we've touched most of this,  but I'll just put it out there.  There's been criticism towards regenerative agriculture recently, especially after case  the ground came online and a whole bunch of things.  And I think for good reason, there's been some questions about the integrity and the  
**[0:41:04-0:41:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:41:04):**  whitewashed nature of regenerative agriculture, basically taking the work of black and indigenous  and Latino and Asian farmers and people of color all over the world who have been doing  incredible agricultural practices and approaches and life ways for a really long time.  We had Chris Newman on the show a few weeks ago, which was great.  I think this is a really cool place for everyone to explore how goods innovation series is  
**[0:41:30-0:41:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:41:30):**  following this thread.  We have a number of amazing indigenous black people of color, farmers and people from all  over the food system speaking on this, especially from an angle of biodiversity and cultural  diversity.  And so those are free.  
**[0:41:44-0:41:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:41:44):**  That's how goods innovation series online.  You can find that.  We can put that in the show notes.  But then also just digging into that realm and understanding what is the indigenous ancestry  of each crop, of each product, of each place that you're in and just going on a, a not  
**[0:42:00-0:42:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:42:00):**  triggered and not defensive and not, uh, don't do white fragility and just really like dig  into it and grieve and learn.  And there's so much beauty there and there's so much healing that can come, but not if  I as a white person coming in as a savior, as a missionary, right?  With my mission based business.  
**[0:42:19-0:42:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:42:19):**  Now we found a solution.  Everybody listened.  Yeah.  So that's not going to work.  And I think there's a lot of really good learning to happen for everybody.  
**[0:42:27-0:42:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:42:27):**  And there are a lot of very interesting people doing stuff.  Instagram is the best place to find them.  I have to say it's fascinating.  I think there's some great work there and go check that out along with investing billions  of dollars and transforming global supply.  
**[0:42:41-0:42:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:42:41):**  It's been great to be on again.  Super, I very much looking forward to checking into it again and have a great day.  If you would like to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and  agriculture, find our video course on investing in regenerative agriculture.com slash course.  This course will teach you to understand the opportunities to get to know the main players,  
**[0:43:03-0:43:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:43:03):**  to learn about the main trends and how to evaluate a new investment opportunity.  Like what kind of questions to ask.  Find out more on investing in regenerative agriculture.com slash course.  If you found the investing in regenerative agriculture and food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  
**[0:43:23-0:43:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:43:23):**  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast.  And it only takes a few seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you, and if you have the means, please  
**[0:43:39-0:43:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:43:39):**  join my membership community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on cambro.com slash investing region egg or in the description  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  
**[0:44:07-0:44:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:44:07):**  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course after a hundred interviews and more than a hundred hours of  audio asking the question how to put money to work in regenerating soils and have been  following the space since 2011 and recording these podcasts since 2016 we thought it was  
**[0:44:29-0:44:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:44:29):**  time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework what to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees and what questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  
**[0:44:43-0:44:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:44:43):**  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space for whom is this course you the soil builders and investors  in this space, the soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund  
**[0:44:58-0:45:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:44:58):**  managers, vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, act tech companies, farm  to gut food companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management, consultants,  etc, etc.  People that are building soil at scale and the investors who are putting their own money  to work through their family office or as private individuals or people who are putting  
**[0:45:17-0:45:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:45:17):**  other people's money to work through foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies,  etc.  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  
**[0:45:28-0:45:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:45:28):**  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very different means.  So I'm inviting you if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  
**[0:45:46-0:45:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:45:46):**  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides.  So you don't have to ride along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  
**[0:46:06-0:46:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:46:06):**  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  
**[0:46:26-0:46:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:46:26):**  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  
**[0:46:37-0:46:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/24/ethan-soloviev-2#t=0:46:37):**  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  