### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2020-00-08)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  Welcome to another episode of investing in regenerative agriculture, investing as if  the planet mattered.  
**[0:00:21-0:00:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:00:21):**  Podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities  and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  
**[0:00:42-0:00:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:00:42):**  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  In March last year, we launched our membership community to make it easy for fans to support  our work.  
**[0:00:59-0:01:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:00:59):**  And so many of you have joined as a member.  We've launched different types of benefits, exclusive content, Q&A webinars with former  guests, ask me anything sessions, plus so much more to come in the future.  For more information on the different tiers, benefits and how to become a member, check  gumroad.com slash investing region ag or find the link below.  
**[0:01:18-0:01:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:01:18):**  Thank you.  Welcome to another episode.  Today with Frank Wooten, founder of Fence, livestock production reinvented, virtual fencing  and autonomous animal control.  And then they have an amazing subline, which is double your profit with Fence.  
**[0:01:32-0:01:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:01:32):**  Welcome Frank.  How's it going this morning?  Very good.  We have a lot to unpack there.  I'm very interested in the double your profit, obviously, but also the autonomous animal  
**[0:01:39-0:01:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:01:39):**  control.  But let's start with your story first.  You didn't start in soil.  How did you end up going after farmers' profits, soil building and even carbon in the last  few years?  
**[0:01:51-0:01:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:01:51):**  Yeah, like most people's entrepreneurial path, it's a bit circuitous.  So I actually my first career, first life was in finance.  And so I was one of those people that everybody loves to hate, worked on Wall Street for six  years and then actually was on the investment side for another six years.  Always focused on small companies.  
**[0:02:13-0:02:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:02:13):**  And when I kind of started looking around for my next foray or next entree and what  it wanted to do, I ended up looking for something that actually, like most people do, had felt  like it had more purpose and felt like it was one of these things that had more meaning.  I ended up landing at a startup.  Actually I was in Brazil at the time.  
**[0:02:35-0:02:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:02:35):**  I was focused on health insurance tech and I was approached via my now co-founder with  this idea for an angel investment in this crazy idea of putting a collar on cattle and  like removing the need for fences.  And at the time I just kind of said, well, I've got no insight into ag, I've got no background  into any of these things, but it sounds intriguing at a minimum.  
**[0:02:58-0:03:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:02:58):**  Let me just kind of dig in, so to speak.  And the more time that I spent on it, the more interest that I got.  Being in Brazil at the time and working down there, you have access to kind of one of the  largest beef markets in the world, so you can get out on farms fairly easily and see  the magnitude of this, of the problem.  
**[0:03:18-0:03:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:03:18):**  My direct response to how to get into soil is actually, it started with the size of the  opportunity.  It started with kind of like there's a billion head of cattle out there on the planet and  there's three plus billion total livestock and it's like this massive opportunity space.  And fencing is what was the control mechanism for all of those animals.  
**[0:03:41-0:03:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:03:41):**  And so the magnitude of the opportunity is what really sucked me in.  And that fencing was this sense of control and sense of enhanced profitability, which  I certainly understood from my background, right?  It was this financial lens that I was looking at it through.  And then what happened over time is that I really started to understand that soil was  
**[0:04:05-0:04:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:04:05):**  the mechanism, which it was the translation mechanism for increased productivity on a  farm and that fencing was just one of the tools in the toolkit, animals being another  one that are really helping this kind of translation mechanism.  And so it's been an indirect path, but I'm squarely there now.  And when was Brazil for you?  
**[0:04:30-0:04:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:04:30):**  When are we talking?  When was this?  So this was 2015, 2016.  So we started the business.  I took a while, it took me about six months.  
**[0:04:39-0:04:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:04:39):**  And at that point in time, I'd gone from like skeptical angel investor to like, okay, I  want to take this thing and run with it.  Like it's just this really amazing opportunity.  And that was mid to late October, mid to late October 2016 that we formed the company.  So there was a company already that you ended up investing in or it was just an idea?  
**[0:05:02-0:05:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:05:02):**  There was no company.  So I kind of invested and launched the company at the same time.  And what is fence?  Because you talked about a collar and then fencing.  And I think some people are wondering this autonomous animal control thing that Kun said  
**[0:05:14-0:05:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:05:14):**  at the beginning, what is fence and walk us through and make it as visual as possible  because we're in audio, obviously.  Yeah.  Most people have some concept of an invisible fence for dogs.  A lot of people kind of have this visual where the dog has a collar and there's generally  
**[0:05:32-0:05:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:05:32):**  a wire in the ground.  And if that dog walks up to near where that wire is, they hear a sound.  And if they go over that wire, they'll get an electric stimulus.  We've done that except there is no wire in the ground.  It's all based on GPS.  
**[0:05:49-0:05:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:05:49):**  And it's obviously you need to magnify, increase the size of that for cattle.  So we've built this kind of end-to-end system where you can hop on your computer browser,  draw up a fence line.  That fence line gets sent down to a collar in the middle of your pasture.  And you can program it to turn on, turn off, or move animals from one place to another  
**[0:06:14-0:06:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:06:14):**  via the utilization of sound.  So cattle are much smarter than most people give them credit for.  They learn really quickly to respond to sound.  And so the only visuals that I have for you are really the collar that you can kind of  envisage.  
**[0:06:29-0:06:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:06:29):**  Just to imagine for people, so you see this herd of cows that have a collar around their  neck and the farmer is basically programmed a virtual fence.  There's no real fence.  So it's just an enormous open space, potentially with trees, potentially not, depending on  the field.  
**[0:06:42-0:06:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:06:42):**  And the farmer decides today, I'm moving the cows to the next virtual field to the right,  or I'm wanting to move them to the right, draws that square.  And the sound in the collar is basically it starts buzzing or such making a sound that  at some point the cow moves to the right direction and stops when the cow is at the new place  we like them to be.  
**[0:07:01-0:07:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:07:01):**  But without any fencing, without any dogs, without any helicopters, without any person  or something pushing them there, they move that in itself.  It's somewhat romantic when you get to see it actually out in the field, right?  Because you're like, I want the animals to be here, but I don't want to have the fence  line there.  
**[0:07:16-0:07:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:07:16):**  I want to have all of this occurring and you can see animals just move from one space to  another without the need for any physical intervention as it relates to you.  Because now often they will touch the fence line, which is electric.  If you are doing adaptive grazing, rotational grazing, et cetera.  And of course they get some electric stimulus, as you call that.  
**[0:07:36-0:07:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:07:36):**  And they know, okay, we're not going past here.  We're moving to the right or to the left or wherever you want to go.  So they're moving by themselves.  And I wanted to ask the third question immediately, how annoying is it for the animal?  Yeah.  
**[0:07:48-0:07:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:07:48):**  It's like all cattle learn the way that they learn electric fence is actually they put  their nose on it.  Which seems pretty annoying.  Yeah.  It's very annoying.  
**[0:07:59-0:08:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:07:59):**  Annoying would be a mild word, right?  It's training them via aversive Pavlovian training.  So you're basically saying you now have a visual stimulus that you're correlating to  that and stay away from this.  What our order of magnitudes of an electric fence will generally be somewhere in the order  
**[0:08:20-0:08:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:08:20):**  of magnitude of 3000 to 8000 volts, depending on if you're running cows versus bulls versus  steers, et cetera.  Yeah.  What I have bison year up at the top in there.  And then we're about 800 volts is what the stimulus is.  
**[0:08:35-0:08:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:08:35):**  And we've done a bunch of different cortisol tests on animals and looked at kind of change  in behavioral patterns.  And there are a number of studies that are out there that have been done on this.  And there's actually no differentiation in terms of kind of stress on animals.  How annoying is it?  
**[0:08:53-0:08:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:08:53):**  I mean, it's annoying, right?  Like you got a hundred volt stimulus, you'd avoid that sound.  But the reality is that's how animals are trained right now.  It's not.  So it's a shock or it's a sound or it's both.  
**[0:09:04-0:09:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:09:04):**  A sound and stimulus is what trains the animal.  And then 95 percent of the time after that, it's just sound, just sound.  OK, it's like the proverbial a lot of kids put their hand on the stove before they learn  that that's hot and then they shouldn't anymore.  But you always have a couple of kids who put their hand on the stove a couple of times.  
**[0:09:24-0:09:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:09:24):**  And then after it's the heat that makes you feel it.  Exactly.  That's what happens for us.  It ends up being largely sound that controls animals.  So it saves an enormous amount of fencing.  
**[0:09:34-0:09:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:09:34):**  I was going to ask you, you said three billion heads of cattle in the world.  Like, have you ever done like do we know how much fencing there is?  One billion, but three plus billion.  If you have 900 million sheep, 400 million goats.  Do we know how much fence line there is in the world?  
**[0:09:48-0:09:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:09:48):**  I've spent a lot of time going down to Google rat hole.  OK, so if anybody has that data, would be nice.  Send it over.  But so do we don't.  But it's a lot.  
**[0:09:56-0:09:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:09:56):**  For sure.  It's a lot.  It's a significant amount of fence line.  And it's mostly this really nasty barbwire.  Like, it's not just to keep livestock in, but also there's an enormous amount of wildlife  
**[0:10:06-0:10:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:10:06):**  that gets trapped in all of that.  Yeah.  So I think it's a it's been since people really started this and you've got fence lines, fence  line.  I kind of like to joke around and say it's a 10000 plus year old technology because you  
**[0:10:21-0:10:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:10:21):**  can go to throughout Europe.  We obviously we don't have as much of this like super steeped history and fencing in  the US.  But the sophistication of wildlife and you go to you go in in Ireland, you'll see these  old rock fences that have been up for thousands of years.  
**[0:10:39-0:10:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:10:39):**  And the newest technology that happened and you had the barbed wire was invented in the  eighteen hundreds, which helped tame the American West.  And then the electric fence was invented in kind of the late 1930s, 1940s.  But it's taken a while to get adopted as well.  So you save a lot of fencing, but that's not why we're so excited about this.  
**[0:10:59-0:11:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:10:59):**  We're excited because of other reasons.  Why is it so amazing for the farmer apart from fencing, which is an enormous cost and  enormous headaches, etc.  But if you start to go to virtual fencing, you suddenly unlock an amount of opportunities  that I at least never thought of until I started to think this through a bit.  
**[0:11:16-0:11:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:11:16):**  So talk us through what makes this possible for a farmer or rancher.  Yeah, I think like one of the things that like that people who aren't on the farm don't  necessarily think about is like with fencing, creating a static solution to actually a dynamic  problem.  And as we know everywhere else in our lives, that doesn't work particularly well.  
**[0:11:38-0:11:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:11:38):**  It's a you know, and what I mean by that is like even over the course of a year, if everything  is exactly the same in terms of precipitation and climate patterns over the course of the  year during that year, you need different fencing based on what the growth is in your  pastures because you've got springtime, you've got winter and yet since people make a $10,000  a mile physical fence investment in it, they just kind of say, okay, well, we're going  
**[0:12:07-0:12:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:12:07):**  to use this.  It's the solution that we have.  This is what we're going to use.  And so the ability to adapt, which is like, you know, amp grazing, you know, but like  the ability to adapt to what the climate is telling you to what the season is telling  
**[0:12:20-0:12:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:12:20):**  you and to what your animals are.  Just amp grazing is adaptive multi-product grazing just for the, for the senior.  But the ability to adapt, observe is very different if you have no fencing.  Exactly.  And then what that allows you to do, like if you think about why farmers utilize fencing  
**[0:12:44-0:12:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:12:44):**  and we're going to get, you know, I'll start diving into this a little bit here, but like  livestock farmers are grass farmers.  It's a grass factory and their goal is how to optimally translate solar energy into grass  growth is kind of the equation that they need for maximum productivity.  And the cattle are the worker bees that are a taking that grass and translating it into  
**[0:13:12-0:13:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:13:12):**  a consumable product, whether that's meat or milk, but they're also optimizing what  its growth patterns look like.  So they're, they're grooming it.  And if you think about grass, so like you get into why fencing is needed, you, it's  about your grass growth patterns and how grass optimally translates into a solar panel.  
**[0:13:32-0:13:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:13:32):**  You go dig a little bit further and you say, okay, well yeah, it kind of makes sense if,  if grass is at stubble, it has no solar panel.  If grass actually gets to this past its peak growth, you can actually see it in a field  where it starts to bend over and it starts to have dead leaves on the end and its growth  pattern is reduced.  
**[0:13:52-0:13:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:13:52):**  And so all of that means there is an optimal growth period at which you should have animals  be grooming that grass.  And that's what fencing is for.  That's the purpose of fencing on a livestock farm.  And if you are dealing with a static solution to that, which is permanent existing fences,  
**[0:14:12-0:14:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:14:12):**  you are unable to optimally manage your property for productivity.  So from our customer's perspective, it's really a productivity and yield question as it relates  to fencing.  And what we enable customers to do is really dynamically, really quickly fix that and have  the ability to change that without the need for infrastructure or labor.  
**[0:14:36-0:14:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:14:36):**  So it's a tool that's in their toolbox that previously was just completely unfathomable.  Talk us through an example, one of your customers.  What does that mean for the farmer, the bottom line, the company, the family?  What does this enable somebody to do in an interesting, I mean, you have many, obviously,  but in an interesting example, what is one that sticks out when somebody asks you, OK,  
**[0:14:59-0:15:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:14:59):**  tell me about a real life example.  A great example is one of our customers who we love.  All of our customers are kind of really interesting and cool individuals and Leo, this guy, Leo  Barthelmus up in Montana on Barthelmus Farm.  He's up in northern Montana and he's owned his property for now almost 60 years.  
**[0:15:23-0:15:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:15:23):**  And over the course of that, so he bought the farm, it was 35,000 acres basically, and  it was four pastures.  At that time, he's got a couple hundred animals on that piece of property.  He's kind of looking at it and over the course of 50 years, he went from four pastures to  30.  
**[0:15:43-0:15:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:15:43):**  And the reason it took so long to do that is because of how much money and how much  labor is required to set up that fencing, as well as you just not having the ability  to manage those animals between one area and another.  So you have to move the animals from paddock to paddock.  You have to be able to get in there and monitor.  
**[0:16:03-0:16:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:16:03):**  There's so many other things that he had to do.  He just didn't have resources to increase the intensity of management on that property.  And so in an actual basis over those years, he put up the equivalent of, call it 10 miles  of fencing, a little bit more than that.  We put our product out on his property last November.  
**[0:16:24-0:16:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:16:24):**  So one year ago.  Yeah.  Yeah.  So one year ago, actually, exactly right now.  We actually just went up there and shot some video with him just on his property because  
**[0:16:32-0:16:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:16:32):**  it's snowing.  We've got cattle out grazing in the snow.  And the first six months of putting our product in his pastures across his herd, we put up  the equivalent of 40 miles of fencing.  So we did 4x what he was able to do in 50 years in six months for the cost of a mile  
**[0:16:53-0:16:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:16:53):**  and a half of fencing.  And so the ability for him to change how he was able to put pressure on his landscape,  how that translates to his bottom line, which is critical for us to even have a business,  is that at the end of the year, when he looks at his property and he's looking at what his  feed reserves are, OK, it's wintertime in Montana.  
**[0:17:18-0:17:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:17:18):**  And we've got to either go buy feed or we have to have feed on the ground that exists  or we need to have baled hay, he would historically go out and have to have to spend hundreds  of thousands of dollars over the coming months to support his animals' growth and weight.  And he's actually not 100% there, but he's almost to the point where that's all produced  on his farm.  
**[0:17:41-0:17:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:17:41):**  And we think that, like all regenerative ag products, there's a little bit of time that  it takes nature to adapt to changes in productivity.  So this isn't something that's going to happen 100% overnight.  But you know that over the course of the next year, he's going to be at a self-sustaining  entity, which for him on the bottom line means that we've paid for ourselves seven to 10  
**[0:18:06-0:18:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:18:06):**  times over in a very short period.  And then we'll continue to pay for ourselves over each year and subsequently.  And this brings up a nice question.  How does the business model work?  Do I rent the collars, does every animal need one?  
**[0:18:20-0:18:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:18:20):**  And does I just rent one per year or something per animal?  Or how does it practically work?  Yeah, so we lease the collars to customers.  We view, I call it the iPhone issue that you face with technology on farms is that like,  everybody knows there's going to be a new version of your product at some point in the  
**[0:18:37-0:18:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:18:37):**  future.  And since we're replacing a 10,000 year old technology, people are kind of like, Oh, well,  I can wait until generation two, or maybe even generation three.  And so to short circuit that kind of as a business challenge, what we did.  And rightfully so, because they've probably seen like a million other technologies come  
**[0:18:58-0:19:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:18:58):**  and disappear very, very quickly.  They all have a shed of just technology that is now completely obsolete.  And they're going, Oh, yeah, you're going to sit next to XYZ's product that he sold  my grandfather, you know, whatever it happens to be.  And so we tried to short circuit that in this kind of leasing rental model.  
**[0:19:19-0:19:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:19:19):**  So it's $35 per animal per year, that scales up and down a little bit based on the size  of the farm.  And then we will kind of upsell those customers on different features and functionality as  well if they're kind of relevant to their farm.  We do put it on all animals, we view the kind of control of the entire herd is a critical  
**[0:19:41-0:19:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:19:41):**  part of how our system works, and it's necessary for customers to put it across the whole herd.  You're saying upsell, I've seen obviously, there are a lot of interesting things you  can do with the data or how you can help the farms to optimize not just replacing my real  fence with a virtual one, and I can sort of adapt it a bit.  Now there's a whole world of opportunities that you unlock as soon as you can just sit  
**[0:20:04-0:20:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:20:04):**  at your kitchen table and change your fencing in the morning.  What are some of the exciting examples or things that you think may happen in the future  with, let's say, exciting examples you can do now that are completely impossible with  real life fencing?  And what are things that probably that I think is very interesting, because that's why I  
**[0:20:22-0:20:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:20:22):**  bring things like this on.  What's the role of tech in regenerative agriculture?  How can it help farmers to really fundamentally farm differently?  And virtual fencing, I think fits perfectly in that bucket.  But I'm always curious to hear what are the crazy things possible with technology like  
**[0:20:37-0:20:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:20:37):**  this that we didn't even think about?  Yeah, I think so the reason we think virtual fencing is really the foundation of the product  is that it generates this return that I've already described to you.  And so that enables us to put a device on each animal.  And there are a lot of things you can do with sensors and that have been shown to be that  
**[0:20:58-0:20:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:20:58):**  can be done with sensors.  And I'll talk about a second here.  But most of those don't justify the application doesn't justify putting a device on each animal.  It's kind of like, oh, that's really cool.  But it generates x percent of return doesn't pay for doesn't pay for the device in the  
**[0:21:14-0:21:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:21:14):**  service each year.  And so that's the reason that actually, I got super excited about virtual fencing is  it's putting an iWatch on your hand, all of a sudden, you've got your watch on your hand.  And it's really interesting.  And it's got some applications and serves a purpose as it relates to your phone.  
**[0:21:30-0:21:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:21:30):**  And then all of a sudden, Apple comes out and they go, Hey, by the way, we can detect  if you have heart arrhythmia.  Because we've been looking at your data over the last year and we have insight into it.  We're going to be able to do the same exact thing as it relates to fertility detection.  All of a sudden, we can tell farmers, hey, this animal is not going through its fertility  
**[0:21:50-0:21:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:21:50):**  cycle, or this animal stopped at this point in time.  So we actually know that it was impregnated in field at this point in time via this bull,  that level of insight right now doesn't exist.  And it's done through, there's a physical preg check that happens on animals.  There is DNA testing that can be done to look to see who the sire is of animals.  
**[0:22:14-0:22:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:22:14):**  And you also just generally won't know until the end of your year if your cattle are no  longer going through the fertility cycle on a beef farm, they're, for lack of a better  term, non-producing assets.  And so it's an inefficient use for the land and it's an inefficient use of that farmer's  resources to actually keep that animal eating grass.  
**[0:22:36-0:22:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:22:36):**  It's just sitting there eating grass and not producing a calf, which is the end product  of a pasture-based livestock farm.  And so when we look at the opportunities that we have there, we view there being this really  interesting on-farm application where we're going, hey, we can now look at health metrics  for animals.  
**[0:22:58-0:23:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:22:58):**  We can look at targeted view, whether or not this animal has changed its behavioral pattern  from this period of time to another, whether or not it's calving, all of these insights,  which on the margin at a farm create some level of loss, but wouldn't justify putting  devices on all those animals.  But if you then all of a sudden you say, oh yeah, look, we saved 2% of your herd last  
**[0:23:27-0:23:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:23:27):**  year via these detections, that translates into a huge level of profitability for our  customer base that otherwise they wouldn't have access to.  And then we think there's like this off-farm potential as well.  And this gets into where we think things may go, but like you're in a world now, and this  is happening already in Australia, that where people are looking at rotational grazing and  
**[0:23:50-0:23:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:23:50):**  the way that animals are managed and saying, this is actually better for the landscape,  this is better for the planet, and it's sequestering carbon.  Yet there's no validation, right?  There's no true thing of that other than somebody going out and sticking a tube in the ground  and testing the soil right now.  
**[0:24:08-0:24:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:24:08):**  But really, you can actually say, hey, if we build a model and we can actually demonstrate  that these animals were managed in this particular way, then this person was sequestering carbon  in the soil and they should get paid for that.  And so we think that there's also this ability for us to be an objective ground-truthing  of the practices in which those animals were managed that will eventually create a lot  
**[0:24:34-0:24:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:24:34):**  of value for our customer base, as well as can be a kind of interesting source of, hey,  was this meat sustainably raised in the future when you go to the supermarket, for example.  And in terms of the land management, like the grazing itself, how can you help the farmer  there to optimize that?  Because of course, removing the fencing, suddenly you come into a whole flexibility world that  
**[0:24:57-0:24:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:24:57):**  also could be overwhelming.  But it definitely, I mean, you talked about the grazing and the optimal timing to when  the cows need to be on the grass and when they shouldn't.  How do you help on that side of things?  Or how could you, if you're not yet?  
**[0:25:09-0:25:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:25:09):**  Yeah, I think that one of the things, and this isn't intended to be pejorative, but  I think that you want to take baby steps.  You don't want to land somewhere and say, look, you need to go from 0 to 100 miles an  hour in day one.  You need to take customers along with you on your journey.  
**[0:25:33-0:25:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:25:33):**  And they need to be ready.  And they will decide what their risk tolerance is for different things.  And so as it relates to your question, a lot of times we're coming into farms and we're  with customers who already have an idea of what they want to do.  And it's great.  
**[0:25:50-0:25:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:25:50):**  They know their lands better than we do.  Going into a farm and trying to pretend like I know better than somebody whose family has  managed that land for hundreds of years would be the ultimate arrogance.  But we do think that over time there is the ability for us to start to incorporate other  data sources and the ability to say, look, like from satellite imagery, we can now tell  
**[0:26:12-0:26:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:26:12):**  you that this is what's going on with the forage in this pasture.  You've got X number of animals.  We can kind of give you a pretty good insight of like these animals should be moved from  here to here at this point in time.  Do you see farmers already doing that?  
**[0:26:24-0:26:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:26:24):**  Like they combined your set with some other sets they have or the drones images they use  or their observation.  They obviously use daily as they go over the land.  It's a completely analog process at this point in time.  It's something that most farmers are out looking at the land, looking at their animals and  
**[0:26:41-0:26:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:26:41):**  observing which I think is absolutely never going away.  I think livestock farmers, part of why they're livestock farmers, they love the land.  They want to be out there with the animals.  It's a very peaceful kind of meditative, meditative lifestyle.  So it's absolutely wonderful to be out in pasture with animals.  
**[0:27:02-0:27:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:27:02):**  I think that what they do right now is they're the ones who are out there and they're saying,  yep, kind of feels like we should move.  And then the question is like, how much of a pain is it for them to do that?  And do they have any place to move them that is actually better than where they are?  Or do they deal with a kind of suboptimal scenario currently because they're not going  
**[0:27:24-0:27:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:27:24):**  to put up two miles of fencing to just hold animals for another couple of days or something  along those lines.  Yeah.  No, I see some people using these mobile fencing, like getting over squat and basically relatively  fast but still very labor intensive, obviously getting some mobile electric fencing up and  
**[0:27:41-0:27:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:27:41):**  some even move.  I mean, there are some of these systems that go up and down and move.  Yeah.  They're the tumbles.  Yeah.  
**[0:27:48-0:27:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:27:48):**  That works in a perfectly groomed landscape.  Yeah.  Or also we look at the landscape, the customer.  You can send them into a forest, obviously, as well.  Exactly.  
**[0:28:05-0:28:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:28:05):**  Or if you look at the American West and you look at Montana or Idaho, you've got these  ditches and draws that'll go down 20 feet in a matter of three or four meters.  Right.  So there's a massive change in landscape and putting fence line across that is actually  really challenging and pretty impractical.  
**[0:28:28-0:28:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:28:28):**  What it enables our customers to do is just draw these imaginary lines and all of a sudden  they become reality.  They don't deal with any of the physical issues that are related to it.  That's like when we think about what I think that you've got to have a couple different  legs to stand on as it relates to getting adoption for your product.  
**[0:28:51-0:28:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:28:51):**  One of the legs that you have to stand on is you've got to change your customer's lifestyle.  You have to make things better.  It's got to be more profitable, but our customers are overworked to begin with.  They don't have another couple hours in the day that they're just going to squeeze in  something new and cool.  
**[0:29:09-0:29:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:29:09):**  It's like, how do we improve their quality of life as well as their productivity at the  same time?  When we talk to our customers, that's something that's also really apparent.  They go, oh man, I was never able to do this.  It would have been a complete pain to do.  
**[0:29:31-0:29:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:29:31):**  Now I'm able to get in.  I can do it and I can get out there and do the things that I actually like, which I go  out, be with the animals, take a look at what's going on in the field rather than constantly  running to go repair the fence line that some bull ran through and tore down the fence line  and the rest of the animals got out of the pasture.  
**[0:29:50-0:29:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:29:50):**  I spent the whole day regathering them.  Which is a lot of time spent.  Yeah.  Nobody puts that into a spreadsheet and says, oh, my time is X and there was 10 hours lost.  It happens daily or weekly on a livestock farm and it's just part of the unexpected  
**[0:30:12-0:30:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:30:12):**  nature of how things are managed.  I think that one of the things that will happen with our system is we're going to enable this  sense of predictability.  We can say, look, I wake up, I know where my animals are.  Even if one animal broke through the virtual fence line, I know where it is still because  
**[0:30:28-0:30:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:30:28):**  I'm tracking that animal.  Yeah, because if the bull breaks through, it's not that the others follow like you normally  have.  Exactly.  It doesn't ruin the fence line for the other animals.  
**[0:30:37-0:30:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:30:37):**  The other animals are still contained.  Once customers get insight into that, it starts to make the bells go off in their minds as  well of like, oh, this is actually really going to be game changing for us on a lifestyle  perspective as well.  I find it absolutely fascinating.  
**[0:30:58-0:31:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:30:58):**  I always like to put the companies of the interviewees we have here onto the ITN framework,  which is importance, tractability and neglect sickness.  And I think importance we covered.  There's a billion heads of cattle out there, plus probably another 1.52 billion of other  livestock.  
**[0:31:17-0:31:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:31:17):**  And the importance on land, both on the destruction and the potential side are just enormous.  The tractability you mentioned as well, how solvable is this problem?  How easy is it for the bull to get out or to just ignore it?  Or how many of the colors don't work after a while or stop working?  Or maybe what kind of reception do you need in the middle of nowhere where cell phone  
**[0:31:39-0:31:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:31:39):**  reception is already very tricky?  I know many farms don't have broadband for that reason.  How difficult is the technology and hardware piece in very challenging Montana, deep snow,  et cetera, or very hot areas?  How difficult is the tech part?  
**[0:31:53-0:31:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:31:53):**  It's a great question.  I think that it's a double-edged sword because you want the problem to be really hard, but  you want it to be solvable because if it's not really hard, then everybody's going to  be able to do it and you don't have a great business.  That's the next one.  
**[0:32:06-0:32:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:32:06):**  Yeah.  How neglected is it?  How many others are looking at this from other?  Exactly.  And so for us, one of the things that we did that I think kind of really differentiates  
**[0:32:16-0:32:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:32:16):**  us in the space, we'll get to the neglected view comment, but we looked at this as a communications  platform and animal management and animal control is the application which sits on a  communications platform.  So we went to go build the company and resource the company in terms of what we needed to  execute this.  
**[0:32:36-0:32:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:32:36):**  It was actually a communications hardware team that was able to build and design a communications  product that works in these extremely challenged environments over huge spaces or huge swaths  of land.  And we managed to, I was kind of researching this as kind of the problem statement is like  we need to have a highly reliable, very low cost, extremely large range communication  
**[0:33:11-0:33:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:33:11):**  system that works in areas that are sometimes in the middle of what looks like Mars.  And I managed to stumble across, for better or for worse, I call it stumbled across a  hardware solution when I was looking for that.  And it was best in class solution.  And the problem was their business model was just way too expensive for what we're going  
**[0:33:34-0:33:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:33:34):**  to do.  It just would have eaten up all of the margin for our customers.  There would have been no real application, no real business model other than simply a  communications platform.  And the business model of that company was actually what drove that company to fail.  
**[0:33:49-0:33:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:33:49):**  But the team that was behind building that was available at the time.  And so I was able to pick off-  After the bankruptcy.  Yeah.  After the failure.  
**[0:33:59-0:34:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:33:59):**  It was a-  Well, as the company was really kind of starting to go down, I was able to bring the leader  of that team really over to Vence and he was able to bring a number of his colleagues with  him.  And we were able to, in short order, really build a platform, which is what we built.  
**[0:34:19-0:34:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:34:19):**  And on that platform sits this animal communications app, this animal management application.  I think thinking about it that way is actually our differentiation factor.  It's our secret sauce as a company and the team, and how we built that.  When you say platform, does it mean there's more than the color out there?  Like I, as a farmer, have to install a pole or something to make it work?  
**[0:34:41-0:34:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:34:41):**  Or a platform is more a virtual term in this case?  At this point in time, yeah, there's a pole.  So he puts up a tower.  What we do is we'll, any given customer will send us through what their farm map looks  like and we basically will create a RF propagation map over that.  
**[0:34:58-0:35:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:34:58):**  So we'll basically say, hey, here's what a network coverage will look like.  We need to put a pole here, here and here.  And then we've built that system end to end to basically drop ship to that customer a  solution set and tell them, hey, this needs to go here.  And they're able to do that.  
**[0:35:19-0:35:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:35:19):**  It's pretty impressive.  Yeah.  That the team, you know, it's my background is not in engineering.  So it's really a testament to everybody at the company except for me.  That this actually works.  
**[0:35:30-0:35:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:35:30):**  Yeah.  Yeah, it actually works.  Absolutely, they continue to impress me in terms of the things that they make and continue  to do.  But to your question, the other thing is the reason we call it a platform is because when  
**[0:35:42-0:35:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:35:42):**  we look at it, animal management is one application, but like, you know, water monitoring sensors,  soil sensors, they all need a communication platform.  They all need to be able to plug into it.  And when you look at, you know, this goes back to my previous comment about like, you  know, a lot of these things that you could previously do with sensors, they don't justify  
**[0:36:02-0:36:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:36:02):**  the full deployment.  All of a sudden, you've got a network there.  And it's like, oh, yeah, we'll hook that into our network.  We'll dial that in.  And they generate your multiples of value for our customer base.  
**[0:36:15-0:36:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:36:15):**  But they're cheap plugins for us to basically add on to the network.  And so we certainly kind of expect to expand into those over the over the coming years  as well.  And in terms of neglectiveness, how busy is the virtual fencing space?  It's not very busy.  
**[0:36:33-0:36:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:36:33):**  So you know, there are...  You can count them on one hand.  Yeah, you can count less than one hand.  We view there as being, again, there are a lot of companies that have built cattle tracking  sensors.  
**[0:36:46-0:36:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:36:46):**  And I don't actually view that as competition.  This isn't a dig against those companies.  But when you look at an IoT network and an IoT platform, the ability to have uplink versus  downlink, it's actually there's a complete imbalance.  There's 16 times easier to report GPS data up to a network than it is to send information  
**[0:37:10-0:37:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:37:10):**  down to that device and control that device.  And so when I dismiss those as non-competition, it's because they would have to build a completely  different solution to get into the virtual fencing space.  And so when you get into the virtual fencing space, there are really three competitors  that we look at.  
**[0:37:29-0:37:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:37:29):**  There's Agresons out of Australia, Halter out of New Zealand, and NoFence out of Norway.  And each of them have built different solutions.  None of them at this point in time is commercially available.  So we're kind of all sprinting towards commercial availability.  Everybody has their different benefits and drawbacks.  
**[0:37:52-0:37:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:37:52):**  We should, in our opinion, be out in the forefront over the coming year.  We should work back and put out 50,000 collars next year and cover two and a half million  acres of land.  And we think that that'll kind of squarely put us in the most commercially available  solution there.  
**[0:38:09-0:38:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:38:09):**  But it's a space that when you're talking about a billion potential users just in the  cattle-  50,000 is nothing.  50,000 is just not even scratching the edge of the surface.  And so it's extremely neglected as a space and people looking at.  
**[0:38:27-0:38:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:38:27):**  I think that answers it nicely.  I want to be conscious of your time and end with some, I think, fast questions.  Let's see if we can manage and otherwise keep some for another episode.  I apologize if I'm rambling.  I get excited about some of these things.  
**[0:38:39-0:38:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:38:39):**  No, absolutely not.  It's the first time we have virtual fencing.  We've discussed it actually with Bert Clover once, but just scratching the surface again  and never got into the real details.  And so it's something I've been waiting for.  
**[0:38:50-0:38:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:38:50):**  So definitely want to ask about the details.  But let's ask some questions.  I always like to ask, what if you would be in charge of a hundred billion or one billion,  sorry, one billion dollar investment fund tomorrow morning?  What would your portfolio look like if you had complete freedom to invest it?  
**[0:39:05-0:39:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:39:05):**  So not granted.  What would you put it to work and why?  It's a good question.  Since you have investors on this podcast that I'm saying I have to say throw it all in  advance.  
**[0:39:18-0:39:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:39:18):**  No, that's a lot of colors.  Yeah.  I think that I would give it how deep I am in the space that I'm in, like in the understanding  that I have.  Most people invest a lot, like they feel more comfort investing what they know.  
**[0:39:31-0:39:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:39:31):**  And so I think what I would probably do, and I've thought about this, is there are a bunch  of countries in the world that are really significant in the agriculture producing assets,  both on the livestock and on the farmland.  Brazil's a great example where their currency has been devalued by 50% in the last year.  So I would actually spend 80% of that buying assets in those lands that are non regenerative  
**[0:39:54-0:39:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:39:54):**  and non kind of suboptimally producing.  I'd probably spend 10% of it investing in ag tech.  The tools.  Yeah.  Yeah.  
**[0:40:04-0:40:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:40:04):**  Tools to bring productivity up, you know, two to three times on this property.  And then I'd probably spend the last 10% on like supply chain efficiencies and marketing  to get those products into the higher value markets at a price point which captures their  value.  So I'd invest 80, 10, 10 along.  
**[0:40:18-0:40:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:40:18):**  Yeah.  80, 10, 10 is how I'd look at it.  And it's a very, very nice answer actually.  And what if you could change one thing overnight in the ag space?  So you have a magic wand and you Frank have the great power to change one single thing  
**[0:40:31-0:40:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:40:31):**  in the ag and food space.  What would you do?  Oh, that's a risky question there.  Being in the US, the immediate thing that pops up is I'm like, oh, would I get rid of  just corn subsidies?  
**[0:40:41-0:40:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:40:41):**  Which people have said, like take away all subsidies and let's figure it out.  Yeah.  I think I would actually enable a nutrient deficiency tax where you actually via a mechanism  are charging like your bag of Cheetos cost you what a pack of cigarettes costs because  of it's like of what's actually in that bag.  
**[0:41:07-0:41:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:41:07):**  Complete absence.  Yeah.  And so you'd get back to this sense that people are actually paying for what they're getting.  Kind of false version of reality.  I think it's a first actually to put somebody mentioned that, but it's a very I mean, policy  
**[0:41:23-0:41:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:41:23):**  has come back and forth and getting or getting the externality costs into it.  I think a few people have mentioned that.  And yeah, it's a false cheapness.  We see it fall like it's empty calories.  And we know it.  
**[0:41:34-0:41:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:41:34):**  Most people know it.  And but it's still and most people like how do we give people the choice to actually switch  to go for the nutrient density stuff?  And it's going to be a carrot and a stick probably in mixed forms.  But this is yeah, it's going to be one of the big challenges.  
**[0:41:47-0:41:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:41:47):**  How do we make sure people get what they pay for?  I think it has to be a carrot and a stick because we're so smart as as humans that we've  hacked the human taste bud.  And we sold in fact, yeah, we basically completely circus circumvented reality.  And like we're like, oh, look, we can hack the brain.  
**[0:42:10-0:42:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:42:10):**  So like, you know, we'll just sell people this and they don't they don't have, you know,  they don't have any insight into it.  So like the government like that, that would be the optimal version of where the government  comes in and says, look, this is actually what is best for society in like, you're going  to get charged a tax for that you can still smoke cigarettes.  
**[0:42:29-0:42:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:42:29):**  That's fine.  However, like, you just not indoors.  Yeah, you just not indoors.  You got to pay a tax for it.  That's just like reality.  
**[0:42:38-0:42:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:42:38):**  And this is definitely inspired by John Kempf.  But what do you believe to be true about Regen ag that others don't believe to be true?  Apart from that virtual fencing is the future.  But that's maybe because most people didn't think about that, because they don't believe  to be true.  
**[0:42:53-0:42:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:42:53):**  Do you have any strong feelings that others not share or the other way around?  Yeah, well, I'm on a podcast with like, people who are listening, spending an hour to listen  about like Regen ag investing.  So to saying something that they don't already believe to be true is like, you're asking  me to stretch a little bit here.  
**[0:43:09-0:43:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:43:09):**  I mean, that's why I ask it.  Because I think if you talk about society at large, right, like it's that Regen ag is  actually cheaper than commercial ag.  I we could definitely stretch the others.  This is an interesting one, because we have people listening that say, you cannot make  
**[0:43:22-0:43:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:43:22):**  money with Regen ag or with ag in general, like it's impossible because you will be squeezing  something, etc.  So you're saying it's cheaper?  Explain?  Yeah, I think it's like, why is harvesting corn so cheap?  
**[0:43:34-0:43:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:43:34):**  It's because of the tools that are used to harvest corn, right?  You've got these massive combines that John Deere makes that are cost you millions of  dollars, but they enable you to have scale to do it.  And the thing that Regen ag lacks is tools.  And so as soon as it has tools, it's going to be cheaper, in my opinion.  
**[0:43:51-0:43:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:43:51):**  So that's that I mean, I don't know that I'd imagine most people who are deep in Regen  ag already believe that and that's like, yeah, but like, you know, that's my, I think it  has to be cheaper.  If you don't believe that, then you probably shouldn't be in the space.  It has to be and it will be are two different things.  
**[0:44:07-0:44:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:44:07):**  I mean, it has to be, I mean, for a long time, it was solar energy has to be cheaper.  Now in many places it is, but it took a while, I mean, took the tools to build it, the factories  and the financing schemes, and of course, the subsidies as well.  This is different in a good but like, we hope that it will be cheaper.  And you're saying actually, with many customers, we see that it is fundamentally cheaper already  
**[0:44:26-0:44:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:44:26):**  with even the first version of the tools, not not even.  I think solar is like such a great parallel, right?  Like renewable energy is like, you look 20 years ago, and honestly, yeah, but like, if  you look 20 years ago, the whole focus was like, there was a boom about like, you know,  who can build the panels and then they built the tools.  
**[0:44:46-0:44:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:44:46):**  And they got to a point where they now the now the boom is gonna be a battery, right?  Like you're already seeing it.  The great thing about Regen ag is like, the batteries is soil.  You don't need to build it.  All we need to build is like the tools, the primary tool, which is the solar panels already  
**[0:45:02-0:45:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:45:02):**  built for you, like which is grass or the plant or the tree or whatever.  Yeah, exactly.  The batteries already there, we just need to find like, the optimal ways to harvest  it or to increase productivity of those.  And then you're gonna have farms that are gonna make a lot more like it's it seems so  
**[0:45:20-0:45:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:45:20):**  much easier than the renewable energy thing where you have to build each of the components  along the way, because they're man made versus nature's already spent millions of years AB  testing, you know, in the in the word of the tech, ABCDF testing, probably.  Yeah, exactly.  And so now, we've got the results of these millions of years of testing.  
**[0:45:43-0:45:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:45:43):**  And all we need to do is like, just get out there and do biomimicry, basically.  Why do you see such a strong pushback then in articles on Regen ag will never be able  and where the peer reviewed papers and an adaptive grazing I mean, savory is being harassed,  I think every day in the press or in from university professors that it may never found  a peer reviewed paper that it actually works.  
**[0:46:04-0:46:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:46:04):**  And then I always like to point out there are millions of farmers or hundreds of actually  using it and it works like in their circumstances.  Why is it so difficult to believe that you can actually build soil and eat from it and  sort of have it have both of that like you can regenerate an asset, you can regenerate  soil, and also grow food.  
**[0:46:23-0:46:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:46:23):**  This is going to be a whole different podcast now.  But yeah, exactly.  You're asking me like, do you have a short answer for that?  Or should we keep it for another episode?  You know, I don't know the answer to that.  
**[0:46:33-0:46:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:46:33):**  Like I wish I did.  If I did, I would be focused on hacking that answer.  Like, you know, I think it's one that a lot of times people find answers to the confirmation  bias, right?  People want to believe something.  
**[0:46:49-0:46:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:46:49):**  And so they go out and try and find answers to confirm what they already believed.  And trust me, both sides of the party, both sides of the fence do that for a lot of things.  But it's the proverbial fence, the virtual one.  Exactly.  But I think that a lot of times when you look at kind of people attacking savory, look,  
**[0:47:05-0:47:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:47:05):**  the challenge on ag is that it exists everywhere on the planet.  So no two farms are actually the same.  They don't have the same soils.  They aren't necessarily producing the same product.  And so if you apply the exact same results and tests from one place to another place,  
**[0:47:21-0:47:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:47:21):**  you may not get the same answer, which when it gets to a simplistic scientific method  version of the world, all of a sudden you say, oh, that doesn't work because it didn't  work.  You know, I took this here and I translated this test from here to from A to Y and it  doesn't work.  
**[0:47:38-0:47:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:47:38):**  So that means it doesn't work.  No, it doesn't mean that.  It just means you're actually dealing with nuance and you need to take a holistic view  of the problem that you're looking at and incorporate all the variables into your test.  And so I think that that's like that's what happens in a lot of like these peer review  
**[0:47:57-0:47:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:47:57):**  papers that will attack savory.  Like, listen, savory's method doesn't work exactly the same everywhere.  It doesn't grazing doesn't work the same in New Zealand as it works in northern Queensland,  which are not that far apart.  Like, you know, the same methodology doesn't work in the US.  
**[0:48:15-0:48:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:48:15):**  Exactly.  So you need tweaks.  You need tools to enable customers to adapt to their landscape and to the climate.  And I think that the answer summarily is like it's being able to take a holistic view on  it and that that our customers, the producers are the ones who I would listen to.  
**[0:48:37-0:48:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:48:37):**  Right.  If they don't go and spend money on practices that don't translate to their bottom line,  they don't they don't have the ability to go and risk their money on something that  goes against social norms to begin with.  If it doesn't make sense.  
**[0:48:54-0:48:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:48:54):**  If it doesn't make sense for them, it's not going to work for them.  And so I think that's absolutely who I trust and what drives me and kind of our North Star  is like, listen, our producer saying this works or are we telling them it works?  What's reality?  I know that's a big difference.  
**[0:49:10-0:49:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:49:10):**  And do they reorder?  Look, Frank, I want to thank you so much for your time, for sharing.  And I definitely don't think it's the last time we have you hopefully on the podcast  and wish you an absolute great day.  Great.  
**[0:49:24-0:49:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:49:24):**  Thank you so much, Koen.  If you would like to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and  agriculture, find our video course on investing in regenerative agriculture dot com slash  course.  This course will teach you to understand the opportunities to get to know the main players,  
**[0:49:39-0:49:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:49:39):**  to learn about the main trends and how to evaluate a new investment opportunity.  Like what kind of questions to ask.  Find out more on investing in regenerative agriculture dot com slash course.  If you found the investing in regenerative agriculture and food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  
**[0:49:58-0:50:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:49:58):**  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  It's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast.  And it only takes a few seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  
**[0:50:15-0:50:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:50:15):**  join my membership community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on gumroad dot com slash investing with your neck or in the  description below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  
**[0:50:43-0:50:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:50:43):**  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to put money  to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011 and recording  
**[0:51:02-0:51:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:51:02):**  these podcasts since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  
**[0:51:17-0:51:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:51:17):**  What questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  
**[0:51:23-0:51:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:51:23):**  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  You, the soil builders and investors in this space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  
**[0:51:39-0:51:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:51:39):**  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management consultants, etc.  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  
**[0:51:59-0:52:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:51:59):**  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very different means.  
**[0:52:13-0:52:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:52:13):**  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  
**[0:52:30-0:52:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:52:30):**  so you don't have to write along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  if you're a soil builder.  
**[0:52:48-0:52:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:52:48):**  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  
**[0:53:05-0:53:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:53:05):**  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  
**[0:53:22-0:53:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/12/08/frank-wooten#t=0:53:22):**  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  