### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2019-00-01)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/07/01/allan-savory/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  So I'm here at Grantwell doing a short podcast at Grantwell Shorts with Alan Savery.  And I would love to know Alan, what would be your not advice or investment advice, but  
**[0:00:24-0:00:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/07/01/allan-savory/#t=0:00:24):**  your idea to for impact investors to get active in the regenerative agriculture and food space?  I really don't know the answer to that question.  I'm serious.  Because how do you invest in changing policy?  Because the number one essential thing if we're going to address global desertification  
**[0:00:47-0:00:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/07/01/allan-savory/#t=0:00:47):**  and climate change and the tremendous damage that mainstream agriculture is doing.  As I've been talking here, I've explained why I believe that agriculture as we're doing  it today is the most destructive industry ever in the history of mankind, even more  so than coal and oil.  Now, where do you invest in changing that when what you need to do is to change public  
**[0:01:13-0:01:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/07/01/allan-savory/#t=0:01:13):**  opinion so that the public is insisting that our governments and environmental organizations,  et cetera, no longer develop policies in a reductionist way that they do, that they develop  them in a national holistic context, holistically?  That addresses the cause of the problem, because the problem is not being caused by livestock,  coal, and oil, as society has told.  
**[0:01:42-0:01:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/07/01/allan-savory/#t=0:01:42):**  Those are resources.  They cannot cause the problem.  The problem is 100% certainty due to management that is reductionist and policies.  If I was an investor and I had a billion dollars to invest, I would invest it in a creative  group of people who helped me change policy so that policy became holistic and we could  
**[0:02:07-0:02:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/07/01/allan-savory/#t=0:02:07):**  solve these problems.  Because unless you address the cause of the problem, you have no hope of success.  Anything else they invest in could make them feel good, and it may make money, but at the  end of the day, we will lose the war.  Global climate change will continue.  
**[0:02:25-0:02:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/07/01/allan-savory/#t=0:02:25):**  Any serious investor, and at the moment, there is no serious investment at all in addressing  the cause of climate change.  I would really not know how to answer your question other than that, and would rather  sit with them and say, here are the realities, how do you as investors believe you could  help us solve this problem?  
**[0:02:48-0:02:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/07/01/allan-savory/#t=0:02:48):**  Perfect.  Thank you so much.  Dear friends of the podcast, I am super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food.  How to put money to work in regenerating soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while  
**[0:03:02-0:03:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/07/01/allan-savory/#t=0:03:02):**  doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to put money  to work in regenerating soils, and I've been following this space since 2011 and recording  this podcast since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  
**[0:03:19-0:03:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/07/01/allan-savory/#t=0:03:19):**  What have we seen in this space over the last years?  How have we built our decision-making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  What questions should you ask?  
**[0:03:30-0:03:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/07/01/allan-savory/#t=0:03:30):**  What is happening in this space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  
**[0:03:38-0:03:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/07/01/allan-savory/#t=0:03:38):**  For whom is this course?  To the soil builders and investors in this space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management, consultants, etc.  
**[0:03:56-0:03:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/07/01/allan-savory/#t=0:03:56):**  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  
**[0:04:12-0:04:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/07/01/allan-savory/#t=0:04:12):**  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  that among the listeners of this podcast we have people with very different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means, to  
**[0:04:31-0:04:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/07/01/allan-savory/#t=0:04:31):**  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes, plus PDF slides  so you don't have to ride along.  
**[0:04:44-0:04:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/07/01/allan-savory/#t=0:04:44):**  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find, or what kind of investors you could  find if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  
**[0:05:06-0:05:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/07/01/allan-savory/#t=0:05:06):**  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  
**[0:05:20-0:05:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/07/01/allan-savory/#t=0:05:20):**  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking, click on  the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  