### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2020-00-20)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com slash course or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  And we're live.  So welcome to I think the third or the fourth Ask Me Anything webinar.  
**[0:00:20-0:00:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:00:20):**  Definitely the first one of this quarter in October, which I cannot imagine this year  just disappeared.  But a very interesting time, obviously, for regenerative agriculture and food.  So I'm so happy to have you all here.  And I'm very curious about questions.  
**[0:00:36-0:00:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:00:36):**  I hope, as we had last times as well, that the rest of the audience will help to answer  them because obviously I have the great pleasure to interview many people.  It doesn't mean I know a lot or everything.  People often assume that basically, where can I find funding for that or how do I do  that?  
**[0:00:55-0:00:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:00:55):**  But I just point to the interviews we did because the experts are definitely in this  case on the ground.  So to start with a short presentation on and I will share my screen, just a bit of background  of where we are, what we're doing and how.  So I will open that.  
**[0:01:12-0:01:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:01:12):**  And that also means that I cannot allow people in anymore.  So that's going to be interesting for a few minutes.  So there might be some angry people.  Anyway, welcome to the Ask Me Anything webinar of today, the 13th of October.  I'm the host of the podcast Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food, where they have the  
**[0:01:29-0:01:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:01:29):**  great pleasure to interview anybody from farmers on the ground to fund managers, to large asset  managers, scientists, nutrient density researchers and everything in the middle.  If you are not listening, you can definitely find them in your podcast app, basically searching  for Investing in Regenerative Agriculture.  We chose a very inspirational name, but very lucky looking back because it's very easy  
**[0:01:51-0:01:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:01:51):**  to find.  There were one of the few if you type that.  If you type that, we have done over 100 interviews now in the last four years.  I think it's October actually.  So it's exactly four years ago that I started recording these conversations and I've had  
**[0:02:05-0:02:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:02:05):**  an incredible amount of fun.  And of course, luck to you to interview so many interesting people.  Always asking that question, how to put money to work, how to get it back and how to regenerate  soils with that money at scale, regenerating people, local communities and ecosystems.  And I think we have been on a nice run, especially this year and also last year since it's been  
**[0:02:25-0:02:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:02:25):**  growing the interest and the wave just keeps growing.  If you haven't been listening, definitely find us here or on YouTube.  We have quite a few interviews on YouTube.  But of course, your favorite podcast app, you should be able to find this.  The reason we're here or the reason why we decided to do another Ask Me Anything is definitely  
**[0:02:46-0:02:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:02:46):**  around the course.  No worries if you haven't looked at it, but we launched a video course on investing in  regenerative agriculture and food.  Basically you can find it on Gumroad.  This is the short link, which is not so easy to remember, but I will also put it in the  
**[0:02:58-0:03:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:02:58):**  show notes where we try to share our lessons learned.  What have we learned after interviewing 100, more than 100 people and does more than 100  hours of audio of how to put money to work in this sector.  And basically sharing some of the frameworks we've been using on selecting things, etc.  Definitely check it out if you're interested.  
**[0:03:17-0:03:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:03:17):**  It's pay what you think it's worth.  And it's completely found on YouTube and via Gumroad.  What is regenerative agriculture?  A lot of people ask that.  I wouldn't say constantly, but definitely ask that.  
**[0:03:30-0:03:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:03:30):**  And it's a very tricky one because there's not a very good definition.  Meaning that this definition I took somewhere from a website.  If you put it in and you find it, but it's as my friend, even sort of, you would say,  it's more continuum than, Oh, there she goes.  It's more continuum than it is a destination.  
**[0:03:55-0:03:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:03:55):**  If you talk to a farmer, I don't think he or she will ever say, I'm a regenerative farmer  because I'm done with this journey.  Now they are applying regenerative practices.  And I think that's that distinguishing is extremely important and you can apply a lot  more practices or a lot less.  
**[0:04:10-0:04:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:04:10):**  But it doesn't mean that there is a rule.  It's not a binary system.  You are a regenerative farmer or you're not.  What is important to see is the difference between expected, which is most of the farming  we're currently doing, sustainable, which is some of the farming we're doing and regenerative,  
**[0:04:23-0:04:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:04:23):**  which is a very small subset of sustainable, but it's definitely focused on regenerating  soils, regenerating sea.  Actually you see some examples in oceans as well, and it's going beyond sustainable.  How do we repair what has gone, what we have destroyed over the past millennia, in many  cases, 12,000 years.  
**[0:04:41-0:04:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:04:41):**  So it's a nice arrow that I definitely took from Ethan.  And there's a lot underneath there.  He wrote a great article on it, which I will share in the show notes as well, and basically  focus on these different practices of regenerative agriculture.  There are many, but they all come down to covering the soil, using complex rotations  
**[0:04:59-0:05:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:04:59):**  in place and time, no or very limited tilling.  There's a lot of discussion on that and soil disturbing and the integration of animals.  And obviously there's a lot of discussion on that as well.  But you see that many of these practices, they come from permaculture, they come from  other places and they boil down to three, four, five practices or three, four, I wouldn't  
**[0:05:19-0:05:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:05:19):**  say rules, but definitely if you talk to a farmer applying regenerative practices in  Costa Rica or in the Netherlands, they will come down to these things.  This is a very, very busy slide.  Don't try to read it, but definitely have a look at the article of Ethan.  He wrote in 2011, so almost 10 years ago, where he basically, this is a very nice map  
**[0:05:38-0:05:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:05:38):**  you can use.  You can send to somebody, to a farmer and ask them, where do you stand on these different  things?  For instance, fuel, for instance, the source of inputs, for instance, your economic sustainability,  for instance, your tillage.  
**[0:05:49-0:05:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:05:49):**  And it would vary quite a bit.  And also the second question, where would you like to go?  So I would like to use this actually, we're going to use this more on the podcast as well.  So if you want to learn more, look at the article, read some books.  David Montgomery has a great book.  
**[0:06:03-0:06:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:06:03):**  Kiss the Ground has a Netflix movie out now.  You probably have seen it, or at least some discussion around it.  The book is great as well.  Dirt to Soil is a very interesting one.  Richard Perkins on YouTube is a great small scale farmer.  
**[0:06:15-0:06:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:06:15):**  And there's actually a lot more.  Judith Schwartz just has a new book out, which I still have to read.  But have a look there and basically dive deeper.  And obviously, if you want to follow the podcast, feel free as well.  And with that, I'm going to stop sharing my screen, see how many people we have in the  
**[0:06:33-0:06:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:06:33):**  waiting room.  So with that, just a short introduction into the world of regenerative agriculture and  food, which is exploding.  You see a lot of large companies coming into the space, which is always interesting.  Very scary for many, I think in the space as well, and very necessary from another side.  
**[0:06:49-0:06:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:06:49):**  I'm just going to bring in the two questions.  And we actually have the two people, I think, even in the room if they want to ask them.  So I'm first going to bring up Joe Swart.  If you're able to talk, you want to ask your question live or shall I put it in the chat  anyway?  
**[0:07:05-0:07:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:07:05):**  I will definitely share the slides.  Yeah, I will share the slides afterwards.  They're always the same, actually.  And it doesn't change too much in the different asking anything ones.  But anyway, Joe, I'll put your question in the chat.  
**[0:07:19-0:07:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:07:19):**  And if you want to unmute, you can also ask it live.  So we are setting up a regenerative agri hub now in Kenya, bringing together at the moment,  we starting it off with three leading farmers.  But we have about 30 farmers waiting in the wings.  And it's the first agri hub of a whole chain is one plant for Mozambique, and so on and  
**[0:07:43-0:07:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:07:43):**  so forth.  So it's all about the agglomerating product, and also to shift the whole process of production  towards regenerative stuff.  What advice could you give or kind of insight could you give on just the investment strategy?  What have you learned and what are the kind of common pitfalls?  
**[0:08:11-0:08:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:08:11):**  Thank you.  Thank you for the question.  It's a very broad one.  And the city answer it's, it depends.  In this case, it sounds like it's not a land based investment in this case, more a food  
**[0:08:23-0:08:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:08:23):**  company or processing based.  There are definitely investors out there that have been financing this, for instance, in  the coffee space and the chocolate space or the bean space to bring or to leave some of  this added value in the country of origin where this is processed.  I know that some other investors are starting to look at it.  
**[0:08:43-0:08:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:08:43):**  It's not an easy one.  But I would definitely look, I wouldn't say the investors that are purely focused on region  practices because they're not so many that are comfortable with processing or even comfortable  with investing in Kenya.  I would look more at the impact investing space in Kenya and definitely add obviously  
**[0:09:02-0:09:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:09:02):**  to regenerative practices to the deck and to the pitch, but mostly pitch it as an interesting  processing investment, an interesting added value investment that more of the money stays  locally.  I know for instance, a very well known impact investor Goodwill, and that's Vincent for  sure knows, is up to their third fund now, mostly technology, has done a lot of MFI's  
**[0:09:24-0:09:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:09:24):**  like microfinance and a lot of FinTech and have recently made their first agriculture  investment in Nigeria, actually a tomato processing plant because Nigeria is one of the biggest  tomato producers in Africa and also one of the biggest importers of tomato products.  So they invested in a company that is making tomato products in Nigeria and does replacing  import.  
**[0:09:47-0:09:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:09:47):**  So I would start seeing that some of these investors start to look at agriculture and  food, but I also know from inside there that it was a very long process to get these FinTech  investors and to get the company comfortable with each other and actually make that investment.  I think it took way longer than they normally would take, but they are very happy about  their first food and agriculture investments.  
**[0:10:06-0:10:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:10:06):**  I would look more at the impact investment space, the funds that are active in East Africa  and that are maybe comfortable already with some agriculture and are interested in that.  And the region part I think is in this case a nice add on, but I think it would find a  very hard time finding an investor that is comfortable with processing, comfortable with  in this case Nairobi and comfortable with the region part or that specifically looking  
**[0:10:30-0:10:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:10:30):**  for that because I wouldn't know anybody immediately.  Although many of these impact funds I know are starting to be more conscious about soil,  but it's a journey and many are not there yet I would say.  So it's probably not a very easy answer.  Thank you very much.  
**[0:10:47-0:10:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:10:47):**  You're quite right.  And then we have another question from Marlise, which is a very, very deep question, which  you can spend quite a bit of time on, but I will put it in the chat if I get the right.  But you can also ask it or basically I think it's about land ownership, but if you want  to elaborate a bit on it, Marlise, then please go.  
**[0:11:12-0:11:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:11:12):**  I will elaborate.  I'm not sure if people are familiar with the one, two, three business model.  You've had lots of interviews with them on the podcast and last time with the Ask Me  Anything I saw people from one, two, three, it's an organization and they do wonderful  stuff where they go and buy a degraded plantation.  
**[0:11:40-0:11:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:11:40):**  It's one of their business models, but I'm going to focus on this specific example where  they have funds of an investor and they buy a degraded land in South America of a plantation  and regenerate it to life.  And then the plantation is seen as the nucleus.  So it's a healthy plantation.  
**[0:12:02-0:12:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:12:02):**  They employ local people and then the surrounding economy also benefits obviously because they  need nurseries and seedlings and there's jobs.  So my question is twofold.  When I looked at the business model, I thought it was very interesting and that it was a  for profit plantation.  
**[0:12:26-0:12:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:12:26):**  And then I thought two things.  Well, it's money from outside.  They go in, they buy a piece of land.  Yes, they provide employment, but then they have a profitable company and they sell it  to well, not the local community because they can't buy it, but to another big one percenter.  
**[0:12:44-0:12:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:12:44):**  So my question was, how do they see the local community actually benefit from it?  And then this is not my question, but it's the follow up is I'm working with a pilot  program of smallholder farmers to convert them in South America, to convert them to  agroforestry.  So I don't want to ask them obviously to sell their land, but I was thinking if we have  
**[0:13:09-0:13:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:13:09):**  this pilot of like hundred farmers and I don't know how many hectares, say 2000 hectares,  would it then be a good thing or a bad thing to have a one, two, three plantation in the  region?  Would it be competing with the smallholder farmers because they lack the scale or would  it actually beneficial because of the big plantation in the neighborhood it will draw?  
**[0:13:31-0:13:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:13:31):**  I don't know, you will have a bigger market or yeah, I'm trying to figure out if it makes  sense to have a big plantation there for the surrounding community and how do they see  it in the long run that the plantation itself actually benefits the local community?  Yeah.  It's a very, very good question.  
**[0:13:54-0:14:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:13:54):**  I think it touches upon a big elephant in the room in many of the, I wouldn't say the  earlier models, maybe I mentioned that in the course, but the models of buying land,  regenerating it and selling it because you improve the quality.  In this case, it's a shame that Lenny isn't one of the employees of one, two, three who  signed up, but he's not on the call, but I can definitely ask what they think of that.  
**[0:14:19-0:14:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:14:19):**  But the ownership structure is absolutely crucial.  Like who owns the land, why can somebody from outside come in, buy, regenerate and sell  and obviously profit from that.  And in this case, there are big German pension funds.  And I think the answer lies in what happens at the sale and what happens there and in  
**[0:14:43-0:14:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:14:43):**  what kind of, in this case, in the land buying funds and structures, what happens after.  In some cases they're setting up, they have 10 years and that's the traditional way of  doing many of these things, but many others are starting to look at evergreen structures  so they never sell or they are actually, the profits are based on basically what comes  off the land.  
**[0:15:04-0:15:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:15:04):**  And obviously that could be slightly less and you still benefit from sort of internal  metric that your land is increasing in price, but you're not selling.  And we've had a number of discussions on this actually on the podcast, twice with Thomas  Ripple who is in Germany, very active of basically buying land and getting it off the market  and never selling it again.  
**[0:15:23-0:15:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:15:23):**  It will be hauled by a foundation and basically it cannot be speculatively used anymore.  In the Netherlands, Heeren Boren is very busy with that and buying farms and farmland and  getting it off the market.  In the US, it's a huge problem because of transition of generations.  A lot of farmers are old, like actually in Europe as well.  
**[0:15:42-0:15:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:15:42):**  And if they sell to a speculator, then obviously the pressure on the next generation that comes  on the farm is enormous because they have to pay back this enormous fee that they have  to borrow somewhere from a bank, et cetera.  So it's an enormous question on land ownership.  What do we find fair or not?  
**[0:15:59-0:16:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:15:59):**  The first wave of these structures are buying it and selling it at some point farmland LP.  I mean, there are a number of these and I think they're essential for the sector because  we get to a certain scale that we can start doing agroforestry at thousands and thousands  of hectares.  But I don't think it's the optimal model.  
**[0:16:16-0:16:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:16:16):**  I'm very interested in this case in transition finance.  Like, how do you partner with current landowners and help them through the transition or investing  in their transition?  But even there, there's a big question on how do they actually get ownership of that  land?  
**[0:16:30-0:16:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:16:30):**  Shouldn't it be hold by collectives?  Shouldn't it be hold by the common good?  And there, we as society, we have a very big question to answer.  Why can somebody own land and why can somebody else only rent it?  And that's something we have to figure out.  
**[0:16:46-0:16:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:16:46):**  I don't know the answer to your second question.  Is it good to have a big plantation or not?  Run by one, two, three that hopefully is going to be as regenerative as possible.  A lot of these structures function as a sort of hub and spokes, meaning they set up a demonstration  site obviously quite big in many cases, but they work with local farmers as well and try  
**[0:17:06-0:17:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:17:06):**  to incorporate their cacao, et cetera, to increase the quality and basically get to  a bigger scale.  But it's a very, it's a tension.  It's a tension between coming in from outside with a lot of money and because one, two,  three raised a lot of money and put a lot of money to work.  
**[0:17:21-0:17:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:17:21):**  And at the same time, buying very, very degraded plantations that have been run down by previous  owners and come back to life, which is a good thing, but could it be better or not?  That's the question.  It's not an easy one.  And then ownership will run through the regenerative space for as long as we haven't figured out  
**[0:17:39-0:17:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:17:39):**  what to do there.  Because many of land has been stolen, has been taken, has been contracts forced.  If you go into the history of land ownership, it's not a pretty one.  And we're going to find a lot of, especially indigenous peoples that have been moved off  the land, off their lands, and they've managed for centuries and for millennia, and somebody  
**[0:17:57-0:18:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:17:57):**  came in, got a contract and took it.  So it's very, very, very difficult, especially if a lot of money comes from outside.  Even if you try to do it the most sustainable, regenerative, socially acceptable possible,  you're still probably stepping on toes and probably a discussion needs to be held there.  Thank you.  
**[0:18:18-0:18:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:18:18):**  Thank you.  From what I'm gathering now is I'm just going to look at and cherry pick like, okay, so  they're doing a regenerative farm and they're making a lot of money.  Let's do that with our farmers.  I think that the good thing is they, I mean, to regenerate large pieces of land, we need  
**[0:18:35-0:18:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:18:35):**  money.  And if you are able to raise that from pension funds, first of all, the money doesn't, didn't  go anywhere else being put to work to plant, hopefully as regenerative system as much as  possible, but you don't get away from the ownership structure discussion.  At some point it comes up and you have to deal with it.  
**[0:18:55-0:19:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:18:55):**  I see some, obviously some answers in the chat as well, which is great.  Thank you for that.  And I would definitely put all of these in the show notes as well.  Can you put a link to the plantation purchasing organization that you mentioned?  I think it's one, two, three Martha, but not sure.  
**[0:19:16-0:19:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:19:16):**  Let me know if that is.  Yeah.  So thank you, Jeffrey, for putting it, putting it in.  We interviewed Olivier, who is the COO and Richard was the founder, Richard Fokken, relatively  recent and they raised quite a bit of money from German pension funds and have been on  
**[0:19:35-0:19:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:19:35):**  an investment spree.  So I want to open it up to other questions.  We have an open field, so please, so please either put them in the chat and or unmute  yourself if you're the first, otherwise it's going to be a bit of a chaos.  There we go.  
**[0:19:55-0:19:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:19:55):**  Philip, you're the first.  I could see you.  Hi, Koen.  Thanks a lot for the show.  Very specific question is what's the economic incentive for a farmer to transition to regenerative?  
**[0:20:10-0:20:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:20:10):**  I listen to all your podcasts on the transition.  Very interesting.  However, there's a lot of questions.  The way I see it is that when a farmer starts a transition to regenerative, probably they're  going to have to sacrifice productivity.  
**[0:20:31-0:20:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:20:31):**  They're going to have a lower yield in the production.  So that would be a negative.  And a lot of people, even in the going to get certified organic has that problem because  you have three years of calculated three years to become certified.  And at the same time, you're sacrificing yields.  
**[0:20:54-0:21:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:20:54):**  So anyway, the only way I see that the farmer can get an economic benefit from that is that  we help them be able to sell their produce directly to the consumer.  Do you have a specific crop in mind in this case, your question, or is it a general one?  Just general.  That's the only way I see that they can get an economic advantage, which can counter the  
**[0:21:34-0:21:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:21:34):**  lower productivity they're going to have for some years before the regenerative benefits  kick in.  Take out the middle man.  I think that's a good thing in general.  But I mean, it depends a bit.  
**[0:21:48-0:21:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:21:48):**  If you look at a grain farmer like Benedict, who we did the transition finance series with,  selling directly for him would be very difficult because you don't go with a few tons of grain  to a farmers market.  I think in terms of return or in terms of financial incentives, it really depends where  you look.  
**[0:22:11-0:22:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:22:11):**  If you look at, for instance, almond crops or certain grain crops, the incentive is absolutely  there to apply more regenerative practices.  If you look at, for instance, the gap in price between non-organic grains and organic grains  in the US, for instance, where there's a huge shortage, it definitely makes sense to transition.  It takes a number of years.  
**[0:22:32-0:22:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:22:32):**  So you need finance or it depends on your bank account, but many need finance to get  through those three years.  Obviously, it depends how your land is treated.  If you have already been very selective with spraying and doing a lot of conventional but  very specific agriculture practices, maybe your lag time is less.  
**[0:22:51-0:22:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:22:51):**  In many cases, there is a yield gap and the J curve goes down.  The question is how far and how deep, and that really depends on the land.  So that's very difficult to say.  If the land has been severely degraded, it could take five to 10 years.  If the land has been in an OK state, it could take a few years.  
**[0:23:07-0:23:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:23:07):**  What we now see is that for many farmers, it's a combination of things.  It's definitely the input costs which are rising and the yields which are slowly going  down in many places or actually faster going down.  So it's sort of a necessity if those two lines didn't already meet, they might meet in two  or three or five years.  
**[0:23:27-0:23:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:23:27):**  And it's a necessity to start changing and especially on the input side to reduce those  costs.  So if you look now at, again, grain, for example, Elmonds, Jonathan Lintgen just published a  study or is publishing a study and is doing the webinar, I think next week, on Elmonds  systems in the US and how much more profitable farmers are that are using regenerative practices.  
**[0:23:49-0:23:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:23:49):**  He did the same on grain a few years ago, 2018, which is one of the few studies looking  at profitability and saw that they greatly outperformed the non-regenerative practices  using farmers and also had way less pests, et cetera.  So really, I think it's a game around inputs, costs and obviously getting higher prices  for, if you can, getting higher prices for your produce.  
**[0:24:11-0:24:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:24:11):**  And in this case, I see funds being set up in the US that are specifically looking at  grain.  Why?  Because they're subject, so they buy conventional land.  They help that land through the three years of transition to organic.  
**[0:24:22-0:24:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:24:22):**  The prices of organic of grain are somewhere between 100 or 200% compared to the conventional  one.  And they are seeing that with very advanced regenerative practices, they can get to the  same yield.  They can close the yield gap between conventional and organic, meaning you get more or less  
**[0:24:38-0:24:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:24:38):**  the same yield.  In drought years, you get much better yield than your non-organic neighbors, and you get  a much better price.  And your input costs are also lower.  Your manual might be more.  
**[0:24:48-0:24:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:24:48):**  You might have some other extra costs.  But from, let's say, an economic perspective, certain crops are definitely already there  in terms of the gap.  But it's really, you have to search, you have to find, it could be that certain grain crops  are in certain places are not yet there.  
**[0:25:02-0:25:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:25:02):**  But if you can get good off-take agreements, which was the conclusion of the transition  finance series.  Transition finance is great.  But more important is to get good off-take agreements, even long-term off-take agreements,  to actually get some security in those years where you're applying more cover crops, where  
**[0:25:18-0:25:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:25:18):**  you're really going all in with regenerative practices.  Because there might be some shocks, and the margins are so thin that it's very difficult.  So Benedict is working on that.  I hope to be able to share some updates soon.  And then it's much easier to get transition finance.  
**[0:25:33-0:25:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:25:33):**  But you see, for instance, in organic, the Rabobank in the US is experimenting with organic  loans to help farmers through those three years.  Why?  Because they have more costs.  They have less.  
**[0:25:44-0:25:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:25:44):**  They don't have the premium yet, but their soil is in shock.  So there's a very interesting investment case to close that gap or to bridge that gap.  But it's going to be specific on crops because almonds are very different compared to olives,  very different compared to grapes, very different compared to grain, and very different compared  to potatoes.  
**[0:26:03-0:26:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:26:03):**  I see some answers also, or some people.  Thank you, Amin, to answer that.  I will probably put the interview with Jonathan Lündchen, where we talked about profitability  in the show notes.  And I have the link of the webinar somewhere where he's presenting a new study they did  
**[0:26:22-0:26:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:26:22):**  on almonds to see the profitability difference between regenerative ones.  And they basically looked at the neighbors.  So they had the same soil type, the same climate, everything the same, except their practices  to see what was the profitability or what is the profitability difference.  And it is quite large.  
**[0:26:39-0:26:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:26:39):**  At least I've seen the announcement.  I haven't read the report yet.  I hope that helps, Philippe.  I see impact bonds.  Very interesting.  
**[0:26:51-0:26:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:26:51):**  This is a bond-like question.  Like, if you know that in three, four, five years, you'll be or your yield will be comparable  or at least very close to, and you can get access to a much more interesting market.  In this case, the organic market in many places is very interesting.  That is a finance question.  
**[0:27:06-0:27:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:27:06):**  Can you help a large group of farmers through that transition?  That's what Pipeline Foods is doing in the US.  That's what players start to do because it's such a, I think it's 1% of the US farmland  is certified organic.  More than 6% of the sales is organic, which means there's a lot of import.  
**[0:27:22-0:27:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:27:22):**  And so there's a huge gap there to start supplying more.  In many countries, that's the case.  It comes down to a finance question and obviously an operational question as well.  Okay.  Who's next with a question?  
**[0:27:36-0:27:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:27:36):**  You can type it.  You can unmute if you're quick enough.  Just going back to your, what you were saying, but the transition.  A lot of the farmers there won't transition straight away because they haven't got finances  behind them.  
**[0:27:56-0:27:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:27:56):**  And that's a big thing.  And a lot of people will stagger that transition over five years.  Yeah, of course.  Which is that shock that's going to affect it.  Definitely.  
**[0:28:09-0:28:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:28:09):**  I think I wouldn't want to argue that anybody should take finance if you can do it slowly  and more secure.  Probably don't shock the system too much because you might be in for a surprise.  Many of the first generation, almost farmers using regenerative practices, they've been  forced to because they lost their corporate number of times or they reached the end of  
**[0:28:33-0:28:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:28:33):**  their bank account and they couldn't buy inputs anymore.  I wouldn't suggest that that's the best case.  We know the stories and it's great that they did, but they also, they could have also tipped  over and basically lost the farm.  So I would definitely, I mean, cautious and context specific transition is key.  
**[0:28:50-0:28:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:28:50):**  And hopefully in the future, many farmers obviously get their finance through local  banks.  And what we really hope with climate bonds and green bonds is that local banks can raise  capital, cheaper capital, if you are applying a regenerative practices.  Like if as a farmer that your interest rate or your payments are different, if you are  
**[0:29:09-0:29:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:29:09):**  applying regenerative practices.  And that would be very, very interesting.  They just raised the first green bond and the climate bonds initiative, certified green  bond in foreign agriculture company in Brazil, Rizoma, which we interviewed and which was  greatly oversubscribed 25 million to apply these practices.  
**[0:29:27-0:29:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:29:27):**  So it is happening.  The market is starting to move, but these are still very small, like very small incidents  almost in the space where you see this happening.  And many farmers have to do it unfortunately by themselves because their local bank doesn't  know what they're talking about if they say soil practices.  
**[0:29:44-0:29:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:29:44):**  Most commercial banks won't even look at them.  But I need.  No, no.  They already, I mean, already organic is for many, like way too difficult.  And it's unfortunate, but there's going to be a huge role for banks here.  
**[0:29:56-0:29:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:29:56):**  I don't have no doubt.  Okay.  Can I ask something?  Yeah, we had Robert first who raised his hand because he figured out the system in Zoom  to raise your hand, which is great.  
**[0:30:08-0:30:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:30:08):**  Then I'll go to you, Ben.  Robert, please go ahead.  You have to unmute.  We cannot hear you.  We cannot hear you still, Robert.  
**[0:30:14-0:30:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:30:14):**  There we are.  Yeah.  Okay.  Sorry about that.  Thanks for this.  
**[0:30:19-0:30:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:30:19):**  I'm in the process of setting up a feasibility study in southwest Uganda to build a processing  centre for coffee, which is a very high grade there, but they've no processing facilities.  And then I want to start this as a centre of excellence.  And I've been, I've visited the area, I've looked at the farming and stuff, and I think  there's a possibility of improving their yields in many ways, not just from the coffee, but  
**[0:30:58-0:31:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:30:58):**  actually from growing other crops in between the coffee trees.  These are all small farmers, usually around one to two hectares.  There's 3,200 of them.  They're in a co-op.  And this is money, pin money for them to stop them actually going into the rainforest to  
**[0:31:17-0:31:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:31:17):**  hunt for food.  So this is very important in terms of protecting the gorillas in the area.  But I'm just wondering if anybody here, or you might have some advice as to what type  of crops, you know, I'm thinking garlic.  I'm thinking herbs and medicinal herbs and spices that could be good cash crops that  
**[0:31:37-0:31:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:31:37):**  would grow in between the coffee trees in this highland area that's rich in volcanic  soil.  So that's a bit of a mouthful.  Very specific.  Anybody who knows any funding structures, I mean, applied to the Irish government's  
**[0:31:53-0:31:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:31:53):**  AADP, which is, you know, for a grant, which is pending at the moment.  Obviously there's other countries that we can link with in this type of thing.  Other EU countries that have similar foreign affairs grants.  Happy to talk about that and link with people to do great projects with other people in  other countries like I hear somebody from Kenya on this call.  
**[0:32:16-0:32:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:32:16):**  It would be nice to connect afterwards.  Yeah, absolutely.  I think to unpack the two questions, to start with the second one, I would definitely look  to make it easier financeable, we come back to something we've discussed before is to  get good offtake agreements.  
**[0:32:34-0:32:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:32:34):**  Meaning get the bean to bar or the coffee place, the bean to cup movement.  And there are actually buyers now that start to ask for higher quality and higher quantity  as well.  But get a better price for, and that actually also answered the question somebody asked  in the chat.  
**[0:32:52-0:32:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:32:52):**  What's a good approach and argument to persuade farmers is to pay for quality and that could  mean very different things in very different regions or crops.  In this case, coffee, there is a market not as easily accessible as we want to sometimes,  but there's definitely a market for higher quality.  And so that would make everything a lot easier.  
**[0:33:13-0:33:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:33:13):**  Obviously, if there are interesting offtake agreements there, or at least interest, et  cetera.  So if you have companion crops or cash crops, I would ask to the experts like Preta Terra  or ReNature, the ones that are building this, a central public our forestry systems around  the world, like what makes sense where and why.  
**[0:33:31-0:33:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:33:31):**  And in this case, it's a super complex specific question that I really don't know if garlic  makes sense or not.  So I wouldn't go there, but there are people out there that are building these systems  and very complex, but also focus on cash crops and companion crops and crops that make sense  together, both because of the soil, but also because of the local context of what is sellable  
**[0:33:50-0:33:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:33:50):**  and what obviously builds more resilience in the system.  So I would look for the right consultants there that can help with those systems.  And then we go to Feni.  If anybody else, please put in the chat if you have any suggestions for Robert.  Yes, thanks.  
**[0:34:14-0:34:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:34:14):**  So I'm in the beginning at the beginning of my journey to build a solution for transitioning  farmers to reach an egg.  And I'm wondering, I mean, a lot is happening, of course, already.  So in my exploration, I'm wondering if you have an idea, you guys, what kind of solutions  do we need or need more of to transition farmers really at scale?  
**[0:34:49-0:34:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:34:49):**  We can spend a few hours on that, Feni.  Thinking about what we focus on in the podcast, I think that's the best answer I can give  at least is our two main or three main things.  One is definitely nutrient density.  So it comes back to the quality discussion.  
**[0:35:08-0:35:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:35:08):**  Then we show that connection between healthy soil, healthy produce, healthy gut system  and healthy people and that's healthy ecosystems.  And that would probably get away of a whole superfood discussion.  But there is a discussion that we can have on food as medicine.  And I think there's a lot to discover there.  
**[0:35:25-0:35:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:35:25):**  A lot of very ugly things like we did with Zach Bush, but a lot of very interesting things  if we start looking at food as much more than just fuel.  And there are some very interesting research pieces and very practical research, which  actually your farmers coming out that this carrot is not the same as that carrot.  The organic carrots you find in the supermarket or one actually grown in very healthy soil  
**[0:35:46-0:35:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:35:46):**  are not the same thing.  They might look the same.  They might have the same color.  But if you look under the hood, if you look what they actually have, and I think that  could unlock a huge amount of consumer demand.  
**[0:35:57-0:36:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:35:57):**  If we start to actually treat food as medicine, we're not there yet.  We still need a lot of moving parts.  But as one of the big funders in this space said to me not so long ago that we're literally  in terms of diet, in terms of understanding what food does to us and what the connection  is to soil and us, we're in the stone age.  
**[0:36:16-0:36:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:36:16):**  We have very, very, very little understanding.  You just have to open a diet book to see how far we are from truly understanding that system  and truly understanding our gut system honestly.  So that's definitely a huge piece.  Like that could unlock so much, maybe not in the coffee space, maybe not in some certain  
**[0:36:32-0:36:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:36:32):**  specific places, but I think if we start seeing what's actually healthy for us and what's  not, that could help.  Second piece is landscape size.  How do we get this discussion from a farm to farm level to a full ecosystem, a watershed?  How do we scale it in terms of hectares and acres a lot more?  
**[0:36:52-0:36:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:36:52):**  What kind of technology do we need for that to figure out what to plant, where and why?  It's something I hope to do a series on next year.  I just keep saying it, so hopefully it happens to really dive deep into that question.  Commonland is releasing a big piece with KPMG, I think in a week or two, no, in a week actually,  and on the returns on a landscape size restoration project in Spain.  
**[0:37:14-0:37:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:37:14):**  So there's a lot happening there, but still there's not enough discussion, not enough  doing.  Like we need to get this to an island scale, to a river system scale, to a watershed, to  an ecosystem because farm by farm, we're just simply not getting the network effects we  need.  
**[0:37:28-0:37:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:37:28):**  And then ecosystem payments for farmers, like how do we pay farmers, not just for the food,  but for the other services, which is very difficult, not easy, a lot of moving parts,  but a lot happening as well, especially now around carbon.  And then the fourth theme we at least focus on is transition finance to finance the above  three.  
**[0:37:46-0:37:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:37:46):**  And that's what we try, really, really try to keep it to, but it's not easy because there's  so much happening in this space.  So I hope that sort of answers.  We go deeper into that also in the course of this.  Yeah, great.  
**[0:37:58-0:37:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:37:58):**  Thanks.  And we try to answer the question by what's fast, like what in the next 15 years can really  tip the scale and why now?  Because many other things obviously need to happen around land ownership, et cetera, that  we've discussed as well, but they're much slower processes.  
**[0:38:14-0:38:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:38:14):**  So we decide to include it sometimes, but not fully focused on that.  I see a lot of questions in the chat, which I will get to, and I see Joram as well waving.  So we go to Joram first and then I'll go to the chat.  Good.  So we'll get to the discussion and answers.  
**[0:38:30-0:38:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:38:30):**  As you know, I'm very much interested in how we're able to create the measurement, what  tools there are today for measurement verification, but create transparency.  We speak about so many stakeholders now, the finance and customers and brands and so on.  What measures there is today and how can we create transparency, which I think will eventually  will actually help to scale connected to the previous question, we're able to do it.  
**[0:38:57-0:39:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:38:57):**  Obviously consumer aiming for more healthy products and so on, but there's a big show  of transparency and there's an issue of credibility today or certification scheme and all of that  that we see on the ground.  So interested very much on this area.  Yeah, me too.  
**[0:39:15-0:39:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:39:15):**  I'm scheduled to do an update interview tomorrow.  I scheduled it, so let's hope it happens tomorrow with Greg Schumacher of Teak Origin who is  definitely on the transparency side, quite, let's say forward thinking and advanced.  And they do a lot of this research in supermarkets, like what's actually in your food, in your  grapes, in your tomatoes, et cetera, et cetera.  
**[0:39:38-0:39:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:39:38):**  So I'm very much looking forward to checking with him on that, like what has happened since  the last time we talked, which has been a year, I think a year plus, and he's been by  far the most listened episode we ever made.  I'm also scheduled to do one with Ben Kittrich, the founder of the Biomutrient Food Association,  who really looks at that soil connection as well and has made a device, which I don't  
**[0:39:59-0:40:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:39:59):**  have here, but I bought it, to basically measure the nutrient density of food.  The big thing missing there is the context.  Like I can measure tomato, which is great.  I can do an apple, but if I don't know, I mean, I get a number of numbers, but if I  don't know the context, what these numbers actually mean and how an apple could be or  
**[0:40:17-0:40:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:40:17):**  should be, or this type of apple, then we sort of get lost in the numbers.  So we are really at that stone age phase, but I hope in the next months to do at least  to get from some of the people working at the absolute cutting edge of this field to  get an update where we are, what's missing, and how many years are we from measuring this  stuff in the supermarket or actually getting a label and seeing, because if you look at  
**[0:40:40-0:40:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:40:40):**  an, like look at a label and it says tomato, it could mean anything.  It could be organic, which obviously has to be certified there, but it doesn't say anything  about the nutrient density and we're really early there, but that transparency is going  to be revolutionary.  Like it would, I wouldn't say change the food sector overnight, but it would be a huge shift  
**[0:41:01-0:41:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:41:01):**  if we start discussing quality per hectare or quantity of nutrients and start looking  at what do you need versus what do I need because we have a different gut system and  personalized medicine, which a lot of people talk about, but they never talk about the  food side of things, is going to be very interesting and local become very interesting because  maybe your gut flora mimics the flora of the soil nearby and thus you're much more able  
**[0:41:24-0:41:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:41:24):**  to absorb certain things or not and seasonal, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.  It's one of the topics I need to dive deeper into and the short answer is we're not there  yet, but we're coming.  And if I may say you're looking on the olive gray, which is the end consumer, but maybe  the driver of initially would be the government subsidiary or financial programs of the bank  
**[0:41:46-0:41:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:41:46):**  and spoke about the quality of the land that is improving and so on.  Maybe there would be consumer next time.  I think food companies, I, my guess is that they're going to be food as medicine companies,  very hip, maybe at the beginning, very super food focused, but actually with quality of  data underneath that, that are going to dive into that and show maybe baby food brand.  
**[0:42:10-0:42:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:42:10):**  I interviewed one recently that are only using by dynamic products for partly that reason.  They might not be able to show it yet and measure it yet, but they have made that choice  and they see different nutrients and they see different things and they, they promoted  as that.  And maybe new parents are the first to jump on this or maybe athletes or maybe people  
**[0:42:31-0:42:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:42:31):**  at risk.  We're, we're obviously talking about healthcare a lot these days.  So I would look there at some niches and maybe people that are in the hospital and with certain,  I mean, they did some research in the Netherlands actually, I think in the North where they  saw that people, they don't know why, but getting local food in the hospitals was shortening  
**[0:42:47-0:42:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:42:47):**  their hospital days, which is very interesting from an insurance perspective.  Those things look for those smaller examples and smaller studies.  And that might be the beginning of this piece.  I see that Jeffrey had a, has a question.  Go ahead, Jeffrey.  
**[0:43:02-0:43:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:43:02):**  Thank you.  Yeah.  I just wanted to follow up on the point of the food companies and the role of food companies  because I think that a lot of the discussion is how do we grow the food?  So on the really the agricultural side of it.  
**[0:43:16-0:43:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:43:16):**  But I think it's really important to remember that the structure of the farms, particularly  monocultures are there because the buyer wants large quantities.  So I'm wondering, you know, from, from a small farmer perspective and I think, Malia, if  I'm pronouncing your name correctly, that you were asking about smallholder farmers  and how they can participate in this.  
**[0:43:42-0:43:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:43:42):**  I think one of the big questions is who's buying the hundred different varieties of  food and spices and herbs that are being produced off of a regenerative farm.  And it's not just one product, it's not just one commodity.  And so I think this, this marketing aspect, I'm just wondering if there's, if there's  a, if the conversation has gotten to how to incorporate more food companies.  
**[0:44:07-0:44:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:44:07):**  I mean, you mentioned the super foods and things like that.  It's definitely necessary.  I'm just wondering how many, if, if there are food companies that are actively participating  in this so far.  That's a great question.  
**[0:44:20-0:44:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:44:20):**  It's, it's sort of the bundling, unbundling and the bundling.  I think it's a question that we've actually had.  I don't remember if Lenny talked about it of one, two, three on this, on one of the  Ask Me Anything webinars.  It's something they struggle with because you can only make your agroforestry system  
**[0:44:37-0:44:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:44:37):**  so complex that at some point you have too many species and thus you have only a few  kilos of everything and thus you cannot sell it.  So there's a tension there with complexity of what you would like to do and what you  can actually sell in right enough quantities to, to make sense for your market.  And there, I think you're going to see a bundling of farmers getting together, starting some  
**[0:44:55-0:44:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:44:55):**  processing together.  And you get sort of this unbundling and bundling that you constantly see in every sector happening.  And I think we need to be careful there and keep asking those questions, like how complex  do you want to have it and what can you actually sell and what are cash crops and whatnot.  And I know these discussions are happening in agroforestry.  
**[0:45:16-0:45:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:45:16):**  I know that Earthworm Foundation in Indonesia actually set up a processing company to process  everything that comes out of some of their pilot forests, which we're obviously scared  to do a podcast about, which is not happening yet.  But they see that as local processing comes into that, decentralized, but you have a certain,  you need a certain scale to process the garlic or to process if you want to process that.  
**[0:45:38-0:45:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:45:38):**  And that's, that's a tension that many of these, what you see many of these advanced  farmers that are using regenerative practices, they start at some point in the processing  company for them, their friends, their neighbors, because they have this some kind of heirloom  weed that fits perfectly in their rotation, but nobody wants to buy it.  And so they actually figure out how to process it themselves.  
**[0:45:59-0:46:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:45:59):**  And there are actually very interesting mini processing units coming on the market that  that are like the mini grinders.  And there are interesting things happening there, but there is a tension between scale  and the economies of scale obviously exists.  And so it's, it's not an easy one and we'd love to have 25 species in our agroforestry  
**[0:46:20-0:46:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:46:20):**  system, but if you can only sell two of them, you're probably gonna end up focusing a bit  more on that.  So it's a tension there as we scale this from a few hectares to thousands of hectares.  And I know it's a tension that the large agroforestry players like one, two, three are working on.  Like, what can we do more than just the cacao?  
**[0:46:38-0:46:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:46:38):**  In terms of quality, what's very interesting is you have a lot of this very high end ones,  like in terms of cacao being to bar like super specific, almost like wine, like we really  focused on a certain year, et cetera.  But what's interesting is that the big players that are buying a lot of cacao are starting  to look not for that type of quality, but just below that, like they want higher end  
**[0:46:57-0:47:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:46:57):**  cacao and they're willing to pay for that as well.  So in some crops, you can see that the market is starting to shift or a reasonable amount  of the market is starting to shift towards quality.  And that makes the system possible.  That makes it possible to focus on quality.  
**[0:47:11-0:47:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:47:11):**  And so focus on those crops where there is a premium on quality and it could be certain  protein levels.  It could be a lot of farmers are incorporating certain species into their rotation in North  America.  Why?  
**[0:47:25-0:47:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:47:25):**  Because there is the artisanal beer movement that is looking for certain things in their  beers and is willing to pay for that.  And it might be one piece of your rotation, but it might make the whole thing worth it.  So it's a puzzle and you would love to do it more complex than probably you can find  buyers for at the moment.  
**[0:47:38-0:47:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:47:38):**  And that's what everybody's going through.  And with that, I would like to use a few more minutes to actually answer some questions  or try to answer some questions in the chat.  We go back a bit.  I saw Deidre asking, is there a European bank that might grandfather finance to all European  
**[0:47:54-0:47:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:47:54):**  countries for these transitions?  We had actually Triodos Bank on the podcast that admitted immediately that they're quite  comfortable with organic, but not at all comfortable with regenerative transitions yet, but they're  super interested to follow and actually have a regenerative money center now that has a  website as well, which they didn't have when we interviewed them.  
**[0:48:13-0:48:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:48:13):**  So there are banks looking at it.  I know some German banks are looking at it, but it's still, they need 20, 30 years of  data in some cases.  So they need to be comfortable with these transitions and need to say, okay, you're  going to take your grain farm from this from A to B. And I know the premium and I know  
**[0:48:26-0:48:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:48:26):**  you have an offtake agreement lined up.  And so I can finance it because the newest things here in terms of transition finance  are not going to come from banks.  They're going to come from funds, private individuals, crowdfunding, crowd investing  platforms, super interesting.  
**[0:48:41-0:48:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:48:41):**  A lot is happening there.  They're going to come from all of us trying to finance the transitions.  And then when we have the data, the big money hopefully will come, but we should definitely  plan for that to make sure that we can basically tap into the larger money sources, which are  green bonds, which are banks, which are insurance companies, et cetera.  
**[0:49:02-0:49:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:49:02):**  Regenerative ag bond investment opportunities.  Peter, great question.  I know one which was five times oversubscribed.  So the answer, at least from my side, but please correct me if I'm wrong, there isn't  too much there yet.  
**[0:49:13-0:49:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:49:13):**  There's a lot of sustainable or renewable energy obviously happening on the bond market.  And the fact that Rizoma managed to do the first one now, I think is a great moment.  And I hope there will be many more that really put this type of money to work.  So far, there was one which was fully filled with Brazilian investors.  And I know some investors tried to get in from outside and it wasn't possible.  
**[0:49:39-0:49:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:49:39):**  And another question, global impact investment space, interact.  That's a very interesting question.  What is the role going to be of the EU versus the state versus the regions?  Don't forget the regions in Europe, very important.  I think it's going to be, that's where the pain is felt.  
**[0:49:57-0:50:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:49:57):**  I mean, there were massive floods in Northern Italy, massive droughts in the Netherlands.  I think this is going to be in many cases tied to regional approaches and maybe connected  to some European money or some state money, but don't expect regeneration to be on any  of the, let's say, to do lists of that.  There's obviously a lot of interesting work happening in Brussels with the farm to fork,  
**[0:50:22-0:50:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:50:22):**  et cetera, but it could also be easily hijacked by some other forces.  So I think it's going to be in many cases regional that feel the pain of the floods  of droughts, et cetera, that are going to act on this and get involved and hopefully  move things.  I see an answer from Joe.  
**[0:50:41-0:50:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:50:41):**  Thank you very much.  And for Fenny, which is great.  We need help to the public to understand the benefits.  That's going to be an enormous task to all of us because we've been trained to think  that all food is the same if it's called the same.  
**[0:51:00-0:51:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:51:00):**  Somebody said on the podcast once, Organic taught us a great job of looking at the label.  Now we need to look beyond.  That's a massive, we need a lot of smart marketing and communication folks to do that.  Alan, this can be done through small local gardens.  Thank you.  
**[0:51:17-0:51:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:51:17):**  What's this nutrient density do?  It's the bio-nutrient food association and it's called the bio-nutrient food meter, but  I will definitely put it in the show notes as I will copy this.  Jeffrey, I will copy this question.  What are some of the best examples that's already a plural of successful watershed scale  
**[0:51:35-0:51:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:51:35):**  regenerative projects?  Not too many is the short answer, Charles.  So I would definitely look at common land who's doing a number of these or a number  of their spinoffs actually.  There is WWF, the Sustainable Landscape Finance Lab, where I interviewed Paul Chatterton,  
**[0:51:54-0:51:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:51:54):**  came out with an interesting research recently.  So there's some work around this.  I mean, we've interviewed a few people.  I will put them in the show notes, but there are very, very few people looking at landscape  size, unfortunately.  
**[0:52:06-0:52:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:52:06):**  I think this is going to be one of the big discussions we need to have.  How do we get permaculture to a landscape scale?  How do we get regenerative practices to thousands and thousands of factors and how to figure  out what to do where and why?  So there are not too many examples, at least now that I know, that are extremely successful.  
**[0:52:23-0:52:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:52:23):**  Cool, you did a great interview.  Thank you very much, Vincent.  With the perennial fund, do you think that could work in Europe as well?  Absolutely, yes.  And I hope many people will start perennial funds, plural, because I think we needed that  
**[0:52:39-0:52:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:52:39):**  kind of skin in the game transition finance for a lot of crops and a lot of regions.  Again, there, I think we're going to see a lot of, let's say, experts that are really  good at helping transition farmers starting to also offer finance for those farmers.  Because in many cases, the business model for the consultants at the moment in this  space is selling their time to farmers that are living on very small margins.  
**[0:53:01-0:53:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:53:01):**  So that's not a very easy business.  But if you can also offer the finance and maybe the offtake agreements, which is something  a perennial fund together with Pipeline Foods does, then you have a very interesting package.  And again, coming back to how do we help farmers in that transition, a very interesting package,  both finance, access to knowledge, which a lot of these consultants have, and access  
**[0:53:19-0:53:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:53:19):**  to markets.  And then you have a winning combination.  One of the two, one of the three is not enough.  I think all three are key.  And I hope to see many, many, many perennial funds.  
**[0:53:27-0:53:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:53:27):**  They're closing their round in the US, which is very small, unfortunately, but they're  closing, which is great.  And I hope to have them back soon to share some updates, but they should be hitting the  ground running soon.  And hopefully we're going to learn a lot from that.  
**[0:53:40-0:53:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:53:40):**  But this kind of skin in the game, really partnering with the farmer.  When the farmer is making money, you're making money.  When the farmer is not, you're not.  And helping him or her through that transition, I think, is going to be crucial, especially  in this phase where there's no easy access to other types of finance.  
**[0:53:56-0:54:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:53:56):**  Ah, great, Jeroen.  I would absolutely love more info on that.  I think they spun off the company, if I remember correctly, but I don't remember the details.  I answered that one.  Ellen.  
**[0:54:17-0:54:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:54:17):**  Definitely, many farmers are opening up for tours, et cetera, and other income streams.  I mean, tourism is a bit tricky.  But for instance, office spaces, I mean, there are many, many options to obviously use the  land in different ways and basically stack business models on top of each other.  What's the best way to connect to farmers?  
**[0:54:41-0:54:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:54:41):**  Go and have coffee and learn and listen.  Mike, that would be my advice in any circumstances.  Go and listen because there's so much to learn there.  Should regeneratively marketed pets and endless discussion.  I know an open plan, but there's definitely a lot of work being done on regenerative organic  
**[0:55:00-0:55:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:55:00):**  at the moment by Patagonia, Dr. Bronner's and their partners in Rodale.  I don't know yet.  I haven't figured out my opinion on should we label this in the label fatigue we have.  I think in some products it makes sense and in some cases it gives the confidence to the  market.  
**[0:55:18-0:55:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:55:18):**  In many others, it might not.  And they distract.  They're doing very interesting work and I hope to have Elizabeth who's running it on  the podcast soon.  But I also know a lot of people are very scared of other labels and other yes and no questions  
**[0:55:29-0:55:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:55:29):**  like you are or you're not regenerative and it's a journey, another destination.  I mean, those kinds of things are tricky.  I think I'm going to wrap it up because we're already two minutes over and I want to make  sure.  Can you address the interface between certification labeling branding?  
**[0:55:54-0:55:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:55:54):**  That's one for another time.  I will try to add something there.  Amy, but I think we're not going to make it now.  So unless there are any burning last questions, I would love to wrap it up and thank you so  much for your time and for anybody that's still here after more than an hour.  
**[0:56:12-0:56:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:56:12):**  I will put as much as I can in the show notes, which probably should be out by tomorrow,  the day after tomorrow.  And obviously also the recording, which feel free to share and share it right in.  And if you have any questions, you can go to the website where we put all the podcasts  and obviously you can find out the course we did on YouTube and also via Gumroad.  
**[0:56:34-0:56:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:56:34):**  If you want to know more, find us on Twitter, Instagram, or reach me.  I think you have all my email address.  Thank you so much and have a great evening, day, wherever you are and see you soon.  Thanks Koen.  Bye.  
**[0:56:49-0:56:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:56:49):**  Thank you Koen.  Very good.  Dear friends of the podcast.  I'm super excited to share with you the online video course, investing in regenerative agriculture  and food, how to put money to work in regenerating soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty  
**[0:57:07-0:57:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:57:07):**  food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course after a hundred interviews and more than a hundred hours of  audio asking the question, how to put money to work in regenerating soils.  And I've been following the space since 2011 and recording these podcasts since 2016.  We thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  
**[0:57:24-0:57:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:57:24):**  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision-making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  What questions should you ask?  
**[0:57:35-0:57:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:57:35):**  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  
**[0:57:43-0:57:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:57:43):**  For whom is this course?  You the soil builders and investors in the space, the soil builders, people working in  this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers, vehicle builders, crowd investing,  platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food companies, permaculture, key line  designers, holistic management, consultants, et cetera, et cetera.  
**[0:58:02-0:58:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:58:02):**  People that are building soil at scale and the investors who are putting their own money  to work through their family office or as private individuals or people who are putting  other people's money to work through foundations, institutional capital banks, insurance companies,  et cetera.  Is this course free?  
**[0:58:18-0:58:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:58:18):**  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you.  And I'm very aware that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very  different means.  
**[0:58:31-0:58:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:58:31):**  So I'm inviting you if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides.  
**[0:58:47-0:58:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:58:47):**  So you don't have to ride along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  if you're a soil builder.  
**[0:59:06-0:59:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:59:06):**  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  
**[0:59:22-0:59:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:59:22):**  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking, click on  
**[0:59:39-0:59:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/ama-webinar-10-13-2020/#t=0:59:39):**  the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  