---
title: Paul Woebkenberg Ecosias 500k Flex Finance Fund For Regen Ag
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2019-09-13)  
### Author(s): Koen van Seijen  

**[0:00:00-0:00:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/09/15/paul-woebkenberg/#t=0:00:00):**  This interview is about how the search engine that plants trees will invest half a million euros into region ag farms.  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture, Investing as if the Planet Mattered,  a podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  
**[0:00:20-0:00:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/09/15/paul-woebkenberg/#t=0:00:20):**  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities and ecosystems,  while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  
**[0:00:32-0:00:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/09/15/paul-woebkenberg/#t=0:00:32):**  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we, as investors, big and small, and consumers,  start paying much more attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  
**[0:00:48-0:01:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/09/15/paul-woebkenberg/#t=0:00:48):**  Before we get started, I've been recording these interviews next to my day job,  and I will definitely continue to do so and release about an episode a month.  But at the same time, I would love to take this further, share more interviews,  
**[0:01:00-0:01:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/09/15/paul-woebkenberg/#t=0:01:00):**  there are many more stories to share on investing in regenerative food and agriculture,  more depth, improve the quality, maybe even doing some video series.  So I started a Patreon community, which makes it easy to support creators like myself.  
**[0:01:13-0:01:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/09/15/paul-woebkenberg/#t=0:01:13):**  If these podcasts have been of value to you, and if you have the means,  I invite you to support me and make this happen.  For more information, please find the link to my Patreon account in the description below.  
**[0:01:25-0:01:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/09/15/paul-woebkenberg/#t=0:01:25):**  And now, without further ado, the interview. Enjoy!  Today I'm interviewing Paul Wibkenberg of Ecosia,  and we'll take a deep dive into their incubator to catalyze change in global farming practices.  
**[0:01:38-0:01:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/09/15/paul-woebkenberg/#t=0:01:38):**  Welcome Paul!  Hi Koen!  So, let's start with a brief introduction of what Ecosia is for someone who is listening and doesn't know,  
**[0:01:46-0:02:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/09/15/paul-woebkenberg/#t=0:01:46):**  and then obviously into your incubator slash fund into Regenec.  Yes, so Ecosia is the search engine that plants trees.  So we are a search engine and use the money that we generate to support tree planting projects worldwide,  
**[0:02:05-0:02:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/09/15/paul-woebkenberg/#t=0:02:05):**  especially in Africa, South America, Southeast Asia.  We are a non-for-profit organization, so 80% of our profits go directly into those tree planting projects,  and the rest is sort of parked for future projects.  
**[0:02:22-0:02:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/09/15/paul-woebkenberg/#t=0:02:22):**  And as a search engine that's planting trees, I think that's your tagline, you've been known for that.  How come you got interested in Regenec, in soil, and then not only got interested,  but actually decided to start an incubator slash a fund to actually actively invest in this space?  
**[0:02:39-0:02:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/09/15/paul-woebkenberg/#t=0:02:39):**  This thinking started probably in 2017, 2018,  when we really asked ourselves the question, what else can we do about sustainable forms of land use,  besides reforestation and planting trees?  
**[0:02:55-0:03:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/09/15/paul-woebkenberg/#t=0:02:55):**  Especially since, particularly in places like Europe, the main problem is probably more in the field of agriculture.  And so we got interested and started to read a lot and talk with people about the field of regenerative agriculture practices.  And in that reflection, we found that if we want to support that, then our lever would probably be through,  
**[0:03:20-0:03:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/09/15/paul-woebkenberg/#t=0:03:20):**  similar to our tree planting projects, through providing capital to farming ventures for this transition.  So we see our money as a sort of catalyzer, meaning that the money flows back into this fund or incubator  to be reinvested. We don't necessarily want to get rich with this practice,  
**[0:03:48-0:04:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/09/15/paul-woebkenberg/#t=0:03:48):**  but we do want to grow the pot of money that we have available to invest into such projects.  And just to be clear, I mean, you're a Stuart-owned company. I interviewed Armin, actually, that's how we met at the conference they did last year in Berlin.  So you actually have, your mission is also in the ownership of the company.  
**[0:04:08-0:04:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/09/15/paul-woebkenberg/#t=0:04:08):**  I will link the interview below in the show notes. And to understand a bit more, you've done one round already.  You're doing a second round now. And as a full disclosure, I'll be part of the jury of the second round.  But can you explain a bit about the first round you did last year, your experiences, what came out of it, what you've done, where you invested, etc.  
**[0:04:27-0:05:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/09/15/paul-woebkenberg/#t=0:04:27):**  Yeah, sure. So last year we ran one round with very close collaboration with Richard Perkins.  We had 14 applicants and very interesting projects. In the end, we selected two projects that received 50,000 euros each in the form of loans.  We were very happy with the sort of the response to our call for applications.  
**[0:05:02-0:05:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/09/15/paul-woebkenberg/#t=0:05:02):**  One thing we learned was that it's difficult to find people who sort of can look at their projects from both lenses.  So the ecological concept lens of really doing something that improves the ecosystem and that is sort of very sort of has a strong focus on regenerative practices and as well the lens of finance.  So how can I structure my venture in a way that it will become profitable in a fairly short period so that it can compete with conventional farming in the market?  
**[0:05:38-0:06:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/09/15/paul-woebkenberg/#t=0:05:38):**  And this isn't easy by no means, but we believe that this is necessary in order to make a transition quickly.  And we believe that even in the sort of tense space or the tense situation of finance in agriculture, that it is possible to apply very regenerative practices.  And we would like to support that transition.  
**[0:06:09-0:06:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/09/15/paul-woebkenberg/#t=0:06:09):**  Yeah, I think it's the constant struggle I see in the podcast as well. Like one, when I'm interviewing people and the most exciting ones, honestly, for me are the ones that are very regenerative, like have a deep permaculture mind, a deep holistic decision making framework and also understand finance and speak London city language as well.  But they're very, very, very rare. So it's a constant search for me to find as I can completely understand that.  I think with Richard Perkins, you actually found somebody that's been very, very profitable and at the same time, very, very regenerative.  
**[0:06:47-0:07:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/09/15/paul-woebkenberg/#t=0:06:47):**  But also, I mean, he pushes and I will link some of his videos below.  He pushes constantly on the numbers. And I think it's very refreshing to have that focus.  Like it has to be financially sustainable. It has to be financially profitable.  
**[0:07:01-0:07:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/09/15/paul-woebkenberg/#t=0:07:01):**  And I think even mentioned someone is video. I think regenerative farmers should should drive Tesla's or there's no reason why they shouldn't.  And and of course, that goes against many of the sustainable ag or regenerative that sort of has the stigma of of not being more profitable of agriculture in general, of not being very profitable or worthwhile, which I think is a very toxic, toxic theme, honestly.  Yeah, just however, to make clear, I mean, we're not looking only for farmers who were previously employed in London city.  
**[0:07:36-0:08:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/09/15/paul-woebkenberg/#t=0:07:36):**  And we are also not looking only for farmers that strive to or are already driving Tesla's.  Sorry, sorry to make that. But obviously, you're right. I mean, but we we are very open to the proposals and we're happy to in a way also accompany people in their progression.  And in the evolution of their business case. But we do expect that people are ready to think about their profitability and and can help us understand their business case and why it makes sense.  
**[0:08:10-0:08:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/09/15/paul-woebkenberg/#t=0:08:10):**  And if we come jointly to the conclusion that it doesn't make sense, then probably it's not the right moment yet to invest into this project.  And on the other hand, if we if we find jointly that it's a great project and we will invest.  Yeah, I think it's a great point. I think you're mentioning something really nice on the website of the of the fund and incubator, which is fair profit sharing.  
**[0:08:32-0:08:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/09/15/paul-woebkenberg/#t=0:08:32):**  I think we're talking about fair profits here. I'm not talking about I get very suspicious as an investor or somebody that works with a lot of investors when there are double digit returns very quickly on region ag or there are people promising a lot of things,  which usually means that they played with Excel to a certain extent that Excel told me this and this.  So I think it's time to look a bit at the fund and what is the amount of money you have available?  
**[0:08:58-0:09:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/09/15/paul-woebkenberg/#t=0:08:58):**  Why this specific structure? And then I definitely ask again about fair profit sharing.  What do you mean by that? Yeah. So the fund for the moment has a budget of 500000 euros to be spent over about two years.  So we're looking forward to the applications that we will receive. Just to be clear, to be invested. To be invested, yes.  
**[0:09:21-0:09:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/09/15/paul-woebkenberg/#t=0:09:21):**  We're looking forward to applications this year by the deadline of the 15th of December.  And then next year will probably be around the same time again.  And so as I mentioned previously, we are not planning to make this a fund of which the aim is purely to make large profits.  
**[0:09:48-0:10:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/09/15/paul-woebkenberg/#t=0:09:48):**  But we are creating a fund that wants to support financially viable projects.  And one criterion for that is that the project can pay back the amount of money that was invested.  And we have mentioned here a period of roughly 10 years. This can be a bit more, can be a bit less.  
**[0:10:09-0:10:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/09/15/paul-woebkenberg/#t=0:10:09):**  We are happy to listen to the projects, what they propose. And that is also valid for the amount of profit that is shared.  So when we say profit sharing, we mean risk and profit sharing. That includes, of course, the risks.  That means that if a project venture doesn't go the way it was planned and runs into severe difficulties, then we are sharing the risk.  
**[0:10:38-0:10:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/09/15/paul-woebkenberg/#t=0:10:38):**  And if the project is, on the other hand, very financially profitable and can compete very quickly in the market,  then we find it fair to also share the profits with us. And with us, I mean, of course, the fund.  So the money goes into the pot of money that will be invested into other projects of this kind.  
**[0:10:59-0:11:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/09/15/paul-woebkenberg/#t=0:10:59):**  I think it's a very, very nice way of basically involving and co-creating these investments together with the projects.  So just to finalise and finish off this short interview, who is your ideal candidate project, if you have one?  I don't think we have an ideal candidate from our experience. So what I can say is that we aim at farmers who want to realise regenerative agricultural practices.  
**[0:11:33-0:12:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/09/15/paul-woebkenberg/#t=0:11:33):**  And that means we are looking for projects that are on a given piece of our earth, be it land or water,  and that will put into realisation those regenerative practices.  And inherently, that means it can be a new farm, it can be an existing established farm that would like to transition and can be young farmers, can be old farmers.  
**[0:12:02-0:12:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/09/15/paul-woebkenberg/#t=0:12:02):**  We are open to all sorts of groups in that space.  However, we are probably a bit more distant to, let's say, start-ups that are providing services to farmers or that have a purely educational or sort of focus on campaigning.  This at the moment is not really part of our focus group.  
**[0:12:28-0:13:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/09/15/paul-woebkenberg/#t=0:12:28):**  And yeah, we are looking forward to engaging with more and more farmers and to help convert more surface to regenerative agriculture practices.  Yeah, I want to thank you so much, Paul, first of all, for giving me the opportunity to be part of the jury and also to come on the podcast and explain a bit more.  I will definitely share it wide and far, and I hope many who are listening will do the same. If it's not you that could be part of this fund slash incubator, maybe you know someone who should be.  
**[0:13:03-0:13:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/09/15/paul-woebkenberg/#t=0:13:03):**  So definitely feel free to share. The competition is sorry, the fund incubator is global, so don't feel limited to size, country, place and type.  So please send in anything you think is relevant. Thank you so much, Paul. And have a great day.  Thank you, Koen, you too. Talk to you soon.  
**[0:13:49-0:13:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/09/15/paul-woebkenberg/#t=0:13:49):**  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  