### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2021-00-20)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  You're going to listen to the audio recording of the Q&A webinar with Brendan Welch and  Phil Taylor of the Perennial Fund and Madagasculture about transition finance and really partnering  
**[0:00:25-0:00:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:00:25):**  with farmers.  For the full video, all the show notes and a lot more, go to investinginregenerativeagriculture.com  and find the webinar tab.  Enjoy!  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture, Investing as if  
**[0:00:41-0:00:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:00:41):**  the Planet Mattered, a podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative  food and agriculture space to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate  soil, people, local communities and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  
**[0:01:02-0:01:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:01:02):**  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much  more attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  In March last year, we launched our membership community to make it easy for fans to support  our work.  
**[0:01:19-0:01:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:01:19):**  So many of you have joined as a member.  We've launched different types of benefits, exclusive content, Q&A webinars with former  guests, ask me anything sessions, plus so much more to come in the future.  For more information on the different tiers, benefits and how to become a member, check  gumroad.com slash investing region ag or find the link below.  
**[0:01:39-0:01:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:01:39):**  Thank you.  A very warm welcome to this Q&A webinar with Phil and Brendan of Perennial Fund and MAD  Agriculture.  I think it's one of the episodes I've shared the most because you have been on a webinar  before, but the episode we recorded with Benedict skin in the game, transition finance has been  
**[0:01:56-0:02:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:01:56):**  something that somehow came up so many times in different conversations with many people.  And I always said, just listen to this, read the white paper and something is happening  there and something has definitely been happening there.  And so I was very happy to see, of course, the closure of your fund.  We're going to talk about that, but also just to check in, to see where you're at and to  
**[0:02:15-0:02:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:02:15):**  give the podcast community the chance to ask you questions and see what they can learn.  What can we learn in other places around the world?  Because you're very place and context specific, but my hunch is that we're going to see a  lot of perennial fund like models around the world over the next years.  And so I'm very much looking forward to that.  
**[0:02:34-0:02:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:02:34):**  I would love to start just with a brief we're now in, I mean, apart from that, you have  a meat, a food of snow, but just to give a bit of context where you're at now, what does  your days at the moment look like?  We're at the 20th of April for anybody that's looking at this recording.  What does a day in the life of a perennial fund at the moment look like and where do  
**[0:02:52-0:02:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:02:52):**  we find you in what state of mind at the moment?  I would say maybe some vital energy, a little frantic, you know, trying to just dig in and  really do the work.  We've been heads down, just delivering, finding farmers, underwriting, getting loans out,  thinking about growth for hiring a couple of people and struggling to find, I think  
**[0:03:14-0:03:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:03:14):**  a little bit of spaciousness to really think cognizantly about the next, you know, 24 hours  and week and months.  So we were just sitting down before this and sort of scrambling a little bit to even hop  online.  And I was like, my goodness, I'm not even sure what I'm going to say.  
**[0:03:30-0:03:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:03:30):**  You know what I mean?  I just like just totally in the trenches, you know, there is spaciousness in the office  at moments where I feel like the camaraderie and the harmonization of our work has some  really awesome moments that kind of pull us deeper into the cycle together.  But day in and day out, it's a lot of turning the wheel and getting work done.  
**[0:03:50-0:03:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:03:50):**  I feel like we're already, you know, four months into the year and yeah, we're just  in stride.  That's a lot of the energy is just that in that stride mode, you know, I'm usually sort  of I have been flow personally through these more spacious moments and more dialed kind  of concentrated moments of focus and I'm in a focus mode.  
**[0:04:10-0:04:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:04:10):**  As the world wakes up out of COVID and as the spring comes to the northern hemisphere,  I just feel myself awakening with the spring, you know, from the inside out.  And I've started my almost daily Creek dips, I dip in Boulder Creek, a little bit of Wim  Hoff, a little bit of Kundalini yoga.  And that has brought a lot of life back to my spirit.  
**[0:04:32-0:04:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:04:32):**  So I expect to see spaciousness in the future.  But right now it's definitely hand over fist and getting the work done.  And just to give a bit of context, when did the official closing was at the 10 million  and how many loans are already out of the door?  What is that grinding the wheel?  
**[0:04:48-0:04:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:04:48):**  What does that mean at the moment?  How many farmers have been touched?  Yep, good question.  I think the official date was February 15.  So we had to kind of extend a couple times to just account for unforeseen documentation,  
**[0:05:04-0:05:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:05:04):**  people needing a little more time.  And February 15, we closed the fund at a full 10 million from 43 investors, mostly US based,  but we have folks from seven different countries, Switzerland, Australia, Singapore, the Netherlands,  England, all over.  So it's been great to involve everyone.  
**[0:05:24-0:05:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:05:24):**  And yeah, we've gotten four loans out the door so far, a farm in Montana, and then three  farms in Minnesota.  So transitioning about 3400 acres up in Montana this year, and then a potential for a couple  thousand starting next season that they have kind of an options contract on.  And then with the three farms in Minnesota, I think it totals about 800 to 150 acres that  
**[0:05:48-0:05:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:05:48):**  they're going to be begin transitioning.  So it's been really cool to, to dive in with these specific farmers.  I'm not going to mention them by name yet until I have their full permission and such.  And I think we're going to see them on the news, etc. as well.  Probably will.  
**[0:06:03-0:06:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:06:03):**  Yeah.  But they're highly diversified.  They grow 10 to 15 different crops.  They raise animals, they're highly integrated leaders in the movement, willing to share  their learnings.  
**[0:06:14-0:06:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:06:14):**  And it's honestly just been a blast and a blessing getting to know them over the last,  you know, few months in a deeper way as we've dug into the financials, created forecasted  models for them, already started setting up crop contracts with a couple of them as well.  So we're already starting to see kind of our system of change really move in and, you know,  help them with financing, technical assistance and markets.  
**[0:06:38-0:06:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:06:38):**  And we've even started bridging them community wise.  One was looking to buy some, some feed from a neighbor.  They were just looking and asking us, you know, do you know where I can get some non-GMO  feed?  We connected them with one of our other farmers who were in the midst of underwriting and  
**[0:06:54-0:06:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:06:54):**  now they're setting up a contract between one another.  So we're already starting to see this community as well take shape.  And that's, it's been really encouraging considering we only have four farmers in so far.  And also interesting that they were relatively nearby.  And do you see that as these, let's say pioneering farmers, which was a very deliberate choice  
**[0:07:11-0:07:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:07:11):**  of you to partner with them.  I'm imagining, but it's just an imagination looking at, let's say pioneering companies  and startups, et cetera, that they have choice of where to get funding from.  Is that the case actually?  That's the first hypothesis.  
**[0:07:24-0:07:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:07:24):**  And then second, why do they pick to work with you or isn't there actually too many,  aren't there too many options for pioneer farmers like these to go faster, to do more  and do they sort of naturally flow or come to you?  Yeah, good question.  These farmers in particular, I'd say two of them had a choice as to where they could go  
**[0:07:43-0:07:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:07:43):**  for financing.  They had an array of options that they could have chosen from, but they really wanted to  dive in with us for kind of the values alignment, our understanding of just we get what they're  doing and we want the future to be regenerative and organic and other bankers they're surrounded  by don't understand it.  
**[0:08:01-0:08:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:08:01):**  They don't necessarily want that.  And they're only throwing money at the problem, whereas we're trying to surround them with  much more.  I'm trying to pull up a quote here, but my internet's not working.  It's been fascinating to sort of try to disrupt the conventional banking system.  
**[0:08:16-0:08:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:08:16):**  I mean, we've realized that in getting closer to that moment when you sign the dotted line  with an alone agreement, when the community banks get involved, it's just the power between  the borrower and the lender is so out of balance.  The lender has all the control and they love to have that control.  And so when push comes to shove, the farmer realizes that, you know, maybe my bank will  
**[0:08:38-0:08:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:08:38):**  fund me through organic transition.  And then when they really kind of push up against the bank, the bank's like, no way  we're going to do this.  And so someone that's been with them for often a generation or two in their bank as a banking  partner is all of a sudden sort of not able to support them.  
**[0:08:55-0:08:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:08:55):**  And then that's where there's sort of almost like a pivotal shift, which can happen in  the matter of days where it's like, my goodness, I realize I'm part of a system that I'm deeply  mal-aligned with.  And you know, the perennial funds here.  And then what we've actually been doing is that in some of those cases where the bank  
**[0:09:11-0:09:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:09:11):**  won't, you know, free up, they have a blanket lien on the farm, they won't free up any collateral,  there's no partnership opportunity.  We ended up just taking the entire operating line.  So rather than just doing transitional acres, like we intended to do, we just take the entire  operating note for the farm.  
**[0:09:27-0:09:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:09:27):**  And then that gives us, that gives the farmer full freedom, you know, to sort of partner  with us in that kind of vision of expression of ag and transition.  And it frees them from those bank obligations, which creates a lot of liberty.  We're taking on more risk than we had imagined doing, but it's actually part of the fund  and what we feel like needs to happen.  
**[0:09:45-0:09:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:09:45):**  And I've got a quote from one of the farmers that we just funded in Minnesota.  He said, it's almost surreal that we finally found people like Madag and your whole team  that really gets what we do and want to further understand this process of regenerative, organic,  direct consumer, next generation farming.  We are beyond excited to look at the opportunities that we have become available.  
**[0:10:04-0:10:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:10:04):**  We've had our heads down for 20 plus years doing what we knew it was right in our hearts,  but nobody cared.  Like I said the other day, the local bankers have thoughts for years.  They just think this is a fad and that we'll eventually give up and go the way of everybody  else.  
**[0:10:18-0:10:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:10:18):**  It's great to be in company with you all looking forward to the future.  So it's yeah, I see applause coming from Sarah.  Yeah.  And I mean, for us, those kinds of testimonials are everything.  I mean, we live in service to our conscience, the land and the farmer.  
**[0:10:32-0:10:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:10:32):**  That's what we're in service to.  And when the farmer is coming back with that kind of feedback, it really reinforces our  approach, our philosophy, the work that's happening.  And frankly, it's inspiring, keeps me up doing the good work.  So when we have testimonies like that, it's becoming a long list now, which is great,  
**[0:10:52-0:10:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:10:52):**  which is good.  And with that, I think I want to open it up to questions.  Definitely put them in the chat if you have them.  I'm going to give the word to Brian actually, who was the one who sent a number of questions,  but you can pick one to start, right, otherwise we're going to overwhelm Phil and Brendan.  
**[0:11:06-0:11:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:11:06):**  But you had a nice list.  So if you pick one, which one would you fire at them?  Maybe just quickly a little bit of background first.  Originally from Iowa, Southeast Iowa, have a small operation there, family farm, 600  acres, corn, soybeans, pigs, as the flavor of Iowa is, of course, based in Switzerland  
**[0:11:28-0:11:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:11:28):**  and now lived and worked in agriculture my whole life, mostly working in the industry,  especially in the input side, crop protection, fertilizer, soil amendments, so on and so  forth.  So from a very practical standpoint, as a landowner, as an input supplier, as somebody  that's been in the traditional conventional production systems that frankly, you guys  
**[0:11:56-0:12:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:11:56):**  are looking to disrupt or transition into organic systems, a lot of things come up as  questions of how feasible is this?  How scalable is it?  Certainly for, let's say, a niche product or making some connections between a producer  and a processor or even consumer, retailer, you can foresee, especially the pioneers,  
**[0:12:22-0:12:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:12:22):**  as Koen said, that you can really find some pioneers and fast adopters and get started.  But I think the way you guys talk, your ambitions are not listed or limited to a niche business  or a niche effort.  So beyond all the success stories, beyond the initial traction, where do you see this  long term?  
**[0:12:48-0:12:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:12:48):**  I mean, how big a driver is this movement to organic farming?  Great question.  We know that organic farming is less than 1% on an acreage basis of the US.  And so it is just sort of a blip and a drop in the bucket.  However, it has double digit year on year growth.  
**[0:13:06-0:13:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:13:06):**  And we feel like a chemical free organic agriculture is the type of agriculture that we can stand  behind.  And we're finding that the very front edge of that movement needs as much support as  it possibly can get.  And so our sort of philosophy of change is a few today, many tomorrow.  
**[0:13:25-0:13:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:13:25):**  The idea that farmers listen to farmers.  And so trying to reform the colossal industrial commodity thing, like there's so many people  trying to do, is less of an interest.  It's more about creating a new system that ends up attracting a lot of people in sort  of a landslide shift over time.  
**[0:13:42-0:13:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:13:42):**  And so our focus is sort of trusting that grassroots theory of change where farmers  look at other farmers across the fence line, they talk in cafes, and it's going to take  a number of decades for us to really sort of create the seedbed for this revolution.  But we feel like it's already afoot.  And there's a bit of a patience game with it.  
**[0:14:05-0:14:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:14:05):**  And I think it's hard to sort of show up and offer a solution to every farmer right now.  Like you might find precision ag doing, there's a bunch of different kind of technological  things coming out and input efficiency things.  But if you're not kind of questioning and living from the deeper virtues and the desire  around diversification and being aspirational, it's really difficult to change the system.  
**[0:14:27-0:14:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:14:27):**  So we typically focus again on these kind of pioneering farmers because our belief is  that regenerative organic ag truly creates more financial and ecological wealth.  So win-win for the pocketbook and for the environment.  And if that is true and we can show it through farmer transformation, through science, through  data, through storytelling, then that at the end of the day will win out, but it's going  
**[0:14:51-0:14:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:14:51):**  to take some time.  I'm not sure if that answers your question, but it's sort of human approach that we take  that requires a bit of patience for creating transformation at the system scale.  Yeah.  And I'd also say to build on that, though it's a really small market, I think if we  
**[0:15:05-0:15:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:15:05):**  can provide kind of the right community of change and system of change to surround those  who could be encouraged to change, if we reduce the amount of friction that's currently there,  whether that's access to the right markets, to financing, to just having a neighbor that's  also doing it, we will hopefully be able to also grow the rate that the market is changing  and the rate that consumers are able to access the right types of products, the rate that  
**[0:15:33-0:15:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:15:33):**  acres are able to make it too organic with less of a hurdle or a trough to go through.  So hopefully we can also encourage the market to start expanding significantly over the  next five to 10 years.  There's also a tremendous amount of frustration within the farm community, which is expressed  in all sorts of interesting ways, whether it's deterioration of rural economy, whether  
**[0:15:55-0:16:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:15:55):**  it's big ag in your pocketbook, whether it's the lack of flexibility to grow what you want  to grow, whether it's the inability to have livestock and crops integrated.  The farm family desires something very different than what is.  And I think with the farmers we work with, it takes a little while to sort of scrub that  light bulb off and get to that more kind of like the heart of the matter, because that  
**[0:16:18-0:16:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:16:18):**  requires emotional tools, requires psychological tools, requires a really profound understanding  of the self within the arc of what it means to be in the Midwest.  And our approach, which we call pathfinding, after someone on boards to our capital, our  markets or our kind of land and business planning, we anchor into this kind of deeper, more soulful,  story based kind of relationship with the farmer where we know the matriarch and the  
**[0:16:44-0:16:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:16:44):**  patriarch and the kids and who's dying and who's getting married.  And like we get texts from farmers.  And what we learn is that there's kind of like a virtue in humanity that wants to be  expressed in community and on the land that I feel like what we're offering provides a  roadmap to.  
**[0:17:01-0:17:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:17:01):**  And that I think could be extraordinary in terms of creating rapid adoption.  How we do that, I don't exactly know.  We're trying.  But for one thing, I know that it resonates and it resonates in a way that's more powerful  than what's already out there.  
**[0:17:15-0:17:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:17:15):**  And so we're going to keep following that.  Great.  Maybe mind a follow up?  Go ahead and then we have a few other questions starting to come in through the chat, but  we have time.  
**[0:17:27-0:17:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:17:27):**  So just maybe an adjacent question to that one.  A lot of times when we're talking about the food system, especially there's a lot of negativity  around that discussion.  You know, it's broken.  Big Egg is polluting this and that.  
**[0:17:42-0:17:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:17:42):**  The farmers are doing this wrong.  It's always coming from the, this is my opinion now, but it's always coming from the producer's  side.  The producer needs to change.  They need to produce more organic or more regenerative.  
**[0:17:54-0:17:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:17:54):**  And it's always the producer first discussion.  When the producers are selling into a market, obviously, and if there's demand in that market,  then they'll respond to those demand signals, those price signals, whatever else.  So where can the most leverage on the system be applied?  Is it by changing producers and disrupting Big Egg or would it be better to work more  
**[0:18:21-0:18:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:18:21):**  on the demand side and get more Walmarts, more general meals, more individual chefs  and consumers to be promoting a different system?  I think Luke Smith's on this call, but he once told me, I used to use the word levers  of change and it's more like nodal points.  You know what I mean?  
**[0:18:39-0:18:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:18:39):**  It's an ecosystem that requires catalytic change by hitting pieces.  So it's not one thing to the exclusion of others.  And so what we feel like are sort of the three big nodal points in the system are capital,  community and markets.  And we try to hold those together in a holistic system of change.  
**[0:19:00-0:19:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:19:00):**  And I think markets, as you were talking about, is absolutely critical.  We're building on our markets team now, hiring one, hopefully two people within the next  two months to really try to work on that demand side.  There's obviously an enormous number of brands and buyers, supplies, shed intermediaries  that are values aligned, but there's an extremely high friction between the folks that want  
**[0:19:20-0:19:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:19:20):**  to buy and where they can actually source from.  Like last night, we were on a call with a farmer.  It was the first time the farmer had ever actually met someone who might be buying their  food and selling it for human consumption.  Everything they've done since they can remember has been corn beans and alfalfa.  
**[0:19:36-0:19:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:19:36):**  And so these farmers we love dearly, it was like their first time getting to know a totally  new opportunity in life.  That's how disconnected the eater and the farmer is.  And so yeah, the demand side is huge.  We say it around here, it's like, some farmers need Twitter, some farmers need capital, some  
**[0:19:52-0:19:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:19:52):**  farmers need a land or business plan, but every farmer needs a market.  And it is like the thing that's universal.  And so we are doubling down on that as a team this year and hiring.  We've got Tanner and Jane here working the storytelling, what we call mutually beneficial  contracting with full transparency across the supply shed.  
**[0:20:12-0:20:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:20:12):**  I can keep going, but I'm going to resist so we can get to other questions.  I want to first go to a second question or a question that came in on the chat of Danica,  which is an interesting issue.  She's just working with a farmer that seems to be too far along.  Basically the problem that people want to help the transition and have this beautiful  
**[0:20:29-0:20:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:20:29):**  before and after picture, which means before should be pretty bad and after should be pretty  biterverse, full of trees, et cetera, et cetera.  I mean, we all know those.  And you partner with the pioneers that are 20 years down the line already.  Any advice, creative ways, retroactively reward a farmer?  
**[0:20:45-0:20:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:20:45):**  What's your response there?  Yeah, a couple of thoughts.  One, I really like what Regen Network is.  I'm not a big ecosystem service sort of markets person.  The word service is utilitarian.  
**[0:20:56-0:21:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:20:56):**  I think we've got to philosophically evolve beyond the whole thing.  But a Regen Network is doing the idea of sort of selling aggregate ecosystem expression,  like selling, sort of monetizing the biodiversity, monetizing the carbon, the water, the wild  and cultivated spaces.  I think is a really holistic and kind of ambitious way of trying to capture the full economy  
**[0:21:20-0:21:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:21:20):**  of place.  And so I think for someone that's well down the journey, the Regen Network, it looked  like a coon might've popped off, but I'll keep going.  I think that there are things coming online.  Soil Heroes is a great European outfit.  
**[0:21:33-0:21:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:21:33):**  Nourad and Gina and team who I think aspire to do something very similar.  So it would support that.  The other way is maybe a little less clear, but we're playing with it, is I think a big  piece of us is what is that community of change and practice?  How do we look to the wisdom keepers, the elders that are already sort of blazing the  
**[0:21:54-0:21:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:21:54):**  trail is such a colonial word, but that's what I mean.  Sort of out there in the front that we can invite to reach back into the movement and  help.  For farmers that are already sort of fully organic and regenerative, we invite them as  a part of our community to share with others and we can pay for that.  
**[0:22:14-0:22:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:22:14):**  And so I think there's a lot of ways to sort of monetarily reward those farmers.  I think there's also ways to probably even more importantly, socially and culturally  reward them.  Many farmers that are on the front edge as a first mover or first kind of early adopter,  they often feel really isolated because of their rural, their geographically isolated,  
**[0:22:37-0:22:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:22:37):**  their ideologically isolated.  And so when they connect and find people in the movement, it's very, very rewarding to  share those successes, those challenges.  And so I think there's some social, financial and cultural ways to reward them that are  built around community and possibly around monetization.  
**[0:22:56-0:22:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:22:56):**  There's probably a bunch more, but those are the ones that come to mind.  Danica, does that answer your question?  Yeah, yeah, yeah.  Thanks so much for sharing some ideas.  Actual physical isolation is not such an issue since the Netherlands is so densely populated,  
**[0:23:10-0:23:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:23:10):**  the farmer lives like a little bit outside of a city.  And it does come down to the fact that he does feel recognized, but that only goes so  far and he needs that financial assistance.  So it's interesting to also see that in the end, the money also matters to some extent  if the farmer is struggling financially.  
**[0:23:29-0:23:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:23:29):**  But yeah, thank you so much for sharing some ideas.  I'll let somebody else take the floor.  Yeah, I would add one last thing, too, is, you know, for farmers like that, I feel like  they're the best farmers to sort of pilot like the Soil Heroes platform, right?  Like you're going to monetize like ecosystem value at the system scale.  
**[0:23:48-0:23:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:23:48):**  Like let's work with those farmers where we know what's possible.  So I feel like that's one angle.  I also feel like for farmers like that, that have that story and have everything in place,  they're also the best to start with, like finding premiums in the market spot.  You know what I mean?  
**[0:24:03-0:24:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:24:03):**  We work with farmers, you know, through Colorado where we're really we're pretty selective  about like, OK, we want someone to grow dry beans for we have a buyer.  Like we go to those farmers that we feel like need to be honored for their commitment and  service and practice and stewardship.  And we use those market opportunities to flow more money back to the farm whenever possible.  
**[0:24:25-0:24:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:24:25):**  So that market demand side, you know, which Brian was also talking about, I think is a  really high potential.  And farmers aren't often you know, there's so much it's so much to manage a farm ecosystem.  It's very difficult to be an evangelical about your product in the marketplace.  And they need help.  
**[0:24:44-0:24:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:24:44):**  And that's a lot of why we're building our markets program is to connect farmers to buyers  and brands and brands to buyers and work on all those supply shed logistics, because that's  outside of the farm gate and really difficult to manage time wise, know how wise, community  wise and quite frankly, contracting wise.  Right.  
**[0:25:04-0:25:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:25:04):**  Like it's hard to negotiate proper value for your crop.  So we act as kind of a third party to do that.  So those are some ways that the market thing can also be brought to bear for those lead  farmers.  Like you said, everybody needs a market.  
**[0:25:17-0:25:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:25:17):**  That's for sure.  Yeah.  And then moving to call Alan, how do you go about finding farmers?  Is that like, do they find you or you find them?  Or is it a mix?  
**[0:25:27-0:25:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:25:27):**  What has been like these four or like the let's say the pipeline that's happening now  or the most successful ones, the ones you end up underwriting?  How did you is there any general way if you find them or they all have a different story?  Yeah, good question.  So at first, nobody knew about us.  
**[0:25:43-0:25:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:25:43):**  So we had to really hit the pavement and just cold call tons of people like start building  partnerships started to, you know, I would just get on the organic integrity list, which  every USDA organic certified farmer has to publicly list location of their farm, crops  they grow, phone number, email.  And I just started calling people and I was just getting people on the line, floating  
**[0:26:07-0:26:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:26:07):**  the idea by them, seeing if this seemed reasonable or if we were out of our minds, mad thinking  that transition financing was, you know, just too out there.  A lot of people really liked the idea.  So it started with the idea.  Then it started, you know, we found a few farmers who said that they'd be interested  
**[0:26:24-0:26:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:26:24):**  in using our financing.  Once we kind of had those few in and we really had those conversations, they started introducing  us to a few of their friends, a few of their connections.  From there, it's really just kind of been a spider web of us continuing to, you know,  try to build authentic relationships with partners, with farmers we think would be a  
**[0:26:44-0:26:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:26:44):**  good fit and as well as a word of mouth.  So I'd say word of mouth has so far been the biggest means of kind of our growth channel  of getting out there into the world.  Now that we've kind of built some good partnerships, have great investors, have our first loans  out, it's real, it's happening.  
**[0:27:03-0:27:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:27:03):**  It's not just an idea now.  So it's been easier to reach out and say, we have financing for your farmers who are  transitioning to organic and, you know, we want to do that.  We're not going to shy away like the community bank because finding those ways of finding  farmers is really important because you can have, we could create the most useful product  
**[0:27:21-0:27:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:27:21):**  in the world, like the perfect transition financing mechanism.  But if nobody knows about it, it's completely useless to actually integrating it into transitioning  more acres.  So I've been thinking in like these two main domains of create the best transition financing  package that we can that is the most useful to farmers, testing revenue shares, standard  
**[0:27:43-0:27:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:27:43):**  APR, term lengths, you know, is it a line of credit, is it an operating loan, all of  those nuances.  And then at the same time, testing all of the different distribution channels, you know,  ways of getting this product in front of farmers.  So that's, you know, referral programs, word of mouth, sending little postcards to farmers.  
**[0:28:03-0:28:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:28:03):**  I sent 6,000 postcards out to the Midwest recently, cold calling people, just trying  it all to see what will stick because ultimately our goal is to start moving billions of dollars  into regenerative organic farmers' hands and to truly transform the food system.  We're going to have to know what the best way of accessing the right types of farmers  that would find this useful is.  
**[0:28:28-0:28:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:28:28):**  So we're testing that early on because, you know, we have ambitions of growing in 2022  and 2023 into the second vehicle of sorts.  Hopefully that answers your question.  We definitely want to know more about that, but let's continue to move with some questions.  Thais had one or actually two, and the first one is actually answered.  
**[0:28:45-0:28:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:28:45):**  How do you find the farmers?  Get on there.  How do you get them to lift their head if they have been 20 years with their heads down  working on their soil?  But the second one is interesting as well.  
**[0:28:55-0:28:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:28:55):**  How did the investors respond when in some cases you take the full operating loan of  the farmer and not just the transition piece or they don't know yet?  Maybe they find out on this call.  Yeah, no good questions.  So the first one, we haven't had to do much convincing.  
**[0:29:11-0:29:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:29:11):**  You know, it's been just really leading with, I think, wearing our heart on our sleeves  and being super values first and just showing that this is the future we're trying to create.  And that's just inspired people who this is the right fit for to come along side of us  instead of trying to project what we think the future of their farm should look like.  So like that farm that I read the quote from in Minnesota, when they saw it, they kind  
**[0:29:37-0:29:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:29:37):**  of knew they wanted it.  And it was something that might've been kind of a cloud of maybe confusion as to why exactly  they wanted to partner with us.  But over the course of five, six, seven phone calls, it gets much easier to build trust  to show that we are here for the long haul.  
**[0:29:54-0:29:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:29:54):**  We want to work with them until they retire.  We want to work with their kids.  I mean, this is a partnership.  It's not just us giving them money.  And then to the second part of the question, the investor part, how do they respond to  
**[0:30:06-0:30:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:30:06):**  the opportunity and the risk of taking over a full operating load or the full financing  basically of a farm and not just a transition piece, which obviously was in the name, like  we're going to transition actors to or acres to XYZ.  Well though it is a little different than the initial intention, we're responding to  the market in real time.  
**[0:30:25-0:30:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:30:25):**  Our initial intention of going out and funding only transitional ground, funding just those  transitional acres is a good idea.  I think if we could find the right mechanism of convincing community banks consistently  to work with us, but we have found it very hard to have them share risk.  So whether that's with a document that we've been creating in partnership with Iroquois  
**[0:30:48-0:30:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:30:48):**  Valley Farms called the inter creditor agreement, which is sharing collateral on a pro rata  basis based on outstanding balance on the loan, which let's say we fund 200,000 and  the local bank funds 800,000 on a million dollar loan, we would have rights to 20% of  the collateral.  Sounds totally reasonable.  
**[0:31:07-0:31:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:31:07):**  Sounds like we're sharing risk there.  How many banks are comfortable doing that it seems even after numerous conversations  and trying to find the right mechanisms of just truly partnering with these farmers to  help them transition.  So instead of us basically having 10, 20 conversations to convince the banker, their board, their  
**[0:31:27-0:31:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:31:27):**  CEO, all of the folks that need to say yes, go ahead for that to happen.  It's much easier and much less friction for the farmer and for us to just finance all  their organic acres, their transitional acres, and then conventional acres that are soon  committed to beginning transition.  Because at the end of the day, all of the farmers we're working with are committed to  
**[0:31:48-0:31:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:31:48):**  going 100% organic with soil health in mind.  So that reduces the risk because then we're able to actually properly collateralize.  We don't have to deal with other parties who could have, you know, aren't understanding  exactly what we're shooting for here and how we're trying to help these farmers.  And it just kind of cleans up the relationship management.  
**[0:32:09-0:32:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:32:09):**  But we are still pursuing opportunities of finding the right ways to partner with other  banks.  We just haven't been able to do it yet.  And we probably just haven't found the right bank, haven't found the right mechanism.  Does it reduce the amount of farmers you're going to be working with?  
**[0:32:23-0:32:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:32:23):**  Like from the plan to does it reduce the amount of the number of farmers you can be working  with with the 10 million basically?  Potentially, you know, initially we came out saying we were going to fund 20 to 25 farmers.  It's probably looking like more like the 15 to 20 type range.  But it doesn't change a whole bunch because what assumption we had made was that farmers  
**[0:32:45-0:32:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:32:45):**  would only be servicing, let's say, 20 to 30% on the loan that we were outlaying during  transition to fund their loss during those transitional years.  Many of these farms are actually able to service significantly more on the loan than we had  anticipated.  There are other farms that are going to pass back in full every year from year one.  
**[0:33:05-0:33:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:33:05):**  Like we just gave out a loan to two of those farmers.  We'll pay back the note in full this year and then we'll continue financing them because  we've made a commitment to them for at least the next five years.  And then hopefully, you know, we have the second structure set up as to where we can  make a longer term commitment into the future.  
**[0:33:23-0:33:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:33:23):**  Introduce the amount of farmers, but at the same time, the impact and the hectares.  And we're going to be able to revolve that capital that comes in the first couple of  years back into financing.  So we've got in a way more capital to work with, probably more acres to touch.  Maybe the numbers of farmers goes down because it's a little more capital intensive.  
**[0:33:43-0:33:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:33:43):**  But yeah, and I'd say it also reduces the risk because we're able to put more capital,  we're able to revolve more capital consistently.  And then there's also more touch points with the farmer.  They're constantly receiving most of the loan back and then redistributing it again into  the next season for them to continue funding, you know, their production costs.  
**[0:34:05-0:34:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:34:05):**  So it also just more touch points, more consistency.  It'll just be a more active relationship of us being engaged, understanding what's happening  on the farm instead of just touching those transitional acres, which, you know, would  be a smaller portion of their operation.  Now it's more of a it's a deeper partnership at the whole farm level as well.  
**[0:34:24-0:34:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:34:24):**  So that's been really exciting for many farmers is I mean, they're saying, we want to work  with you for the next 20 years.  And that's great.  The other thing it does is it opens up their entire farm for us to think about what to  sell into the marketplace.  
**[0:34:38-0:34:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:34:38):**  You know, if you're just thinking about marketing transitional crops, it's usually not the time  to try to be squeezing economics out of your farm.  It's a time to reinvest.  And so we can look to those organic acres and say, hey, what are you doing every year?  What are you aspiring to?  
**[0:34:53-0:34:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:34:53):**  What's the best way to work on a more full rotation?  Because a lot of transition years in the Midwest is, you know, alfalfa with the nearest crop  of oats.  That's probably the best way to go if you've got an alfalfa market.  And so it limits our creativity to really regenerate the land, which is diversity first.  
**[0:35:10-0:35:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:35:10):**  I mean, diversity and perenniality are the big perspectives and ways of regenerating.  And we do that more effectively by having access to the entire farm ecosystem.  So, you know, what felt like a hurdle has now become the massive opportunity that we're  really excited about.  And you mentioned a couple of times in the 20 years and second vehicle, etc.  
**[0:35:29-0:35:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:35:29):**  What is in the thoughts there, if you want and are able to share?  Yeah, we're first to get money back into the bank from our investments.  So it is like just to calibrate the pace.  We're still living, learning and deploying.  But yeah, I don't know, maybe we can speak to a little bit.  
**[0:35:47-0:35:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:35:47):**  It's sort of just horizon gazing, but we realize the need, right?  Like a fund that might not be the best structure for long term partnerships.  And so I don't know, maybe you can speak at a high level around what we're thinking.  But yeah, I'll try to keep it really short because we could talk about this for an hour.  So there are various vehicles that we're exploring because we're realizing the inherent limitations  
**[0:36:10-0:36:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:36:10):**  of a 10 year fund life, which is pretty this is kind of, you know, cookie cutter standard,  you know, easier to raise money around and, you know, say we'll have your money back by  this time period.  That doesn't match, like the length of time that we're able to commit to alone doesn't  match, you know, the underlying asset being a farm which takes generations and is multi  
**[0:36:31-0:36:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:36:31):**  decadal and, you know, is going to be there for hundreds of years.  So we are intending to create something that's much longer term, so we can make a longer  term commitment to our farmers, make a 10, 15, 20 year commitment to our farmers, and  recycle capital more consistently without worrying about having to hold on to it.  And let's say you're four, five and six to make distributions to our investors versus  
**[0:36:55-0:37:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:36:55):**  continuing to kind of retain those really strong relationships and farmers we've been  able to bring in.  So an Evergreen Fund might be a solution to that.  Maybe it's a CDFI.  We've also been kicking that idea around to access really low cost capital from the US  
**[0:37:12-0:37:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:37:12):**  government, which just gives money out these days.  Or maybe it's some sort of another mechanism where we're kind of like a platform or a conduit  for connecting, let's say banking partners and individual investors to farmers that are,  you know, mad certified or that we've done underwriting on and due diligence, and then  we've brought onto the platform and then we're just kind of the connecting point and we take  
**[0:37:35-0:37:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:37:35):**  some sort of a VIG on the top.  Those are the leading ideas.  It might be a bank.  That's another idea we're throwing around, but the amount of regulation and permitting  and the difficulty of actually getting certified in the US is pretty burdensome.  
**[0:37:49-0:37:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:37:49):**  So we're trying to think through how to balance the relationships that we hold with our farmers,  which is really kind of our remote and thing that is non-displacable with using, you know,  modern technology, ability to get capital in the hands of farmers who need it.  And then as well as align the length of capital to the values and virtues of these farmers  want to embody in the way that they manage their farms.  
**[0:38:13-0:38:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:38:13):**  So there's these multiple factors that are all kind of dynamically competing for one  another.  And we are pretty agnostic as to how that turns out.  Right now we're just in full bore listening mode to investors and to farmers to see what  is the most useful and practical to creating enough inertia and getting this flywheel spinning  
**[0:38:34-0:38:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:38:34):**  to where we can help the market grow.  We can help reduce the amount of friction and every farmer who wants to transition to  regenerative organic ag has the financing they need, the markets they need and the technical  assistance they need to do so.  I think it's a topic we'll come back to over the next couple of years and see how it develops.  
**[0:38:53-0:38:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:38:53):**  Let's see as we're slowly getting closer to the top of the hour, if we can get through  a few more questions.  Willy Webb asked one or actually two on the buyer side, which we sort of covered, but  then also something like how do the buyer contracts and off-take agreements fit in with  crop insurance and other ways of reducing risk, guaranteeing income and offering a safety  
**[0:39:11-0:39:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:39:11):**  net?  Is that something you have been exploring, touching upon?  Just a tip of discussing, you know, the crop insurance thing is tough.  We know if you're growing corn and beans, you need to really need crop insurance.  Price loss protection is kind of the American version of that.  
**[0:39:27-0:39:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:39:27):**  We encourage whole farm protection, but that also has its kind of hitches.  And then once you get above growing six or seven things, usually you don't need insurance  from a statistical perspective.  Usually there's enough on-farm resilience that you actually don't need to purchase insurance.  So right now we're kind of in this in-between where in some farms we're really insurance  
**[0:39:48-0:39:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:39:48):**  focused.  They might be sort of still in the corn, bean, alfalfa system and taking their first steps  into decommodifying the specialty crop.  And so we'll do that in a very calibrated, low acreage way.  The way we de-risk that is by creating what we call a mutually beneficial contract where  
**[0:40:04-0:40:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:40:04):**  we have the buyer put money down, you know, with skin in the game on their commitment.  So there's not a total loss, but we do have active gods in place for the farmer so that  if they can't deliver, then that's okay as well.  So we've been playing around with that quite a bit.  Honestly, we're just growing into this space and I think we're going to be learning a ton  
**[0:40:23-0:40:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:40:23):**  over the next year and we'll be happy to report back on our learnings.  But we're hiring two people right now to actually really tackle this area in full and deal with  all these issues.  And how do you find the buyers?  Question from Willy as well.  
**[0:40:36-0:40:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:40:36):**  Did he find you?  Is it what's on the buyer side of this market?  Yeah, again, just kind of coming in, it sort of fits and starts and nothing that organized.  I mean, I think, you know, the work of Terragenesis, the work of Regen, the work of Howgood, those  are all sort of comrades in the movement that I deeply respect.  
**[0:40:55-0:41:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:40:55):**  And they've been, you know, I've been, I don't know, underneath their wing in many ways,  sort of getting to know brands and buyers.  And we've done our own work as well.  Boulder here is kind of the epicenter of the natural food movement in the world.  Well, I don't know if the world, but in USA.  
**[0:41:11-0:41:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:41:11):**  And so there are a lot of mission aligned brands here.  Not a lot of big buyers.  That's the problem.  You can't sort of sell a bag of beans for a good price to brands and also to institutional  procurement.  
**[0:41:23-0:41:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:41:23):**  But to get that long contract where you're selling 250,000 bushels of something, you  know, is kind of new territory for us.  We're going to need to figure that out because that's what the land base that we're working  with is going to need to have as a market.  And so we're just at the beginning.  
**[0:41:37-0:41:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:41:37):**  I know that there's a lot of energy within general mills and Kellogg's and pipeline foods,  nature's path, cliff bar, everyone from those to Patagonia provisions has ambition to push  in this direction.  And right now, as I said, there's an enormous amount of friction between, you know, those  brands and the farmers that are actually growing.  
**[0:41:57-0:42:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:41:57):**  And that's where we really feel like we can step in and help in a variety of ways.  So I think as you track our progress, Coon, we're on the podcast.  Let's come back to these issues and kind of track our progress.  Be happy to share with your community what's going on.  And for the next one, actually, we're shifting gears a bit to the investor side.  
**[0:42:15-0:42:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:42:15):**  How did you find investors?  And it connected to your first question, like how accessible was or is this fund?  Is there a lot of regulation around it in the US to offer things like this?  This comes from Daniela Denis, who is operating in the Netherlands.  How tricky was that?  
**[0:42:31-0:42:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:42:31):**  Or is that actually?  Just Silverstrand.  I mean, I feel like a lot.  I mean, we have a big shout out to Silverstrand.  I mean, Silverstrand was our anchor investor.  
**[0:42:40-0:42:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:42:40):**  Kelvin and his team, Patty and Chen, now Rachel, they just in the best of ways put us through  the ringer.  You know, we're first time fund managers.  And you know, their due diligence on us really improved our game.  And Homecoming Capital and Tin Shed out of Patagonia also came underneath their wing  
**[0:42:58-0:43:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:42:58):**  to support as lead investors.  And just a huge shout out to them for living and learning with us over the two years.  And I think Brandon can speak a lot more to how that kind of initial work led to a whole  community of investors coming together.  Yeah, I mean, initially meeting them was total happenstance.  
**[0:43:17-0:43:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:43:17):**  Just happened to have an email from Kelvin, had met him in person.  We really got along.  And as he was growing his team, you know, we were starting the fund and we were kind  of put through like Phil was saying, like, you know, it felt like we were training for  like fund Olympics or something.  
**[0:43:33-0:43:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:43:33):**  I mean, we were going for, you know, first time and they had really helped us dial in  all the documents, PPM models, and really just started, they were pushing in the right  spots to have us question our assumptions and then put specifics and rigor behind them  to make sure that they were, you know, validated in some way.  So that really prepped us to have a, what I think was a pretty good offering when we  
**[0:43:56-0:43:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:43:56):**  went to market to investors.  It was during that time period as we were creating that with Silverstrand by our side,  it was just slowly, we had some investors reaching out every time they reached out at  the beginning, I would ask, you know, do you have one other person in your network that  you'd be willing to introduce me to?  
**[0:44:15-0:44:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:44:15):**  And then we slowly just started propagating just through word of mouth.  And I think your podcast back in mid 2019 as we were kicking off the idea was a incredible  catalyst for the entire effort because we did not know any investors.  You know, we knew a few, but we didn't know the couple hundred that we know now, even  a year and a half, two years ago.  
**[0:44:35-0:44:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:44:35):**  So it's a lot of just community development and just really trying to bridge those gaps  and talk with people.  And this investment, Daniel, this is high, but this is not super accessible yet in terms  of like it is just for high net worth individuals, accredited investors in the US, around the  world, but predominantly.  
**[0:44:56-0:45:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:44:56):**  Unfortunately, yeah, we actually, we're two tiers above accredited investor.  You have to be a qualified purchaser.  You have to have at least 5 million in net liquid assets if you're an individual, you  know, outside of your home.  And if you're a fund, at least 25 million.  
**[0:45:10-0:45:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:45:10):**  And if you're a foundation, at least 5 million.  That was to make some of the SEC regulations a little less burdensome, but yeah, it's not  accessible yet.  In the second vehicle, we hope to integrate some form of democratizing access.  So folks who are not accredited will be able to access the fund.  
**[0:45:28-0:45:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:45:28):**  That was just another layer of complexity in a first fundraise that would have been  over the top for us right now, but it is the ambition to allow anybody to participate.  Yeah, that would be extremely interesting I think to Daniel as well.  We're not going to get through all the questions, but I'm picking just one from Rosalie because  I think it could go, I mean, could go down a rabbit hole.  
**[0:45:47-0:45:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:45:47):**  But what are your thoughts on the exhausting of the regen movement?  I have a feeling we're just getting started, but it may be my bubble.  You mean just sort of...  But what do you mean, Rosalie?  In general, the hype cycle we're going up and then we fall off the cliff again?  
**[0:46:01-0:46:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:46:01):**  Or what are your thoughts behind that question?  Hi.  Well, I'm thinking that you were just a little while ago talking about the big food companies  and I'm thinking about like they use the word regen to get the good feeling for everyone.  Yeah.  
**[0:46:26-0:46:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:46:26):**  Yeah.  Yeah.  They set their own standards and live by them.  And no, that is, I mean, yeah, exhausting is one word to describe it.  And I think regenerative ag, I have two kind of competing feelings about it.  
**[0:46:41-0:46:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:46:41):**  Like I think in one light, regenerative ag in its truest essence is about aspiring to  listen deeply to what the land wants us to be and asking the question of what does the  indigeneity of this place require of us as humanity to aspire to?  Very place-based understanding of the evolutionary and ecological expression of every unique  place on earth.  
**[0:47:07-0:47:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:47:07):**  And that aspiration is so far away from what is that it's sometimes hard to even feel like  we're moving the needle toward it.  At the same time, I feel like regeneration is a process and not a destination.  And so any step toward healing our relationship to ourselves, to others, to any living thing  and non-living thing is also a regenerative effort.  
**[0:47:31-0:47:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:47:31):**  And so I don't begrudge anyone in that process.  And if that's a regenerative act, then it's regenerative.  And so I sort of see regeneration as a word or a concept much bigger than any single paragraph,  book or sentence or idea can hold.  And the word is being exhausted and cheapened, but I think that it's a word that best describes  
**[0:47:55-0:48:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:47:55):**  where we are and the need to reimagine our relationship to earth and others.  And so we're holding tenaciously onto it.  And there's some great other people in the world that are also holding fiercely into  it, have actually been at this work much longer than I.  I feel like as being fully cognizant of being a white male in Colorado in the front range,  
**[0:48:18-0:48:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:48:18):**  not too many generations in on colonializing, we're a relic of that and in many ways perpetuating  it.  And so I feel like for me, as much as I aspire to what it is, I feel like I'm really entering  every day with a beginner's mind and probably know as little as anyone else about it.  So I don't know, I think humility is kind of required the whole process.  
**[0:48:42-0:48:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:48:42):**  So I don't know, we have kind of a non-judgment thing here at Madag.  That's kind of a cheap way of saying it, but we really try to welcome all to the movement,  but we end up being pretty specific about who we work with.  Yeah, sounds good.  But I think at least for me, my fear is that the big food companies will use it to look  
**[0:49:07-0:49:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:49:07):**  good for us all.  One, this word is getting more and more used and familiar to the general public.  And that's kind of like, we're working with so and so many farmers and we have so and  so many acres and we're doing regenerative, but are they really?  I hear you.  
**[0:49:36-0:49:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:49:36):**  I hear you.  Yeah.  I mean, regenerative ag has become kind of boiled in America broad acre sense, commodity  sense.  It's sort of like the five principles of soil health, that the National Resource Conservation  
**[0:49:48-0:49:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:49:48):**  Service quote created, which has been popularized by Gabe Brown, nothing against any of them,  but that's sort of what it's boiled down to.  And that is like just a piece of the regenerative paradigm.  So anyway, you're right.  Rosalie, you're totally spot on.  
**[0:50:07-0:50:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:50:07):**  And let's hold to that word in paradigm tenaciously and hopefully call ourselves and everyone  up to a more emergent way of being.  I think we can.  I think it's great what you're doing.  I'm looking forward to doing something similar in Sweden and Europe.  
**[0:50:26-0:50:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:50:26):**  Excellent.  Thank you all so much.  I want to make sure we stop on top of the hour more or less.  Thank you so much for your time, calling in your questions, whatever time zone we're in.  And thank you so much for listening to the podcast, reaching out to me.  
**[0:50:41-0:50:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:50:41):**  I'm sorry if I'm not always responding as fast as we used to, but we're growing fast  and that's amazing to have.  But it's also an issue sometimes.  We'll definitely keep sharing content like this, webinars like this to try to connect  the community around the podcast more and more.  
**[0:50:56-0:50:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:50:56):**  We have a lot of plans and you'll be hearing from us.  But first of all, I want to thank Phil and Brandon for taking the time to share in a  very, very busy time.  So thank you so much.  Have a great day all and we'll be in touch soon.  
**[0:51:10-0:51:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:51:10):**  Cool.  Awesome.  Thanks, everyone.  If you found the investing in regenerative agriculture and food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  
**[0:51:20-0:51:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:51:20):**  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast.  And it only takes a few seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  
**[0:51:36-0:51:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:51:36):**  join my membership community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on cambrot.com slash investing region egg or in the description  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  
**[0:52:02-0:52:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:52:02):**  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After a hundred interviews and more than a hundred hours of audio asking the question  how to put money to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011  
**[0:52:20-0:52:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:52:20):**  and recording these podcasts since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  
**[0:52:35-0:52:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:52:35):**  What questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  
**[0:52:42-0:52:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:52:42):**  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  You, the soil builders and investors in this space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  
**[0:52:58-0:53:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:52:58):**  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management consultants, etc.  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  
**[0:53:18-0:53:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:53:18):**  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very different means.  
**[0:53:32-0:53:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:53:32):**  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  
**[0:53:49-0:53:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:53:49):**  so you don't have to ride along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  if you're a soy builder.  
**[0:54:07-0:54:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:54:07):**  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  
**[0:54:24-0:54:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:54:24):**  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  
**[0:54:41-0:55:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/qa-webinar-brandon-phil/#t=0:54:41):**  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  