---
title: Regeneration Newsroom Podcast November 2018 ft. Ethan Soloviev
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.

---

### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2018-11-16)  
### Author(s): Koen van Seijen  

**[0:00:00-0:00:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:00:00):**  Welcome to the regeneration newsroom podcast of November 2018. This is a joint venture between  the investing in regenerative agriculture podcast and Ethan Soloveyev's monthly regeneration newsroom.  We're going to talk about the highlights from this month's regeneration newsroom  
**[0:00:17-0:00:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:00:17):**  and dig in with commentary from both of our perspectives around the world.  So welcome, Ethan. I mean, it's great to be piloting this, testing this out and to discuss  your great newsroom this month. What's the main story? What's the main thing that people should  
**[0:00:31-0:00:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:00:31):**  definitely, I mean, they should read everything, but should definitely check out when they open  newsletter or find it on email. I think the most significant thing that's happening this month is  really looking at Australia. Australia has an amazing amount of agriculture happening.  
**[0:00:48-0:00:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:00:48):**  And this month there was kind of a trio of stories that showed regenerative agriculture all the way  from detailed on the ground case studies up to a very high level, former politician making  statements about how to change the whole nation of Australia through regenerative agriculture.  
**[0:01:07-0:01:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:01:07):**  And now I completely agree. I mean, I read the case studies and the Guardian had a big piece  on it. And then of course the article, or actually as much as a policy paper, sorry,  on restore the soil and prosper the nation, which is something we completely agree on.  
**[0:01:20-0:01:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:01:20):**  Why is it so significant that a politician is saying that? And have you any idea why  that's happening in Australia? Because I I've been following it a bit, but yeah, you're right.  Somehow maybe I'm biased, but I see a lot of Australia popping up in region food and egg.  
**[0:01:35-0:01:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:01:35):**  Well, from the perspective of kind of the origins of at least permaculture in Australia, Bill  Mawson would always say Australia was the place where humans did the largest amount of damage  in the least amount of time to the ecosystem. And so he was saying that ecological design  
**[0:01:53-0:01:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:01:53):**  permaculture and by extension, the counter reaction regenerative agriculture. Yeah. It's  sort of like a immune response of the natural systems to it. So I think that could be part of  it, that there's just sort of an upswelling plus agar agriculture is huge in Australia.  
**[0:02:09-0:02:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:02:09):**  It's one of the largest industries. And so I think there's been a lot going on on the ground  and that's the case we see all over the world. Regenerative agriculture has primarily been,  at least until this last year, an upswelling from innovative farmers developing new technologies,  
**[0:02:25-0:02:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:02:25):**  new approaches, and really just working things on the ground. What's significant about this  is here we have high level post-government official making large statements about how do  we tackle climate change? How do we tackle degrading soils through regenerative agriculture?  
**[0:02:42-0:02:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:02:42):**  And we see this mirrored a little bit in the United States. There's one quick story on a  congressional candidate who was speaking about regenerative agriculture, but it hasn't nearly  gotten to that level yet in the United States or really, you know, anywhere in North America.  
**[0:02:57-0:03:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:02:57):**  Are you seeing anything in Europe where regenerative agriculture is kind of getting  into the policy level and being discussed? Not really. I mean, I've seen a policy paper or  more a vision manifesto or paper from the Dutch government on agriculture and they call it more  
**[0:03:13-0:03:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:03:13):**  circular agriculture or something like that, which sounds really nice and very interesting.  The policy part of it is definitely not there. So now the question is how do we translate that  into concrete examples? How do you tackle the power of the supermarkets or how do you tackle  
**[0:03:30-0:03:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:03:30):**  the huge rises in soil prices or land prices in the Netherlands that are no longer connected to  actually the current capacity? So there's some talk about it, but I haven't seen a very concrete  set of policy measurements that any government should get behind. But you see a bit of talk,  
**[0:03:50-0:03:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:03:50):**  as you see everywhere around soil, but I haven't seen concrete things, nor here in Italy,  where soil hasn't been on the agenda, except when it floods away in some of the many floods we had  in the past weeks here, which actually killed over 30 people. So it's soil again is on the news,  
**[0:04:07-0:04:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:04:07):**  but not in a way that we would like to see it. But could it be also that Australia is really  suffering from, I'm thinking that probably the thing we read here with Australia in agriculture  is drought. And when there's a 10 year drought or an eight year drought, maybe climate change hits  
**[0:04:25-0:04:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:04:25):**  harder there and thus more of the farmers started looking for alternatives. It's something I'm  wondering. Definitely. Yeah. There's a paper that I'm going to post in this month's newsroom that  actually has some statistics looking at the drought, but also looking at what they call  
**[0:04:40-0:04:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:04:40):**  conservative or conservation agriculture, which is actually quite widespread in Australia. The paper  says that 90% of rain fed agriculture in Australia has adopted some form of conservation agriculture.  So I think the pressures of the drought over the last decade have moved farmers in this very,  
**[0:04:57-0:05:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:04:57):**  in a way, common sense direction. And so in a lot of ways, a step on from conservation is to head  towards regeneration. I think one thing we have to be careful of when talking about regenerative  agriculture in Australia is that there's really different levels of regenerative agriculture going  
**[0:05:16-0:05:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:05:16):**  on. And honestly, I think a lot of what people are calling regenerative agriculture in Australia is  actually, it's not really regenerative agriculture. It's basically just conservative agriculture  developed a little bit more in the technology and the thinking of it, but it's still, you know,  
**[0:05:33-0:05:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:05:33):**  no till cover crops, crop rotation, efficient irrigation, which doesn't really get to the deeper  levels of regenerative agroforestry, animal integration, and a bigger sort of systems change  perspective on what regenerative agriculture can be. So I think one thing I've noticed a lot from  
**[0:05:51-0:05:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:05:51):**  Australia is that maybe there's more people saying they're doing regenerative agriculture,  but when we look at it from a global perspective, it may not be as deep as it could be.  I think that's honestly the case in many places. People are using it everywhere. And I mean, if you  
**[0:06:09-0:06:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:06:09):**  search or you follow the Google trends, it's popping up. But if you really dig deeper in,  are they building soils in a way that makes sense? And are they really taking on the bigger  challenges of agriculture? Many are not yet. I would have to say, I think it's a great platform  
**[0:06:25-0:06:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:06:25):**  to start and some to continue, but yeah, there may, I mean, there are some examples of them.  Well, like people that actually took it to a whole new level and they're there in Australia as well.  I mean, I've read the book of Charles Massey. There are some that are really, really pushing  
**[0:06:41-0:06:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:06:41):**  the boundaries, but yeah, if you say X percent or half of it or whatever is already close to  regenerative and probably we're fooling ourselves. Yeah. And I think I'm working on a new paper that  will attempt to help discern between these different levels of our, really these different  
**[0:06:59-0:07:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:06:59):**  paradigms of agriculture from the extractive to the conservative to restorative and all the way  to regenerative and really be able to help people distinguish, okay, they're saying it's regenerative,  but is it really, how could I tell, how could I self assess my own farming operation to find  
**[0:07:13-0:07:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:07:13):**  that out? So that'll be forthcoming in the next couple of months. It'll be super, super useful.  Let's keep moving. Otherwise we'll never get to the end of the newsletter. What else I saw,  one of the things I noticed and it's not perfect, and I think we're going to put it somewhere on the  
**[0:07:29-0:07:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:07:29):**  levels you just mentioned, but there's the first product of land to market. We say when it came  out, did you already taste it? Where can we find it? Why is it so exciting? I haven't yet. I'm  really excited to, this is the first product. Uh, it's a spicy beef sriracha bites from  
**[0:07:46-0:07:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:07:46):**  Epic provisions, which is a very exciting startup. It's part of general meals, right? Yeah. Now,  yeah. Purchased by general meals and honestly they're, they're quality and their sourcing  dropped off a good bit when they're a purchase, but this is a really important step for them  
**[0:08:01-0:08:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:08:01):**  back into the eyes of hardcore grass fed consumers. They've sourced from a really excellent farm in  the United States and are providing the first land to market verified positive ecological outcomes  in this product. They are only selling it online at this point from their epic provisions website.  
**[0:08:22-0:08:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:08:22):**  They're looking for retail partners and I think it'll be very interesting to see which retailer  is the one that picks it up because I think that will send a signal to other retailers  that a regenerative agriculture is coming. And how they're going to communicate it. I'm very  
**[0:08:38-0:08:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:08:38):**  curious about the brand marketing and how, how are you going to sell soil? Basically,  that's some funding general music has been experimenting with, I think with ends,  what does the Mac and cheese, but it would be great to see more soil in the supermarkets and,  
**[0:08:52-0:08:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:08:52):**  uh, in the grocery shops. Absolutely. And I think one thing, so from my day job at how good  we rate the sustainability, the regenerative nature of food products and also health and  beauty and cleaning products. And how did they, how did they rate? How would these rate?  
**[0:09:08-0:09:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:09:08):**  Actually, we haven't rated this one yet. So we can talk about in the, on the next podcast,  we'll see what they ended up getting. But I think what's really interesting is we've been able to  track now through some data partnerships, how the market is responded. So what are the actual sales  
**[0:09:23-0:09:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:09:23):**  that are happening for different products in the marketplace? And so that's the other reason  I wanted to get into retail is that we can track and see, you know, what's the market response.  Are people excited about this? Are they willing to, you know, pay the small premium?  
**[0:09:37-0:09:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:09:37):**  If there is one that's going to be on there when it gets to supermarket shelves, this is  very exciting. And I think the next year, as we see more land to market products hit the shelves  and as other certifications start to get online, the regen organic certification  
**[0:09:51-0:09:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:09:51):**  and the other one forthcoming from green America, it'll be very interesting to see if  consumers by and large are as excited as all of us regenerative agriculture fanatics are.  Yeah. And if enough people pick it up and eat it, and of course, if it tastes good and if the  
**[0:10:05-0:10:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:10:05):**  ingredients are interesting and good, I mean, there's, there's still a lot to do, but it's,  I think it's quite a monumental shift because the first time for the Saver Institute who has  been working on this, I mean, on this specifically, I think for two years, but in general on holistic  
**[0:10:19-0:10:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:10:19):**  management for the last 30 to 40 years, it's a huge step. So I'm very happy we see that in  almost the end of 2018. Yeah. Very exciting. And I think one thing that's really going to  help on the brand marketing and, you know, consumer pickup of this is really the video  
**[0:10:36-0:10:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:10:36):**  and media side of that. Yeah, because you had a few, quite a few media things in the newsroom.  Just tell a bit about the videos, the podcast, how we're going to promote market this amazing  regeneration story with all the complexity that is part of that. I think sort of small mini  
**[0:10:52-0:10:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:10:52):**  documentaries are going to be really important and Kiss the Ground is really a leader in this realm.  They put out an excellent little video called a regenerative secret, uh, that has some really  great drone footage of moving animals between different pastures. It's worth just, just checking  
**[0:11:11-0:11:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:11:11):**  the video just for the drone video. It's already makes it makes you think that. Yeah, but it's really,  it's an eight minute video that packs a lot of information and some beautiful visuals. And I  think little things like that are going to get a lot of, a lot of play because they're real.  
**[0:11:25-0:11:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:11:25):**  They're showing real farms, real farmers figuring out how to do this much more so than the kind of,  I don't know, interesting, but also a little strange video that came out from Patagonia.  Did you get a chance to see that? Yeah, I saw it. I have to say it's the coloring, the, the,  
**[0:11:41-0:11:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:11:41):**  it was very digitized. It wasn't really my video. I've seen other ones of them. Maybe it's because  I'm so much in the sector, which I really loved on their beef jerky and this almond part. And  they really made these mini documentaries you mentioned before. This is a completely  
**[0:11:55-0:11:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:11:55):**  different one for everyone who wants to watch it. It's very different. It didn't really  hit me to be honest. It was a bit weird. Yeah. Yeah. Well, I think, you know,  I think they're aiming at a particular consumer segment. Um, and it could work for that, but  
**[0:12:11-0:12:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:12:11):**  I don't think any farmer watching that video is going to be inspired to explore regenerative  agriculture, think about how they could develop and evolve their farm systems towards greater  ecological resilience and towards, you know, farm profitability. It didn't, it sort of seemed like  
**[0:12:28-0:12:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:12:28):**  it missed the mark in actually supporting farmers to head into this. Which might not be their goal.  I mean, they do have to sell their produce. Yeah. And I think it shows as well. I mean,  what do you want to achieve by your media or your content? What do you want to get to? And who's  
**[0:12:45-0:12:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:12:45):**  your audience? And apparently we're not the one with this video. We're not the audience.  You know, it's just something I'm thinking of that we haven't seen a lot of, and again,  Kiss the Ground is I think the best at this so far. We haven't seen a lot of like regenerative  
**[0:12:59-0:13:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:12:59):**  agriculture means little image boards and little funny photos with texts that are sort of getting  people interested and excited. That's I'd love to see some more people do that. Get some little  meme mind magic out there, getting people interested and excited about regenerative  
**[0:13:16-0:13:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:13:16):**  agriculture. So yeah, I would love to see more. I mean, if people have examples of that,  definitely hit us in the comments underneath or tweet us at us or comment on the, on the medium  use room, obviously. And I would love to see that's more for the insight to, to make the  
**[0:13:32-0:13:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:13:32):**  invisible visible and the root systems that are growing. How do you make a regenerative field,  the difference between a regenerative field and a chemical one much more visible, both to invest  stores, obviously that's my target group, but also to the general, it's very different. If you have  
**[0:13:48-0:13:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:13:48):**  a lot of pollinators, it's very different, but often you don't see the two different,  obviously if you have a huge agroforestry system, you see the differences, but often it's sort of  hidden. You don't see all the plants at work. You didn't see the hidden things under the  
**[0:14:01-0:14:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:14:01):**  hidden half of nature as the Montgomery would say underground. And that's a shame because there's,  there's real magic happening or real nature happening there, which, which we  lost the ability to see and some cave actually to taste as well.  
**[0:14:14-0:14:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:14:14):**  Yeah. And I think you make a good point about agroforestry and there's actually  a pretty good fixed section in this month's newsroom on agroforestry.  Huge. Yeah, definitely. Check it out.  
**[0:14:23-0:14:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:14:23):**  Some really great initiative in Africa that's happening on agroforestry. There's also a great  little documentary video that again, from the storytelling perspective, hones in on a couple  of key agroforestry crops from around the world, Northern Ghana, looking at the baobab tree,  
**[0:14:40-0:14:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:14:40):**  and then in Columbia looking at the kakai tree. So really interesting agroforestry stuff happening.  And I think, I think from my perspective, there's just the science shows over and over again that  agricultural systems that integrate tree crops by far capture the most carbon the most quickly,  
**[0:14:59-0:15:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:14:59):**  you know, on sometimes an order of magnitude greater than just the soil and tillage or  low tillage approaches. So I think agroforestry is a important piece and I'm hoping more and more,  we'll see folks adopting the systems. Yeah. And a shout out to the indigenous  
**[0:15:14-0:15:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:15:14):**  groups that are working with the US forest service to restore an enormous amount of square  kilometers. I'm reading you 5,700 against fire, basically, or against out of control fire and  using traditional methods, which is quite interesting to see that coming back to forest.  
**[0:15:30-0:15:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:15:30):**  And we've all seen this year, but also last year and before, unfortunately, the huge forest fires.  And I even saw, I have to find the details, a climate bond or a bond somewhere popping up to  against forest fire. So there's also, you see from the investor perspective also developments  
**[0:15:47-0:15:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:15:47):**  to finance the mitigation instead of paying for the damage after which is enforced fires.  Exactly. Exactly. Yep. And I think, you know, even seeing again, from an investing perspective,  one of the largest advisors that looks at timberland investments put out the first of  
**[0:16:07-0:16:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:16:07):**  its kind report on agroforestry as an option for integrating into timberland management strategies.  So that's really cool because that's starting to show that. That's serious money. Yeah.  Yeah. That's serious money that goes into timber. And so for timber to be thinking about  
**[0:16:22-0:16:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:16:22):**  integrating, you know, non-timber forest products and agroforestry systems, very much looking  forward to seeing more of that. Yeah, we definitely need, I mean,  institutional investors will be the last one on the table. I mean, you'll be at the table,  
**[0:16:35-0:16:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:16:35):**  the last one to invest, but the amounts that they can put to work are just working anything else.  And definitely it's very interesting to see even just the word agroforestry in those kinds of  reports, which normal timberland investors would never, I mean, that's monoculture, just like in  
**[0:16:52-0:16:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:16:52):**  agriculture, monoculture. And we don't want anything mixed with that. And to finalize this,  this, this round up basically of news regeneration news, the newsroom, what are things we should  look out for, for, I see an event you mentioned here, tell us a bit about regenerative earth  
**[0:17:10-0:17:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:17:10):**  summit and then we close with some, some holiday thoughts and potential gifts.  So the regenerative earth summit is happening a little less than a month from now in Boulder,  Colorado. And the theme this year is bringing together, uh, fiber and food. So there's  
**[0:17:28-0:17:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:17:28):**  representatives from Patagonia, from the, uh, clothing side of Patagonia also from the north  face who have just released a very interesting product in collaboration with the nonprofit  fiber shed, which does it's a hat, right? It's a hat, a little beanie with a regenerative wool.  
**[0:17:47-0:17:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:17:47):**  They use it as an example so many times as, as like one of the first products that people  have of regeneration and not a major brand. I haven't seen one yet live, but it's very cool.  Very cool. Yeah. And then there's stuff from the food side as well. So this is going to be  
**[0:18:03-0:18:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:18:03):**  a great summit. It's not the traditional conference. There's going to be really  interesting working groups discussion. So one month from now, when exactly is it?  The date is December 4th. And I think it's the fourth to the seventh in Boulder.  
**[0:18:19-0:18:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:18:19):**  So anyone who wants to go find, click on the link, find out if you can,  it's a very interesting lineup, both from the fashion, fashion and food. It's a good mix.  Great. And then also upcoming no date yet. This is more on the business side of things, but  
**[0:18:34-0:18:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:18:34):**  the generative business summit is forthcoming probably spring 2019, which is going to be a  hybrid virtual and in-person event that takes some of the principles of regeneration and applies  them to how do you design and evolve your business. So more stay tuned for more about that.  
**[0:18:51-0:18:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:18:51):**  I'll be speaking, uh, and part of both events and be great to meet you in person. If you can  make it to either of them. Very cool. And then to finalize, I mean, the holidays are still a bit  away depending on where you are, but there are a number of books you mentioned. Some of you are  
**[0:19:03-0:19:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:19:03):**  excited to read too. You mentioned you haven't read them yet. Why these two?  I picked out Gary Paul Nabhan's new book called Niskit and a board arboreal love affair. I just  love reading Gary Paul's stuff. I mean, for years he's hit this line between incredibly deep science  
**[0:19:24-0:19:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:19:24):**  and like beautifully lyrical readable pros. His books are the most fun and informative to read.  And so, you know, mesquite is this amazing perennial traditional crop from the borderlands  between the United States and Mexico. Uh, it's a nitrogen fixer. It makes this delicious flower.  
**[0:19:42-0:19:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:19:42):**  And so I just, you know, I love the plant and I can only imagine what he's going to say.  Hey, kind of wandering around the deserts down there looking at and getting to notice  and the other one is in the other one brings us to an important and probably underrepresented in  
**[0:19:59-0:20:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:19:59):**  a lot of the news we're seeing aspects of regeneration, which is the social social justice  reparations climate justice side of regenerating agriculture. So, so this is a very powerful new  book by Leah Pennyman from soul fire farm, uh, in the United States. It's called farming while black.  
**[0:20:20-0:20:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:20:20):**  Yeah, I've heard about it. I saw it popping up on a number of newsletters, emails, and  social media, but I haven't read it yet. It's, it's, it's something that is, is very underrated.  I think also here in Europe, you see, I mean, if you see at the end of farm workers are,  
**[0:20:37-0:20:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:20:37):**  are often either from Sub-Saharan Africa or from the East and work in conditions that we can only  imagine. And it's a huge hidden tragedy, basically in the agriculture sector that we somehow are not  able to defeat the farmers or pay for the farmers, let alone the farm workers for the food we eat.  
**[0:20:57-0:21:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:20:57):**  And this book is actually, you know, taking that in a way, flipping it, it's really focused on Leah  and the other group of farmers that she's been working with here in the Northeast and beyond  that are black and Latino, Latino farmers, people of color who are reclaiming agriculture,  
**[0:21:16-0:21:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:21:16):**  getting their own farms, uh, you know, repairing and restoring their communities and asking  white people to show up as allies as supporters for their work. So this is not going to be an  easy book to read. Uh, but I think it's really important. And there's one other article actually,  
**[0:21:33-0:21:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:21:33):**  um, on chickens and trees from a Latino perspective as well in the, in the newsroom.  Absolutely. Yeah. Yeah. And there's also a podcast with, uh,  but he and Aldo who's Guatemalan originally and has a really cool tree based poultry system that  
**[0:21:52-0:21:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:21:52):**  is modular and is being developed in the Midwest in the United States. So that's, yeah, great  perspective to see as well. And I think you were talking about Gabe Brown's new book.  Yes, definitely. I see that popping up everywhere. I mean, his podcast is in the,  
**[0:22:05-0:22:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:22:05):**  in the newsroom as well, which has been going really, really strong by John Kemp.  And I read the book, I got it a week, two weeks ago. It's a great story. It's well written. Um,  it's the story of probably known by many, many listening to this, but it's, uh, it shows actually  
**[0:22:23-0:22:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:22:23):**  something we discussed before in Australia, like how drought or how this case hail and four terrible  years basically got Gabe Brown thinking. And as a non farmer coming into a farmer family and  taking over the farm, it really showed how deep you need to go in some cases to start questioning  
**[0:22:40-0:22:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:22:40):**  the system. And he definitely started questioning a lot of systems and it shows it's an easy book.  It's not too thick. I think it's around the pages or something. Maybe I must underestimate. It reads  really quickly. There's some beautiful pictures in it. And, um, it's, uh, I think a great gift to,  
**[0:22:55-0:23:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:22:55):**  uh, traditional farmers that are curious. I think it's, uh, it's an easy entry point because he talks  farmer language and, and, but at the same time questions a lot and shows what he's been doing.  It keeps repeating. This is not a recipe book. This is you have to figure out isn't it. And it's,  
**[0:23:12-0:23:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:23:12):**  but it's a, it's a great week. I really enjoyed it as a, as a, as a good story on what he has done  with, uh, with a farm, like many, many others. Great. All right. So make sure to pick up,  uh, one or all or read them, share them, spread them and make it go further. Great. I think that  
**[0:23:32-0:23:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2018/11/20/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-november-2018/#t=0:23:32):**  brings us to the end of the regeneration newsroom podcast for November, 2018. Let us know what you  think. If you have other stories, books, you're reading things you're seeing that we're not  catching, let us know in the comments and see you next time. Cheers.  