### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2019-00-25)
**[0:00:00-0:00:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:00:00):**  Welcome to the Regeneration Newsroom podcast of March 2019. This is a joint venture between  the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture podcast and Ethan Soloviev's Regeneration Newsroom,  where we, Ethan Soloviev and myself, Kungfansagen, go through the most interesting  regeneration news items of this month. Welcome back. Ethan, for whoever hasn't listened to our  previous podcast, would you like to introduce yourself very briefly and then I will do the  
**[0:00:23-0:00:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:00:23):**  same with me? Sure. I am a farmer in upstate New York in the United States. I'm also the executive  vice president of research at Howgood, where we track sustainability data and analytics for over  a million products in the world. We have the world's largest food sustainability database.  I'm also an author working primarily in regenerative agriculture. I've written a number  of pieces. I'm starting to work on a book and have a new paper coming out soon. Kungfansagen,  
**[0:00:54-0:01:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:00:54):**  introduce yourself. I'm a senior manager at Tonic, which is a global community of  active impact investors. I'm a senior manager here in Europe, where I'm responsible for about  half of our members and our events. I work at an asset manager. I'm a partner in Milan,  focused on region ag and food in Italy. I host the podcast series Investing in Regenerative  Agriculture since 2017. We're back this time with the news of the last few months, specifically  
**[0:01:22-0:01:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:01:22):**  of March 2019. When I was looking through the newsletter, the first thing that really  caught my eye was that there are multiple certifications and initiatives coming up which  are really outcome-based. I think one of the main ones that's starting to catch on is Savory's  Land to Market. What did you see there, Ethan? There was an important announcement in the  last couple of months from Applegate, who is launching a new set of products through  
**[0:01:49-0:01:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:01:49):**  a new platform called the New Food Collective that out the gate is starting with the American  Grass Fed Association certification, which is one of the highest bars for grass-fed grazing  of animals. They also said in their announcement, this is where we're starting, but we're going  to head towards the Savory Land to Market initiative, which is the first ecological  outcomes verification, the first real chance to show actual regeneration on the ground.  
**[0:02:18-0:02:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:02:18):**  I think it's really important to note not only that they're doing it, but that they're  telling the story of their journey. I think that's going to be more and more important  as citizens around the world, as consumers, look towards transparency. They don't just  want to know what certification did you get. They want to know what's the story, what's  the journey that you took to get there. I think it's great that Applegate's leading  
**[0:02:39-0:02:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:02:39):**  in this way. Yeah, and I saw the pictures on the website.  The New Food Initiative, they look amazing. I think they quoted something like, for food  porn, you need land porn, et cetera. Beautiful pictures. Definitely check them out. The big  news there probably is that they are moving towards, meaning that it's not so easy to  get there. They hopefully are going to keep us posted on the setbacks, but also the challenges  
**[0:03:02-0:03:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:03:02):**  and the victories they encounter as they're moving pieces of their supply chain, because  I don't think they're going to go all in immediately. At least they're announcing something and  a start, which I think is interesting. Actually, it wasn't the only initiative that got some  attention this month, right? Yeah. At Expo West, Natural Products Expo  West at the beginning of this month, a group launched a new standard that is called the  
**[0:03:30-0:03:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:03:30):**  Soil Carbon Initiative. This is the second outcomes-based standard that's going to hit  the market. From now until May 5th, they're in an open comment period, so anyone can read  the standard and submit comments on it. I think it's actually really exciting. It is  purely soil focused. They're not calling themselves regenerative. They're not even saying sustainable.  They're just saying, let's build the health and vitality of soils, and let's measure it  
**[0:03:57-0:04:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:03:57):**  rigorously, scientifically, and in a way that any farmer can participate. You don't have  to be organic. You don't have to know what agroforestry is. You, as a farmer in anywhere,  even mechanized tillage crops, can think about and learn, and they're actually making education  and learning part of the standard, how to improve your soil and get all the benefits  that go along with that. I think this is a very forward thinking, it's outcomes-based.  
**[0:04:21-0:04:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:04:21):**  There's different levels of testing that you can do from just simple observations that  could be done low-tech on the ground anywhere to more university laboratory-based specific  technology, to really check soil carbon and aggregate stability, microbial biomass. I  guess I should also say there, if you didn't happen to be at Expo West to see it, they're  doing a free webinar coming up, and the link will be in the newsroom that you can register  
**[0:04:49-0:04:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:04:49):**  and basically see their whole presentation on the standard.  I think I would invite anybody active in soil carbon to read the standard, to read the proposal,  and actively comment on it, because this is really a chance for the sector to get involved  with some of the very big players, because it's Ben and Jerry's owned by Unilever, it's  Danone, obviously. This is a chance to, at least on the soil part, to really participate  
**[0:05:16-0:05:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:05:16):**  in what's hopefully going to be a very strict standard and a very scientific one to counter  a lot of claims that have been made in the past years, etc., around regen or at least  soil building in general.  I think that heads you towards something we were chatting about before, about companies  and their role in this movement.  
**[0:05:36-0:05:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:05:36):**  I think it's a general feeling I had when I was reading the newsroom or when I see a  lot of the info with the hashtag regeneration or regenerative ag, is that companies seem  to be leading the change and will be driving this, but at the same time, there's an incredible  amount of hot air or blah blah blah around it that a lot of companies are claiming to  be regenerative or we're on our way without actually saying anything around it. Maybe  
**[0:06:05-0:06:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:06:05):**  they're somewhat organic, maybe they're not even that, maybe they're somewhat better than  the standard, but I see the emptying almost of the term really through the newsletter  you shared this month. Is that something I only see? Is that my pessimistic view or you  see the same?  Both sides of that I totally agree on. A, that companies are leading and that this is  
**[0:06:26-0:06:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:06:26):**  really different from organic. The organic movement was led by farmers, it was led by  concerned citizens and people who eat food really wanting and pushing this forward, but  at least so far in regenerative ag, the companies, the corporations, the larger businesses that  are making the food products, they are the ones that are pushing it forward at least  in the most public way.  
**[0:06:48-0:06:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:06:48):**  Why is that?  I think they see a couple things. I think they see what's happening with climate change  and that people are concerned about it and that they have a perceived approach and solution  to it or at least part of it, but then I also think that they see the money. I think they  see the financial writing on the wall and we'll talk about that a bit later from some  
**[0:07:10-0:07:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:07:10):**  of my research in the last couple of months on the data, the quantitative side of sales  and regeneration. I think there's money to be made while doing good for the world, which  overall I'm definitely not opposed to, but I am skeptical of a lot of what's being put  out there. There's a new launch this month from somebody who was the COO I think and  one of the founders of Blue Apron who's launching a new quote unquote regenerative chicken farm,  
**[0:07:37-0:07:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:07:37):**  but I couldn't tell anything regenerative about it. Their definition of regenerative  I saw the video. There's nothing in it. It's like chickens that are happy, but it's nothing  about soil, nothing about the feed of the chickens, like the basic three questions you  would ask. Yeah, they may be seen better off than a factory farm chicken, obviously, but  yeah, they mentioned regenerative without giving any... I saw a few other articles  
**[0:08:00-0:08:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:08:00):**  I think in your newsroom as well that are empty with... There's just the word and maybe  a bit better than the standard conventional plowing, et cetera, but not even soil is mentioned.  No, I think there's a couple good articles that lay this out, one from Grist and another  from AgFunder that basically say regenerative agriculture, is this a really great new thing  or just a big marketing ploy? I think it's useful to have that conversation. I think  
**[0:08:29-0:08:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:08:29):**  it's useful for us to be discerning. I don't want regenerative agriculture to get quickly  dumbed down and banalized into something that's just a tiny bit better or not even as good  as a certified organic. I think us having this discussion and discerning between what's  happening is really important. Like we mentioned earlier, I think Applegate's doing a great  job at telling the whole story, but then it's also fun to see the back and forth in the  
**[0:08:55-0:09:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:08:55):**  New York Times, full page ad in the New York Times where Clif Bar called out one of its  competitors, Kind Bar, for not using organic ingredients. Kind Bar came back at them and  said, well, your products are mostly made of rice syrup, which is just sugar. It's kind  of funny, maybe it's confusing to consumers, but you know what? I'm actually glad that  people are talking about this and arguing about food and health and soil is much better  
**[0:09:21-0:09:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:09:21):**  than much of the current political dialogue, if you can even call it that. I'm overall  happy.  No, absolutely. I think it gets back to the... I mean, it's a discussion we had before  as well. Is it good to call some things organic, even if they're... Maybe we call them only  five percent or 10 percent. Actually, we don't know what 100 percent is, but it's good. You  
**[0:09:43-0:09:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:09:43):**  see these initiatives, the ones we mentioned before, Land to Market, Soil Carbon Initiative,  and some others that are actually trying to quantify and actually trying, okay, how we're  going to measure this. Probably we're going to find that it's very, very difficult and  very slow. All the lofty goals were going to be 100 percent regenerative very soon,  et cetera, are going to be very tricky, but at least hopefully some of these things we  
**[0:10:04-0:10:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:10:04):**  can hold these companies accountable at some point. General Mills announcing a million  acres regenerative, a million we can measure. Also at Expo, we can measure that quite quickly,  but we obviously don't know what they mean by regenerative.  But that's something we can also at some point start asking the question. It's at least a  goal, I think, and we can argue how far they're going to push it, how many trees are going  
**[0:10:26-0:10:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:10:26):**  to be planted, what kind of agroforestry systems they're going to do or not, and that kind  of thing. But I think that those steps do create a platform of hopefully pushing these  companies further and further down the regenerative.  I think so, too. And I think General Mills, they said advancing regenerative agriculture  on a million acres. And so there are many different things that that could mean.  
**[0:10:48-0:10:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:10:48):**  Depends where you start as well.  Exactly. And I think they've been good at, at least in their earlier work, one of their  earlier sort of standards from Annies, which is a company owned by General Mills, was a  farmer self-assessment, which I really like. It's important for farmers to be able to be  thinking about it and making choices on their own and also choosing, you know, sort of which  
**[0:11:10-0:11:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:11:10):**  stream of regenerative agriculture they want to engage with.  Yeah, because I think there's, I mean, honestly, a lot of these things feel a lot regenerative  light between brackets. It's some steps, some cover crops and etc. But to really go down  the line, I mean, you're calling the soil profits lineage in your piece to really push  it further and deeper, etc. That's a journey and that's a huge undertaking, which you're  
**[0:11:35-0:11:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:11:35):**  not doing in a few years with a small rotational change, etc. But it's also the question, do  we want or are these companies, these large companies, because they were saying they're  going to lead the change or they're actually leading at least the public change at the  moment, are they ever going to be able to really go regenerative? Is it Ben and Jerry's  physically, structurally able to do that? And do we want to?  
**[0:11:57-0:11:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:11:57):**  Yeah.  No, I think it's, but it's going to be, I mean, we need to keep a very strict eye on  them. I mean, the Blue Apron founders, of course, it's interesting and funny to make  fun of the chickens, but the General Mills announcement, what are they going to measure  and what kind of certification or standards are they going to use, hopefully publicly  
**[0:12:17-0:12:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:12:17):**  to measure their journey? And I hope more will do, like Applegate actually publish their  journey and their difficulties because there are many companies that might keep that in  house, which is a shame.  Great. And actually on the consumer piece, because you mentioned one of the main reasons  these companies are moving into the space is that they see a potential or a real consumer  
**[0:12:39-0:12:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:12:39):**  interest in regeneration or in regenerative products. And you published or you presented  something on Expo West right on that piece, on some research you've done.  Yeah, this is really interesting. In the last couple of months, my day job at Howgood, we  looked at an aggregate sort of ranking or scoring of sustainability attributes and chose  products. We have about a million products in the database and we looked to say which  
**[0:13:07-0:13:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:13:07):**  one is achieving the most of these sustainability attributes. I'm not going to call those products  regenerative. I don't think there are any regenerative food products at scale in the  marketplace right now. But I said, well, these are the ones that are furthest on the pathway  towards regeneration. And if you look at those and you take those top 5000 products out of  a million and then track how they are doing in the marketplace versus their category.  
**[0:13:33-0:13:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:13:33):**  So how is the most sustainable, the furthest towards regeneration yogurt doing compared  to everything else in yogurt? You'll see that the most regenerative products are doing awesome.  They are outpacing their categories by up to 170% over the five-year period that we  were looking at. Different categories, it's different amounts. It's anywhere from 10%  ahead of the overall category to 150%. And it's just amazing to see how much that is  
**[0:14:06-0:14:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:14:06):**  driving things and then you can dive down and even in something specific like yogurt,  depending on which attributes you are achieving. Are you getting non-GMO? Are you getting organic?  Those are good. Those will bump you up a few percentage points in sales compared to the  category. But if you hit the grass-fed dairy going into it, that particular attribute was  predictive of over a 200% growth overall compared to the category. So it's really cool to see  
**[0:14:33-0:14:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:14:33):**  that even in the marketplace, and this is based on syndicated sales data from an outfit  called Nielsen that tracks this. So this is based on grocery stores, not just small local  co-op. This is the big players all across the entire United States over a five-year  period. Products that are more sustainable that are further on the path to regeneration  are selling better in the marketplace. And that is, I think, good news for what everybody  
**[0:14:58-0:15:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:14:58):**  here is working on.  Yeah, because all of these companies obviously are going to launch or launching products  which have to be, especially if you're large, probably sold at large supermarkets and large  grocery chains.  Right. And depending on what category you're in and what category you're designing products  
**[0:15:17-0:15:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:15:17):**  for, you need to know specifically which sustainability attributes are resonating. Sometimes in some  categories it's fair trade. In other categories it's a combination of clean ingredients,  preservative-free, and minimal processing. So depending on the category and how the most  regenerative products are doing in that category will help brands figure out what to focus  on and how to drive growth. I'll make sure to link to the How Good page where you can  
**[0:15:48-0:15:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:15:48):**  download just a simple one-page report that shows the performance of the most regenerative  products in all the different categories that we were able to study.  That would be great. And to finish off this Newsroom podcast, as always, we look at upcoming  events. We mentioned an event in the past, the Expo, but what's upcoming both in Europe  and in the US? First, in March.  
**[0:16:13-0:16:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:16:13):**  Just a couple of key events. One coming up really soon, the Living Soils Symposium in  Montreal in Canada, March 28 to 31. I'm speaking on a small panel there. Joel Salatin will  be there, other folks doing holistic management. This was a really big, fun mix of farmers  and activists and businesses when they did it last time two years ago. I'm excited to  present there. It's going to be just at the end of this week by the time you're hearing  
**[0:16:40-0:16:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:16:40):**  this podcast.  Yeah, and actually in London there's a very interesting event organized by Soil Capital  and the City of London, so the financial city of London actually, financing regenerative  agriculture on April 8th. It's invite only, so make sure if you want to go try and get  an invite. But it will be Danone speaking actually, the head of nature and sustainability  
**[0:17:00-0:17:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:17:00):**  finance director, Sacha Tripathi, the assistant secretary general of the United Nations Environmental  Program who I interviewed on their project in India. Chuck, the leader and CEO of Soil  Capital will be speaking, who I also interviewed. And Jeremy Grant, the co-founder of GMO, is  invited but not confirmed yet as we are recording this podcast. But already these three plus  Jeremy I think will make it into a very, very interesting mix. So we're looking forward  
**[0:17:25-0:17:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:17:25):**  to hear from whoever is going, what was discussed and what was learned there.  And the last event I would point to is one coming up in May, at the end of May in the  Bay Area, which is Transform Climate Communities Capital. And this event, it comes from the  producer of SOCAP, the Social Capital Markets Conference, which has grown in the last 20  years to this massive, super important event for impact investors. And he sold SOCAP and  
**[0:17:55-0:17:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:17:55):**  has gone on to start this new project that is focusing on regeneration, regenerative  agriculture, investment, the transformation of land and cities. And as part of that event,  it just released a list that I worked on that is a list of all regenerative agriculture,  forestry and agroforestry funds that are out there and operating in the world. And there's  about 40 funds globally that we found for that list and have a little bit of data about  
**[0:18:22-0:18:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:18:22):**  assets under management and size of acres invested in and are going to be expanding  some of those funds will actually be at the conference. So I'm pretty excited for that.  I'll be there as well, May 22nd to 24th in California.  Sounds amazing. And there are still tickets for that, I imagine.  Yeah, still available going quick.  
**[0:18:42-0:18:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:18:42):**  Great. And I think the last piece is that I launched my Patreon account. So for the  investing in regenerative agriculture podcast, I've been recording that next to my paid job.  And so I could dedicate about one day a month to it, which means I record about one episode  a month. But I'm looking to scale that to actually more because there's so many more  stories to tell around regen food and egg and how to put our money to work. So I have  
**[0:19:05-0:19:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:19:05):**  a Patreon community live and already some great supporters. And I invite you obviously  to check that out and see if it's something for you to join. And we'll put a link in the  show notes and also on the newsletter.  Thanks everybody for listening in. As always, if there's any news we missed, or any news  you have upcoming that you'd like to be covered here first, shoot us an email, get in touch  
**[0:19:28-0:19:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/03/24/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-march-2019/#t=0:19:28):**  and thanks for tuning in.  Thank you so much. See you next time.  