### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2019-00-31)
**[0:00:00-0:00:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:00:00):**  Welcome to the Regeneration Newsroom podcast of May 2019.  This is a joint venture between Ethan Soloveyev's Regeneration Newsroom  and the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast,  where we, Ethan Soloveyev and myself,  Koon van Zeyen, go through the most interesting  
**[0:00:14-0:00:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:00:14):**  regeneration news items of the month.  Good to be back, Ethan.  Great to be with you. You added a word to your podcast.  Definitely. And it's yeah, I mean, after agriculture,  I thought we had to discuss food as well.  
**[0:00:24-0:00:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:00:24):**  There's such a strong connection.  And actually, podcast that just went live has a has a great connection  between that, but we'll discuss that later.  Let's do a very brief intro into who are you and who am I  for the people that listen to this podcast for the first time.  
**[0:00:38-0:00:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:00:38):**  My name is Ethan Soloveyev.  I'm the chief innovation officer at Howgood Inc,  a global sustainability data and analytics firm.  And I'm also a farmer in upstate New York,  working with apples and grass fed sheep.  
**[0:00:54-0:00:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:00:54):**  Over to you.  Great. I'm Koon van Zeyen. I'm based in Europe.  I work with an impact investing nonprofit community of impact  investors called Tonic.  And I created a podcast on investing in regenerative agriculture  
**[0:01:07-0:01:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:01:07):**  and also food in 2016 at the end of the year.  And we're approaching 30,000 streams.  So it's been a while.  And I work at an asset manager here in Milan, in Italy,  focused on regenerative food and agriculture in Italy.  
**[0:01:20-0:01:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:01:20):**  And of course, Koon gets the much sexier office in Milan.  I'm just here in rural upstate New York.  But let's get to the news.  There was an amazing study that came out this last month  from a very respected international life cycle assessment  
**[0:01:37-0:01:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:01:37):**  firm called Qantas.  It was funded by General Mills and focused  on the beef production of white oak pastures in Georgia.  Yeah.  I mean, I love this study.  
**[0:01:50-0:01:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:01:50):**  I love the infographic because often these things are very, very dry.  And they actually managed to make it quite visual.  I mean, I have a lot of questions on it.  But my main takeaway was actually that traditional life cycle assessments,  they don't look at soil carbon capture.  
**[0:02:04-0:02:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:02:04):**  And they, I think, also don't look at the loss of soil carbon.  So they miss this gigantic negative and potentially positive impact,  actually, of, in this case, beef.  And so they actually were able to show that per kilo of fresh meat,  the way of them operating actually was storing,  
**[0:02:25-0:02:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:02:25):**  actually, a negative impact of minus 3.5 kilos,  which is very interesting compared to any other beef or any other soy,  et cetera.  But the main thing was LCAs don't even look at soil carbon,  which is quite shocking to be, coming from such an established research firm.  
**[0:02:41-0:02:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:02:41):**  It's very interesting.  And I saw a little graphic on Facebook.  I couldn't actually get the real sourcing of it.  And I didn't know where they got the data.  But it was effective.  
**[0:02:49-0:02:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:02:49):**  So I'm going to explain it.  Basically, it showed CAFO, Confined Animal Feeding Operation,  a kilogram of beef and showed a very high impact, 10 times grass fed,  general grass fed.  Then it showed general grass fed, which is about a tenth of that.  
**[0:03:06-0:03:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:03:06):**  Then it showed the Impossible Burger and the Beyond Meat Burger,  which are both smaller than grass fed, but still have a,  they're still emitting net, emitting carbon into the atmosphere.  And then there was the results of this study,  which showed the white oak pastor's beef at negative 3.5 kilograms of carbon per  
**[0:03:23-0:03:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:03:23):**  kilogram of fresh meat.  And that was very impressive.  It sort of pushes back up against this techno utopian, future of food,  lab grown meat idea and says, look, if you're actually doing a really excellent  job with holistic management grazing, integrated multi-species,  
**[0:03:42-0:03:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:03:42):**  then you can have this positive impact where you're pulling carbon down into the soil.  And to have this showed by a very respectable international firm doing  life cycle assessment, I thought was a pretty big deal and a big step for  the regenerative agriculture industry.  Yeah, I definitely invite everyone to look at this study.  
**[0:04:01-0:04:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:04:01):**  It's very, very readable.  I mean, there are, I think, 30 or 40 slides.  And they ask a lot of questions as well because they didn't look at water.  They didn't look at a lot of other things.  They really kept it to carbon carbon.  
**[0:04:12-0:04:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:04:12):**  So the potential negative and positive things could be much bigger.  And they were, there are actually quite some questions around methane.  So they were very, very conservative on methane, although, and  I know there are a lot of discussions, you know that as a farmer, probably much better  of the birching and the burping of cows and how much of that methane is being  
**[0:04:30-0:04:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:04:30):**  absorbed immediately or relatively immediately by the grass bacteria and  how much actually goes up in the air.  So there's still a lot of conservancy around this data.  But it's, I think, the first time we've seen and  sort of proven that climate positive beef is actually possible.  
**[0:04:47-0:04:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:04:47):**  Apart from the whole discussion, obviously, around animal welfare and  should we be eating it, that's a different discussion.  But from the climate side of things, there are some interesting signals here.  Definitely, and I think it's exciting.  I think it's also just in tracking the overall regenerative agriculture industry.  
**[0:05:04-0:05:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:05:04):**  This is a real ripple that's starting to happen from General Mills,  one of the largest ag players in the world, getting into this realm.  So they have funded a number of things in the last couple months.  There was an announcement of a $650,000 grant to a series of  nonprofits that are doing soil health trainings in the Midwest.  
**[0:05:25-0:05:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:05:25):**  Gabe Brown is involved in that, right?  Yeah, exactly.  Gabe Brown, Ray Arculetta, Kiss the Ground,  another allied not-for-profit organization, is involved as well.  So, and then here's this thing on a totally different angle where General Mills  
**[0:05:38-0:05:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:05:38):**  supported this study to happen.  So I think that the ripples we're seeing from that are pretty significant and  we can expect them to increase in the coming year.  Yeah, which is a nice plug because I'm going to interview them really soon.  So if you have any suggestions of what I should ask, let me know.  
**[0:05:56-0:06:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:05:56):**  And I definitely will ask about their purchasing powers and  how they're using that.  Of course, the big announcement of their gigantic farm, it's not their farm, but  the farm they're helping to convert to regenerative or  on the way to regenerative is very interesting.  
**[0:06:10-0:06:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:06:10):**  What I was missing in this study or what I would love to see is something on costs  and profitability and risk and seeing how that actually, in this case,  hits the bottom line of white oak pasture and how that's different from a lot of  the CAFOs we see and how close they are to basically being bankrupt in many cases.  Yeah, we basically have very, very few studies on the financial capital  
**[0:06:35-0:06:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:06:35):**  profitability of regenerative agriculture.  We can look to some of the folks that Kohn has interviewed on the podcast,  SLM Partners, Iroquois Valley, Farmland LP.  Many of these are investment funds that are making a go at returning investment  to investors through organic or further towards regenerative agriculture  
**[0:06:57-0:07:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:06:57):**  approaches, but a lot of their work is based on the land and  the real asset value of the land.  There's one study that I wrote about a couple months back in the newsroom that  was on corn and corn profitability using what they called regenerative  agriculture practices, which were definitely not.  
**[0:07:13-0:07:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:07:13):**  They were basic conservation, tillage, really kind of simple, straightforward,  good organic and agro-ecological farming practices,  looking at about 15 different farms farming corn.  But the results of the study were very interesting.  Even though I wouldn't call it regenerative,  
**[0:07:31-0:07:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:07:31):**  the farms that were implementing more of these practices,  they had a slightly lower yield per acre on their corn,  but the profitability was as much as 75% greater than the standard  industrial tillage and chemical intensive agriculture.  So that's a sort of hint and I agree it would be great to see more studies  
**[0:07:51-0:07:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:07:51):**  that look into the financial profitability.  We know that ecological, the living capital profitability of regenerative  agriculture is huge.  Let's start to see more of it or hope that we see more of it on the financial side.  No, absolutely.  
**[0:08:05-0:08:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:08:05):**  And actually I've been making some summaries of some of the interviews  I've done in the past and going through them again,  the word profitability or showing that it is more profitable this way,  agriculture keeps coming back in many, many of the interviews.  So there's definitely something there.  
**[0:08:20-0:08:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:08:20):**  And obviously there are the financial returns and the non-financial returns.  And we have to hopefully in more beautiful infographics show the  profitability on both of those types of returns because they are there  and it's just a shame to not talk about when we talk about inputs and outputs.  Great. Well, aside from,  
**[0:08:39-0:08:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:08:39):**  there's some really interesting articles in this month's newsroom that we're not  going to talk about having to do with government legislation and its relationship  to regenerative agriculture, touching on the Green New Deal,  a consortium of companies with 750,000 employees asking for a carbon price.  There's some really interesting stuff on the policy side of things.  
**[0:08:59-0:09:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:08:59):**  Yeah, but there was one other article that you honed in on,  Koen, that was focused on standards.  And so maybe talk a little bit about that.  Yeah, it's an old friend. We've discussed it before.  So process versus outcome based standards.  
**[0:09:12-0:09:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:09:12):**  Savory obviously was mentioned.  So it was the Green Biz article.  And I wanted to give a shout out to the outcome based ones to really be ambitious here.  We've been discussing many times a bit regenerative isn't good enough.  We're running out of soil and time.  
**[0:09:28-0:09:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:09:28):**  So I would strongly hope that we see more and more outcome based and more and more  real discussions on the results on and in and above the land instead of just small steps.  Now, let me push you on this a little bit, because in the last couple of months,  I've had the opportunity through my work at HowGood to be working with some of the  larger CPG corporate players that are in food and ag and kind of pushing into the regenerative space.  
**[0:09:52-0:09:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:09:52):**  What is CPG for the people not in the space?  Consumer packaged goods. Sorry.  So these are the large companies like Danone would be an example or, you know,  General Mills or Unilever who are producing goods, including food for consumers.  And as I've connected and worked with some of these companies,  
**[0:10:11-0:10:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:10:11):**  there's been some pushback against outcome based standards.  Because it's too difficult or too ambitious?  Yeah, it's hard, because it's really it's hard to measure.  We don't have a quick, easy way to just you know, you can't plug a probe in the ground  and say, what's the soil carbon and how has that changed?  
**[0:10:28-0:10:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:10:28):**  There's stuff coming from the quick carbon side of things, but it's not really there yet.  And how do you quickly ascertain whether biodiversity has increased or not  in an objective way to show the outcomes?  It's, you know, you need to be a PhD level scientist,  some people say, to do species counts and track it all.  
**[0:10:44-0:10:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:10:44):**  So they're sort of saying, yes, we want to get to outcomes.  Yes, we want to be measuring there.  But in the meantime, we need to be tracking what's happening.  And in a lot of cases, using a process based outcome, for example,  what practices are being used?  
**[0:10:57-0:10:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:10:57):**  Is no till being used?  Are you integrating, you know, agroforestry systems into your crop production?  Are you rotating animals through?  Those are process based indicators, but they aren't necessarily outcomes.  And so I don't know, a bit of me is sort of saying, OK, yes, we want to get to outcomes.  
**[0:11:15-0:11:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:11:15):**  But shouldn't we have some really good indicator processes that we're also looking at now?  I don't know.  I mean, we've discussed this also before.  There's agroforestry and agroforestry, and there's no till and no till.  And just like we have organic and organic, it still doesn't guarantee their outcomes.  
**[0:11:33-0:11:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:11:33):**  And maybe some of this budget, and hopefully more, has to be spent  on making these measurements easier and actually getting to a probe that you can put  in the ground and tells you that.  Or, and actually it's an interview that I just put online coming from a very small nonprofit  with the Bio-Nutrient Association that promises, and it's still a few years away,  
**[0:11:54-0:11:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:11:54):**  but a device that basically measures your nutrient levels, your nutrient level,  meaning the nutrient levels of the produce on the spot,  and showing that connection to healthy soil.  So maybe we should be spending more of our research and money  on making those outcomes more easily be checked and verifiable  
**[0:12:15-0:12:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:12:15):**  so we actually can connect them to the real impacts.  Because otherwise, we have amazing processes, but in 10 years from now,  we haven't really hit our goals in terms of acres and carbon stored.  I don't know.  Let's see.  
**[0:12:29-0:12:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:12:29):**  Let's carry this to next month's podcast and see what we think.  I'm finding more and more argument for a short-term process-based solution  that leads to outcomes, but let's see.  What else has been happening out there in the world of podcasts this month?  So actually General Mills, who we just discussed before,  
**[0:12:49-0:12:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:12:49):**  was on the Food Tank podcast of Daniel Lichtenberg  and it was actually quite interesting, their journey,  but also some of the issues they've been having  or the challenges they've been having on regenerative agriculture.  But it's been very vocal and it seems to be,  
**[0:13:03-0:13:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:13:03):**  if you look at the articles this weekend of the research we just mentioned,  that they are doubling down and they're actually flexing their muscles  and getting much more active in the space.  So I'm very much looking forward to interview them myself.  I just put an interview online with Dan Kittredge,  
**[0:13:19-0:13:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:13:19):**  like what I mentioned before with the Bionutrient Association,  super cutting-edge stuff.  I got the bionutrient meter actually myself last week or two weeks ago  and still need to play with it.  But the promise is very, very interesting.  
**[0:13:34-0:13:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:13:34):**  If you can connect healthy soils, healthy produce and healthy people,  and of course healthy ecosystems,  there will be quite an interesting change in agriculture.  Early, early states, but super interesting to listen to some of these visionaries.  And another one actually on a much larger, larger, larger scale,  
**[0:13:51-0:13:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:13:51):**  how to get agroforestry systems to landscape and watershed levels.  I had the great pleasure to interview Brasa,  actually one of your colleagues at TheraGenesis.  And it was very interesting to see the tech version  or the tech approach to what should we plant, where and why.  
**[0:14:08-0:14:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:14:08):**  And when it comes to trees, that's quite an interesting,  or quite an important decision,  because at the end of the day they don't have legs and they cannot walk.  So you, as an investor, as a farmer, as an entrepreneur,  you need to be very sure where you plant your trees  
**[0:14:20-0:14:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:14:20):**  for the next 30, 40, 50, 100 years.  And if you're into GIS and sort of mapping technical analysis approaches  to thinking about this, definitely listen to that podcast  and check out the work that Brasa is doing.  Very, very interesting way to look at a whole watershed,  
**[0:14:37-0:14:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:14:37):**  a whole bioregion scale.  And identify, okay, where is the best spot for a chestnut plantation?  Where should we be putting in, you know, cacao, coconut, agroforestry?  Like, what is the best spot, given in a certain bioregion to...  Yeah, it was fascinating, absolutely fascinating.  
**[0:14:54-0:14:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:14:54):**  If you're, you know, any other suggestion on people to interview in that space,  definitely let me know.  And what about events?  What have you been to?  What should people look out for, for the next few weeks slash months?  
**[0:15:06-0:15:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:15:06):**  I was just at the Transform event in California.  I hosted a panel with Paul McMahan from SLM Partners  and Alex from Iroquois Valley.  I did get a recording of it.  I'm going to see if I can get that up and available.  
**[0:15:21-0:15:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:15:21):**  It was a really good conversation about business models  and investment structure and the numbers that they're working with.  Upcoming events, a couple in the fall that are, I think, pretty important.  There's a Regenerative Earth Summit happening in Colorado.  I'm helping to co-organize this year.  
**[0:15:39-0:15:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:15:39):**  There's a special one-day in-person leadership event,  just the day before, really, for leaders inside of companies  that are moving forward on regenerative agriculture.  I'm excited about that.  And then the Regenerative Business Summit,  
**[0:15:55-0:15:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:15:55):**  you can find out more about that at the Regenerative Business Summit website.  But this is really focused on how do we take the idea of regeneration  and bring it into business, not just what you do,  not just agriculture, but how you run the business.  If you have questions about that, feel free to reach out.  
**[0:16:11-0:16:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:16:11):**  I thought maybe we could wrap up with a little conversation about jobs.  I noticed that in last month's newsroom, the jobs that were listed,  I think there was only one regenerative agriculture job,  got a huge amount of attention.  And there's a couple more that we'll post in this month's regeneration newsroom.  
**[0:16:31-0:16:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:16:31):**  Some very kind of exciting looking jobs working with systemic and soil capital.  There's a regenerative agriculture and nature-based solutions position.  And then also some other very interesting jobs that are coming up.  We're not quite at the spot yet where I can do a jobs board, though I'd love to.  There just isn't quite enough demand yet for particular, you know,  
**[0:16:55-0:16:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:16:55):**  professional jobs in the corporate space that are working on this.  But I think it's going to be happening more and more.  So if you have job listings or things that are not even full listings,  but you're just interested in looking for someone, please let me know.  We'd love to start being a place to aggregate and sort of let people know  
**[0:17:13-0:17:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:17:13):**  when jobs are posted in the regenerative agriculture space.  Yeah, no, I completely agree.  I see a lot of interest from people wanting to get in this space.  I think my main tip would be get into the large-scale farming side of things.  There's an incredible demand for people that both speak the financial language,  
**[0:17:33-0:17:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:17:33):**  that can read spreadsheets, and that are able to manage large farms.  There's an incredible demand.  I think I can place 10 or 20 people tomorrow if they would have the experience and the mindset.  Yeah.  So there's definitely, but it's very specific, I understand,  
**[0:17:49-0:17:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:17:49):**  for most people that's not their thing.  But if that is your thing, definitely let me know.  Yeah, and if it's not your thing, maybe consider making it your thing  because the demand is just going to grow.  It will be work for the next 50 years.  
**[0:18:02-0:18:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:18:02):**  And grow and grow.  And there's a great training.  The Rugrarians are offering a hybrid in-person online training.  If you have some farming experience, this would be an awesome way to up your integrative design,  regenerative agriculture skills.  
**[0:18:16-0:18:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:18:16):**  The Rugrarian's training that's coming up.  And just in general, yes, the demand for farmers is huge and will only continue to increase  as more and more corporates start saying, hey, we want regenerative agriculture,  but there's no supply.  We need people farming that.  
**[0:18:32-0:18:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:18:32):**  That's part of why I have a farm.  So yeah, go for it.  Perfect.  And I think with that, we are at the end of our time for this month.  Super full newsroom.  
**[0:18:42-0:18:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/05/30/regeneration-newsroom-podcast-ft-ethan-soloviev-may-2019/#t=0:18:42):**  Definitely check out all the articles we didn't discuss.  They're all worth it.  They're all worth reading.  And we'll see you next month.  