### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2019-02-27)
**0:00:00-0:00:04:**  You will listen to a short interview with Sarah who is putting together the regenerative  food system investment forum in Oakland at the end of September.  I'm going, I'm very excited, the speaker list looks amazing and I hope to see you there.  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture, Investing as if the  Planet Mattered, a podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and  
**0:00:23-0:00:28:**  agriculture space to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil,  people, local communities and ecosystems while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat  our land, grow our food and what we eat.  
**0:00:43-0:00:48:**  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much more  attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  Before we get started, I've been recording these interviews next to my day job and I  will definitely continue to do so and release about an episode a month.  But at the same time I would love to take this further, share more interviews, there  
**0:01:04-0:01:09:**  are many more stories to share on investing in regenerative food and agriculture.  More depth, improve the quality, maybe even doing some video series.  So I started a Patreon community which makes it easy to support creators like myself.  If these podcasts have been of value to you and if you have the means, I invite you to  support me and make this happen.  
**0:01:25-0:01:30:**  For more information, please find the link to my Patreon account in the description below.  And now without further ado, the interview.  Enjoy!  Welcome to the podcast.  Today I'm interviewing Sarah Day Levesque, Director of Events and Media at Acres USA  
**0:01:41-0:01:45:**  and the Regenerative Food System Investment Forum in Oakland, September 30th and October  1st.  I will be there.  I'm very excited and I'm very excited to have Sarah on the call to explain a bit more  about this event.  
**0:01:51-0:01:52:**  Welcome, Sarah.  Thank you for having me.  So I mean, all of us in the space obviously see the momentum building and the excitement  around regenerative ag.  But what made you decide to put together this actually groundbreaking event?  
**0:02:06-0:02:10:**  Well, yes, I absolutely see the excitement around regenerative ag.  I've spent several years, many years working with global ag investors on the more conventional  side of investing.  And for the last three to five years, I've worked more and more in the regenerative agriculture  space and it didn't take long working with all the producers that we have in this space  
**0:02:29-0:02:36:**  and the supply chain to recognize how much capital is needed for this space to help it  grow.  So that led me to this, the idea for this event to try to collect and gather all the  major stakeholders who are either already investing in the space or who are interested  in investing in the space to come together and learn more about it so we can move this  
**0:02:55-0:02:57:**  movement forward.  And what made you decide to create a specific conference on its own instead of integrating  it in one of the other conferences you're already organizing?  Well, that's a good question.  So the conferences I work on right now are very focused on production.  
**0:03:12-0:03:19:**  So the Acres USA Eco Ag Conference and Trade Show gathers about 1100 farmers and producers  to really talk about the science and the practical applications of producing chemical free.  And it's a wonderful gathering, but I really felt like this idea of allocating capital  to space and bringing in the stakeholders that are on the finance side and the investment  side really deserved some attention of its own, if that sounds right.  
**0:03:43-0:03:49:**  I really think that we're going to be talking about some topics that go beyond what we're  talking about with the production side of things.  So we were excited to kind of give this community its own place to thrive.  So we will have some awesome topics, very specific to what are the strategies behind  finding opportunities and allocating capital opportunities.  
**0:04:05-0:04:09:**  We could have integrated into one of our other conferences.  But the other cool thing about the Regenerative Food Systems Investment Forum is that we're  going to be in Oakland, which is right near the heart of the finance district in San Francisco,  right in the heart of Northern California's regenerative ag movement.  And it's not in Minneapolis in December, which is where we're gathering our farmers for the  
**0:04:29-0:04:30:**  Eco Ag Conference.  So I think it'll be great to have its own space.  And what are you looking forward to get out of it?  This is the first time you're organizing it.  I mean, you're already talking in the pre-eco we had on next year.  
**0:04:42-0:04:46:**  So it's definitely going to be it's not going to be the last I think if I see the lineup  and see the excitement of the space.  What's your goal with this event?  Yeah, I think there's a couple of goals.  I mean, I see a couple different, a few different players in this space.  
**0:04:56-0:05:00:**  I mean, if you look at our agenda, you'll see the diverse speakers that we have.  There are people coming from from larger food companies.  There's people that are investing in the space already.  There are folks that have funds.  But there's also this entire group of stakeholders, I think, out there who are just kind of curious  
**0:05:15-0:05:21:**  about this space, aren't quite sure about about what the risk profiles look like, whether  it's actually an opportunity that they can pursue.  And so I wanted to bring them all together.  So the goal really is one, let's get everybody.  All of these players into one room and really talk about this opportunity and start laying  
**0:05:35-0:05:38:**  the groundwork for what we can do going forward.  And so that is absolutely the idea is that this is just year one of an event that we  hope to keep growing and growing on a community.  We hope to keep growing and growing as well.  So I really hope that we are we serve as a forum for folks to come and learn about the  
**0:05:55-0:06:00:**  opportunity and those who are already doing it, come and learn more about other strategies  that the others are using, but also a place where you can connect and make relationships  with folks that will last long into the future.  And so the idea is that the information and the relationships you make here are ones that  are going to really help you achieve your objectives when it comes to investing and  
**0:06:18-0:06:21:**  participating in regenerative agriculture.  I'm for one very excited to go and very excited to see many of the faces and people I've interviewed  for the first time in person.  I think it's never happened before that such a such a group has been in the same room,  basically.  
**0:06:34-0:06:39:**  And I see I mean, there's there's a big group coming from from the US, obviously, but actually  quite a few from Europe and Australia.  So it seems like especially for a first time, a very international international audience.  Yeah, we're I am super excited about this lineup.  And I come from a biased perspective, but I don't think I could be any happier with  
**0:06:55-0:06:56:**  the group we're gathering here.  Our speakers are phenomenal.  They're going to have so much to share.  But our audience is pretty amazing, too.  So I just I think you're right.  
**0:07:03-0:07:07:**  It's going to I mean, again, I'm biased, but I really think it's going to be an event that  you don't want to miss.  It's a community we really want to keep building on.  And in terms of is there anything specific you're extremely excited about, like one speaker  or one visit, because there are going to be some farm visit, actually, and company visits  
**0:07:23-0:07:24:**  we haven't discussed yet.  And is there anything you're super proud of that manage that you managed to get?  And what's the most the thing you're most looking forward to?  Oh, gosh.  That's like telling asking me to choose my favorite child.  
**0:07:40-0:07:46:**  I have I'm I guess I'm most proud about the content and I do come from a content background.  But I mean, just the diversity that we were able to pull together is what I'm excited  about.  We're going to be covering diverse asset classes in different geographic regions with several  panels and a lot of inside investor perspectives, which I think will be really neat.  
**0:08:01-0:08:05:**  And on the flip side, what you were just saying is we're going to have some case studies from  regenerative farmers as well so that our investment and finance community can hear from them.  We have two authors who I know you know Joshua Humphreys and David Lasax at the New Soil  Wealth Report and they're going to be discussing what their recommendations are for increasing  capital allocation in the space.  
**0:08:21-0:08:23:**  The findings from their report.  Great.  I'll be interviewing them in a few weeks, I think.  No, in a week, week and a half or so on the report, which was very exciting to see that  that level of detail coming out.  
**0:08:33-0:08:34:**  Exactly.  I mean, yeah.  Plug right here and plug later when you do that.  You have to read that report if you haven't already.  It's pretty, pretty incredible resource.  
**0:08:41-0:08:45:**  And they know that they're going to keep working on that, which is pretty exciting.  And then we'll also be covering things along the lines of ag tech and how that relates  to regenerative agriculture as well.  So I'm just really excited with the diversity of information and people will be able to  share with our group.  
**0:08:57-0:09:03:**  And if someone cannot make it because of planning, because they cannot be in Oakland in September,  which is obviously possible in terms of following it online, in terms of resources and content  that comes after, what are you doing on that side?  Yeah, we won't have a live stream, unfortunately.  We may have some audio recordings.  
**0:09:18-0:09:24:**  We will have some definite follow up in terms of articles and content, maybe some presentations  available.  What I hope to be doing in terms of building the community as we go forward is meet up.  So having a few more meet ups around the country, at least where we can continue to build on  the relationships that everybody's building.  
**0:09:38-0:09:45:**  But yeah, I would say if anybody interested in follow up or following along should just  email us at info at rfsi-forum.com and we can give them information on what resources  will be available.  Perfect.  I think we covered everything.  
**0:09:56-0:09:57:**  We're both extremely excited.  I'm very much looking forward to coming over and seeing, I think, the first of many, many  meetings and we can say we were there when this group came together for the first time.  Absolutely.  And I'll just say we're super excited to have you and thank you for all the work that  
**0:10:12-0:10:15:**  you're doing with this Regenerative Ag Investing podcast.  It's phenomenal.  I never imagined that this group would come together and even so it's great.  Great.  Well, thank you for having me.  
**0:10:24-0:10:28:**  If you found the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  It's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  
**0:10:44-0:10:48:**  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  join my Patreon community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on patreon.com slash regenerative agriculture or in the description  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  