### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2021-00-03)
**[0:00:00-0:00:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-d-levesque-and-anthony-corsaro#t=0:00:00):**  The Regenerative Food Systems Investment Forum is happening again in person in Oakland on September 28th and 29th.  And I'm joined by Sarah and Antonio to share a bit more about it.  Welcome to another episode of Investing in Regenerative Agriculture, Investing as if the Planet Mattered,  a podcast show where I talk to the pioneers in the regenerative food and agriculture space  to learn more on how to put our money to work to regenerate soil, people, local communities and ecosystems  
**[0:00:29-0:00:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-d-levesque-and-anthony-corsaro#t=0:00:29):**  while making an appropriate and fair return.  Why am I focused on soil and regeneration?  Because so many of the pressing issues we face today have their roots in how we treat our land, grow our food and what we eat.  And it's time that we as investors, big and small, and consumers start paying much more attention to the dirt slash soil underneath our feet.  In March last year we launched our membership community to make it easy for fans to support our work.  
**[0:00:54-0:00:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-d-levesque-and-anthony-corsaro#t=0:00:54):**  And so many of you have joined as a member.  We've launched different types of benefits, exclusive content, Q&A webinars with former guests,  Ask Me Anything sessions, plus so much more to come in the future.  For more information on the different tiers, benefits and how to become a member,  check gumroad.com slash investing region egg or find the link below.  
**[0:01:14-0:01:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-d-levesque-and-anthony-corsaro#t=0:01:14):**  Thank you.  Hi Antonio, welcome on the show.  Could you briefly explain what the RFSI forum is, when, where it's happening, etc.?  Yes, absolutely.  So the RFSI forum is our marquee event and is happening this year in person in Oakland, California on September 28th and 29th.  
**[0:01:36-0:01:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-d-levesque-and-anthony-corsaro#t=0:01:36):**  And it's really all about catalyzing connection and capital in regenerative ag and food systems.  And it's a place we think where the funders of regeneration and the other key stakeholders in the food system can meet and learn from each other.  So we can continue to create a more resilient food system overall.  Hi Sarah, great to have you back on the show.  Could you please share why after a great first edition two years ago, which we were very lucky enough to attend and a very big one,  
**[0:02:01-0:02:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-d-levesque-and-anthony-corsaro#t=0:02:01):**  over 400 people I heard on the virtual edition last year, you decided to run another one in person this September?  Yeah, thanks, Kun.  It's great to be back and to be able to talk about our in-person gathering next month in Oakland.  A good question about being in person.  We definitely appreciate how this global community is connected so well virtually over the past 18 months.  
**[0:02:21-0:02:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-d-levesque-and-anthony-corsaro#t=0:02:21):**  And we're super excited to offer opportunities for virtual convenings in the future.  But there is just something so powerful about bringing people together face to face to learn and connect at a different level.  For example, we know that after our 2019 event that was in person, new businesses were formed and investments secured as a result of the relationships built on site at the event.  Those results drive real impact in our space.  And that's why it's important for us to gather in person.  
**[0:02:49-0:02:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-d-levesque-and-anthony-corsaro#t=0:02:49):**  The other more selfish reason just maybe that I miss all those great conversations that happen in the off hours at the bar and elsewhere.  That's something I have certainly missed.  And besides the forum, what else have you been up to regarding investing in region egg and food?  That's a great question.  It's actually a funny story.  
**[0:03:06-0:03:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-d-levesque-and-anthony-corsaro#t=0:03:06):**  So I started out as an RFSI audience member myself as an investor looking for ways to deploy capital in the space.  And so I was listening to a lot of your podcasts.  I was reading a lot of the content and consuming the content that RFSI was putting out, attending some events.  So it was a really interesting journey.  But once Sarah posted the role to join the team, I was kind of all over it.  
**[0:03:31-0:03:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-d-levesque-and-anthony-corsaro#t=0:03:31):**  Personally, on the investing side, I've been making some investments in the space with multiple people you've featured on the pod, which is great and exciting.  Some in the robotics and ag tech space, some in the fiber space, some in the consumer brand space, and then some larger funds overall.  On top of all that, my entrepreneurial venture is called Regeneration Nation, which is an apparel brand for the heroes and advocates of regenerative ag.  And that has been soft launched to the world.  And right now we're building some momentum and a follower and a newsletter base so we can launch our first collection before the end of this calendar year.  
**[0:04:07-0:04:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-d-levesque-and-anthony-corsaro#t=0:04:07):**  And why should all that can obviously in these crazy times try to attend the upcoming forum?  Yeah, as you know well from your work, Coon, regenerative food systems and investment in them has evolved a lot in the past two years.  So there's lots to talk about, lots to learn and many new people to meet.  We have an incredible lineup of speakers and sessions planned for this year's forum.  And not to mention some amazing sponsors led by our presenting sponsor, Trailhead Capital.  
**[0:04:34-0:04:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-d-levesque-and-anthony-corsaro#t=0:04:34):**  We're super excited to have them and others on board.  We're going to cover everything from investment strategy and successful case studies to consumer demand, technology and carbon markets and much more.  In short, this event will equip attendees with the latest and leading information, resources and people necessary to move the space forward.  We really can't wait to see old friends and all the new faces in September.  If you found the investing in regenerative agriculture and food podcast valuable, there are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  
**[0:05:06-0:05:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-d-levesque-and-anthony-corsaro#t=0:05:06):**  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast.  And it only takes a few seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please join my membership community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  
**[0:05:27-0:05:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/sarah-d-levesque-and-anthony-corsaro#t=0:05:27):**  You can find all the details on gumroad.com slash investing region egg or in the description below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  