### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2022-00-18)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  Welcome to Soil Builders, a series where we follow who is building soils at scale.  This is an experiment, so please share any feedback.  
**[0:00:22-0:00:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:00:22):**  Why this show Soil Builders?  I believe that most change in regenerative agriculture and food will come from and is  coming from entrepreneurs building ways to regenerate soil at scale.  I call these Soil Builders.  Soil Builders are entrepreneurial farmers, ag tech companies, investment funds, food  
**[0:00:37-0:00:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:00:37):**  startups, new seed cooperatives, teams within food companies, robot startups, investment  vehicles, etc. etc. etc.  All regenerating soil beyond their own farm gate and with more than their own money.  This series allows the community of the podcast, which is you, full of funders, investors and  fellow soil builders to follow their progress, their challenges and their breakthroughs.  
**[0:00:58-0:01:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:00:58):**  I hope you enjoy it and please reach out with any comments, feedback and ideas.  Today we have Pete of Ubi, working hard to make local and organic food easy and fair  in the UK.  And Wolfgang of Saving Grains, turning post-harvest losses into profits for smallholder farmers.  But first over to Pete.  
**[0:01:17-0:01:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:01:17):**  Pete, could you briefly introduce yourself and what brought you to FoundUbi?  Hi Koen.  I'm Pete Russell and I founded Ubi over a decade ago because I recognize that our centralized  global food systems were causing more damage than good.  That was the industry I was in and I had a firsthand experience of that.  
**[0:01:39-0:01:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:01:39):**  And it's not by design, but by consequence of economic incentives.  In the pursuit of greater and greater economies of scale, food corporations have been forever  consolidating and centralizing.  Reproduction methods have been optimizing for maximum yield at minimal cost.  And the food itself is optimized for the demands of long convoluted supply chains and for merchandising  
**[0:02:03-0:02:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:02:03):**  rather than for nourishment.  So Ubi was founded as a solution, as a short, fast and simple sales and distribution model,  which is designed to bring economies of small scale, if you will, which can actually compete  with mainstream food at the retail end of the market, whilst ensuring that all the actors  within the supply chain, in particular the food growers, are receiving the right proportion  
**[0:02:40-0:02:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:02:40):**  of the retail pound.  And what is the biggest difference for farmers working with you compared to working by themselves  or working with others?  I'd say the biggest difference for farmers working with Ubi compared to working by themselves  or with others is that they have a comprehensive system with Ubi wrapped with full support  
**[0:03:01-0:03:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:03:01):**  so that they can easily manage a direct sales model to households and businesses in their  local region.  This means that farmers can often double or even triple their margins without needing  to become experts in sales and distribution.  And what makes Ubi so unique in the direct to consumer marketplaces, which is slowly  
**[0:03:22-0:03:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:03:22):**  getting more crowded?  What makes Ubi unique in the crowded space of direct to consumer marketplaces is that  it's primarily designed around the logistics, coordinating and streamlining the delivery  process from gate to plate.  Collating an ever changing range of perishable goods from small and independent suppliers  
**[0:03:48-0:03:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:03:48):**  is a complex task.  And platforms like Shopify or Etsy, they're great at the initial sales side, but they  like any of the logistical tools that are needed by food hubs to sort of manage a very  complex supply chain operation in order to deliver on that sale.  So the first sale to a customer is the easy sale.  
**[0:04:11-0:04:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:04:11):**  You're just selling an idea really, but it's the second, third and subsequent sales that  make a food marketplace work.  And that heavily depends on the entire customer experience working for the customer, including  it arriving on time in the right place in full and as fresh as expected every time.  So that's our focus.  
**[0:04:35-0:04:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:04:35):**  It's on optimizing for the recurring sales rather than just acquiring customers.  And so whilst people can easily buy one off deliveries on Ubi, the system defaults to  a subscription model and the customer dashboard encourages add on purchases without disrupting  the recurring sales pattern.  So I think that's how we're different primarily.  
**[0:05:03-0:05:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:05:03):**  The customer experience on Ubi is that they know that they're shopping with a local independent  farm and that's the primary experience.  They're shopping with someone in their region and with real provenance.  But they are also aware that they're doing this via the Ubi platform.  So it's similar to Etsy in that way.  
**[0:05:26-0:05:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:05:26):**  You know you're buying from an independent vendor, but you also know that you're doing  it on the Etsy platform.  The Ubi is visible to the customer, to the household, but it stands behind the farmers  and the food hubs.  And the farmers are the champions that are put front and center.  
**[0:05:45-0:05:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:05:45):**  Could you walk me through a use case?  Let's say I'm a typical farmer and I'm reaching out to you.  How does the process of joining and using Ubi look like?  The use case for farmers is evolving over time.  At this stage, we're really focused on building out the logistics network.  
**[0:06:03-0:06:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:06:03):**  And so we're working with farms that also act as distribution hubs.  These are the farms that may produce a portion of the products for sale to the customers,  but they also buy in goods from other producers in order to provide a full range of staple  items for the households.  So in this case, the joining experience is a high touch process where we work closely  
**[0:06:29-0:06:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:06:29):**  with the farm hubs to help them to set them up on the platform and to train them on how  to run a full logistical operation in order to do home deliveries from their farm.  In due course, we'll be enabling farmers that don't want to be hubs to simply create a supplier  account where they can create a profile and upload their available produce and products  to be purchased in bulk by the network of hubs on the platform.  
**[0:07:05-0:07:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:07:05):**  So customers will be able to buy from these suppliers via their local hubs, and these  suppliers won't need to deal directly with the thousands of customers.  They'll be able to sell in bulk, but they'll have a platform that presents them to the  thousands of customers.  And so for these farmers, it'll be a much simpler self-onboarding process in much the  
**[0:07:27-0:07:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:07:27):**  same way as a vendor would set themselves up on something like Etsy.  And now to Wolfgang of Saving Grains.  Hi, Wolfgang.  Welcome to the podcast.  Could you briefly introduce yourself and what brings you to focus on grains in West Africa?  
**[0:07:39-0:07:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:07:39):**  Thanks, Goan, for having me.  It's a real pleasure.  I'm Wolfgang.  I worked for the World Food Program for quite a while.  They are focused on market-based interventions.  
**[0:07:48-0:07:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:07:48):**  Together with the accelerator, they have a great accelerator there.  And so we try to address systemic market inefficiencies to help smallholder farmers escape poverty.  So after a while, we focus on post-harvest losses.  And basically, we've seen this huge opportunity to have a scalable business addressing these  issues.  
**[0:08:14-0:08:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:08:14):**  And that's why we found Saving Grains.  Now, the reason we went to West Africa to start with our platform was that we simply  got some support from the Austrian Development Agency to get our model up and running.  And could you share what Saving Grains is?  Saving Grains is our social startup.  
**[0:08:30-0:08:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:08:30):**  We are building a digital platform to revamp the village crop trade in sub-Saharan Africa.  And the problem we are addressing is that smallholders always sell during the harvest,  and prices are really low.  Now, prices go up within six months towards lean season.  And in Ghana, it's a whopping 80% price increase on average.  
**[0:08:53-0:08:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:08:53):**  Now, all of this money doesn't stay in the village.  But smallholders sell to traders, and outside the village, and the value trades outside  the village benefit from this price increase.  Now, we are revamping that.  But our starting point is not the farmer, but we enable local entrepreneurs to store  
**[0:09:17-0:09:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:09:17):**  hermetically.  We provide them with hermetic storage technology, as well as a loan that we give them and an  app.  Now, this holistic package combined allows them to buy grain in the community from smallholders,  and then to store for a long time without any quality issues or any post-harvest losses,  
**[0:09:44-0:09:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:09:44):**  and subsequently sell and make on average 80% in profits.  Now, they also have to invest some money, but due to the loan, it gets very profitable  for them.  Now, since all these transactions and all the money flows run out via our app, it's  possible to automatically deduct the profit share that we pay back to the smallholder  
**[0:10:07-0:10:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:10:07):**  farmer so that they benefit from that value creation.  Yeah, this is in a nutshell our first product.  And we think it's a very scalable product.  Yeah, and at the moment, we're doing this in Ghana and testing our first market proof  with 100 customers.  
**[0:10:25-0:10:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:10:25):**  But we have plans to prove that this model works for different crops, for maize, for  beans, for groundnuts.  And we also want to enter East Africa and Kenya and maybe to Nigeria to show that this  is not like a local solution.  But this is something where we hopefully can get better prices for millions of farmers.  
**[0:10:46-0:10:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:10:46):**  And how does it make a difference for the farmers involved?  Now, that one is really simple.  And our farmers receive a profit share.  So the customers buy from the smallholder farmers, they make a big trading profit, and  our app automatically takes a part of the profit and pays it back to the smallholder  
**[0:11:03-0:11:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:11:03):**  farmer.  And what's really neat is that the profit share comes in the lean season.  That's the time when everybody's broke, when farmers need to invest into their cultivation,  but there's no money, the time when the family starts skipping meals.  So it's money when it's most needed.  
**[0:11:19-0:11:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:11:19):**  Now, if you look at the numbers, our entrepreneurs make 80% in trading profits on average.  So 10% of the trading profit we take out of this, and this goes to the smallholder farmer.  Now this doesn't seem very much, but if you look at the numbers and at the margins that  smallholders make, they're fairly low.  If you look at crop budgets, and I mean, there's variation depending on the type of grain and  
**[0:11:52-0:11:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:11:52):**  the type of cultivation and if they need external labor or not, but margins are typically between  5% and 20% to 25%.  Now, if you give an extra 8% on top of this, it is significant.  And the smallholder farmers we talked to, I mean, obviously they love that because there's  no risk on their part, no behavior change required.  
**[0:12:14-0:12:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:12:14):**  So for them, it's a pure win.  But there's also like a business reason behind this because we are a social business and  we need to make money as well to be able to scale this rapidly.  So we give a loan to our customers.  And in Africa, as you well know, you have to make sure that you get the money back if  
**[0:12:37-0:12:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:12:37):**  you loan out money.  Now what is really interesting is that in this model, everybody wins in the village.  So should there be a problem with the default, then we can communicate to the smallholder  farmers and with the traders to find a solution.  Because obviously, if you farmers expect a profit share, it's a very uncomfortable for  
**[0:13:01-0:13:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:13:01):**  a situation for a crops trader not to pay that profit share.  So it doesn't make sense for our customers to default on their loan and be unpopular  in their village.  There's a big social element of this.  There's also a social element that we completely underestimated that our customers love the  
**[0:13:25-0:13:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:13:25):**  social position.  They love to be in the position to be the source of a profit share and extra money to  farmers.  So we're very happy about this social element, and we find that it's very well intertwined  the social element of the business element.  
**[0:13:42-0:13:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:13:42):**  And compared to other solutions, how is it fundamentally different?  Most sub Saharan African markets are completely dominated by traditional crop trading, which  means the trader comes in the village, buys grain, grain travels through aggregation centers  and to population centers, and all these indices and the price increases run up in later parts  of the value chain outside of the village.  
**[0:14:09-0:14:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:14:09):**  Now our solution as described is obviously very different and has many advantages.  We formalize the crop trades to the traders.  They get a loan, they get a financial history, they get transparency over their own trading  activities, and there's profit shares to smallholders.  So it's a big step to what's currently happening.  
**[0:14:32-0:14:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:14:32):**  Now there's other digital approaches, very interesting ones like EcoCenter or AFIX Nigeria,  Safari Comm is also working on solutions.  But what makes our, what distinguishes our solution from others is that we are completely  free platform.  Now other solutions are more captive, so they use these crowd elements to basically aggregate  
**[0:15:02-0:15:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:15:02):**  themselves.  They sort of like use this more as an agent model, but the crop is controlled by them.  Whereas we are a free platform, we really build on the entrepreneurial energy and activity  of our customers, and they can buy grain and sell grain to anybody they like as long as  it goes through our app.  
**[0:15:26-0:15:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:15:26):**  There's also an additional element to our business model where we also offer a connection  to other markets, especially the urban markets and the big off takers since we have higher  quality grain.  But this is not mandatory.  We just offer our customers a price for their grain, and they can accept or reject it depending  
**[0:15:48-0:15:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:15:48):**  on the other opportunities they have to trade.  So we really build on this, being the tool for like hundreds and thousands of entrepreneurs  to become small businesses or even bigger businesses in growth.  If you found the Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  
**[0:16:11-0:16:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:16:11):**  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  It's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast, and it only takes a few  seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  
**[0:16:28-0:16:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:16:28):**  join my membership community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on cambrot.com slash investing region egg or in the description  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  
**[0:16:54-0:16:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:16:54):**  Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to put money  to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011 and recording  
**[0:17:13-0:17:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:17:13):**  these podcasts since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  
**[0:17:27-0:17:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:17:27):**  What questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  
**[0:17:34-0:17:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:17:34):**  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  You, the soil builders and investors in this space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  
**[0:17:50-0:17:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:17:50):**  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management, consultants, etc.  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  
**[0:18:10-0:18:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:18:10):**  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you.  And I'm very aware that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very  
**[0:18:23-0:18:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:18:23):**  different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  
**[0:18:34-0:18:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:18:34):**  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to write along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co investors you could find, or what kind of investors you could  
**[0:18:57-0:18:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:18:57):**  find if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  
**[0:19:14-0:19:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:19:14):**  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  
**[0:19:29-0:19:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-7/#t=0:19:29):**  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  