### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2019-00-08)
**[0:00:00-0:00:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:00:00):**  So, a very warm welcome for a short interview today live from the Regen Food System Investment  Forum.  It's a mouthful, but I'm very, very excited to be here with David and Josh, and we're  going to dive a bit deeper into the Soil Wealth Report that they released not so long ago,  I think two, three months.  
**[0:00:17-0:00:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:00:17):**  We're first going to hear a bit about the institutes they work at and what is the work  they do, what brought them to writing this quite groundbreaking report.  Josh, can I start with you?  Sure thing.  I'm Josh Humphreys, President of Cro-Tan Institute, which is an independent, nonprofit  
**[0:00:34-0:00:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:00:34):**  research institute based in the Research Triangle region of North Carolina, and our mission  is to harness the power of investment for social good and ecological resilience.  And I also am co-founder of the Organic Agriculture Revitalization Strategy, also known as ORS,  which is re-envisioning certified organic food and agriculture as an inclusive economic  development strategy for revitalizing rural places.  
**[0:00:59-0:01:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:00:59):**  And then the other thing that I do is agroforestry as a small-scale practitioner in the Piedmont  of North Carolina.  Thank you so much.  And David, what about you?  David Lizax from Delta Institute, a Chicago-based nonprofit working across the Midwest and the  
**[0:01:15-0:01:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:01:15):**  Great Lakes region of the U.S. on a variety of issues with communities and people and  the land and agriculture.  And my specific focus is the, I lead the Regenerative Food Systems Initiative, really looking at  this intersection between finance and regenerative agriculture.  And you published quite a groundbreaking report looking at the ways of current investments  
**[0:01:41-0:01:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:01:41):**  and current money flows into the Regen-ag space.  The sustainable ag and then you went a lot further into Regen-ag.  I definitely encourage everybody to, I will link the links, obviously, below in the show  notes to read the report.  It's dense, there's a lot of information, and I think it's the first time there's this  
**[0:01:56-0:01:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:01:56):**  much on paper.  But I would like to ask you, David, what surprised you the most of the process and the report  you published?  So this report is part of a larger project supported by the USDA's Natural Resources  Conservation Service Conservation Innovation Grant.  
**[0:02:12-0:02:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:02:12):**  Lots of big mouthfuls of words here.  And this project is a three-year project.  We have 19 partners.  And we pulled it all together, at least the proposal for the project, back in November  to December of 2016.  
**[0:02:29-0:02:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:02:29):**  And at that point, there were very few people using the term regenerative agriculture, regenerative  food systems.  And we thought that this would be an opportunity to explore kind of the leading-edge actors  of that space.  Fast forward three years almost from when we wrote that report, and we're standing here  
**[0:02:49-0:02:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:02:49):**  at the Regenerative Food System Investment Forum with 175 people and two days' pack full  of content.  We have new funds spinning up.  We have new financial mechanisms that are available.  And just the growth of the sector and the interest from not only those who hold capital  
**[0:03:06-0:03:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:03:06):**  but from farmers and the supply chain in between has absolutely just shocked us.  And we're excited to be able to report on where we see this theme and the regenerative  ag sector in general coming from and going to, and what those gaps are that we can help  to fill as we mature.  And you make an interesting point in the report that it's often seen as an asset class, and  
**[0:03:32-0:03:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:03:32):**  actually it's much more of a sectorial theme.  Can you dive into that a bit, Josh?  Yeah.  I mean, one of the frameworks that we use in mapping this really rapidly growing landscape  is a multi-asset class framework that we describe as total portfolio activation at Crotan Institute  
**[0:03:49-0:03:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:03:49):**  and Delta has kind of embraced this framing for the way to think about it, in part because  we recognize that regenerative food and ag systems are not just about making farmland  investment, but investing in the entire value chain.  So by thinking about value chains as something that need to be supported in addition to farmland,  taking a total portfolio approach basically provides a lot more entry points.  
**[0:04:14-0:04:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:04:14):**  So I think the basic conceit here is that some folks, I think for tactical reasons,  like to create sectorial themes using an asset class language, because they feel like, oh,  if we call it an asset class, then we'll get an allocation to it.  But the fact of the matter is that within the total portfolio activation framework,  we actually think really hard about not just the risk and return profile of each asset  
**[0:04:41-0:04:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:04:41):**  class, which is basically the premise of modern portfolio theory, but also to think about  the impact opportunities that are intrinsic to each asset class.  So investing in a real asset like farmland is a rather different affair than investing  in a publicly traded company like a General Mills that's here, that's actually sourcing  from regenerative agriculture producers.  
**[0:05:01-0:05:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:05:01):**  And the opportunity set as an investor differs dramatically from a conventional asset class  like public equity or public fixed income or cash than it does from alternatives like  real assets, private debt, venture capital, ag tech, and these kinds of things.  And the entire asset class spectrum is an opportunity.  And as we argue in the paper, we see certain opportunities in asset classes like cash and  
**[0:05:27-0:05:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:05:27):**  fixed income, quite conventional asset classes as ripe for opportunities to build this field  as the farmland sector itself.  Yeah, because I think the farmland sector, and it's something we discuss here a lot and  in general is probably the most advanced or the ones that we've seen the most funds and  the most work on, but it's often a complaint or somebody that is building a full, that  
**[0:05:51-0:05:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:05:51):**  is transitioning a full portfolio, a family office or a foundation says, yeah, but we  cannot only buy real assets.  So you're basically saying in this paper there is a whole, you could, could you, let's ask  the question, could you construct a portfolio at the moment in the US because it's a US  focused paper of a considerable size with considerable depth in region ag or region ag  
**[0:06:12-0:06:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:06:12):**  and food?  Do you think that's possible at the moment?  I think as part of a more diversified strategy, what you can seek is exposure across these  asset classes.  I mean, it's very parallel in many ways to the conversations that are going on around  
**[0:06:26-0:06:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:06:26):**  fossil fuel divestment and reinvestment in solutions to climate change.  And it's one entry point for many investors in regenerative ag is precisely the climate  related risks and opportunities.  So we actually have a parallel initiative called the Clean Portfolio Project that's developing,  you know, total portfolio approaches to fossil free investments in solutions to climate change  
**[0:06:48-0:06:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:06:48):**  thematically across food and ag, timber, energy, community development, water and clean technology,  among other themes.  So ag is one way to get thematic exposure.  I think it would be very challenging to develop an entire portfolio exclusively around this  theme at this time.  
**[0:07:06-0:07:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:07:06):**  But if it's part of a more diversified approach, say to impact investing, or sustainable responsible  investing, call it whatever you like, you can certainly grab exposure across these five  asset classes that we've looked at closely and indeed six if you break up fixed income  between private and public markets, we see a lot of opportunities.  Now the nature of the exposure is going to be quite different for each asset class.  
**[0:07:32-0:07:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:07:32):**  So farmland, which you mentioned, Cohen, is obviously a hot topic and how we often think  about it, you can get fairly full exposure to regenerative farmland through certain kinds  of funds.  More is sort of organized under the rubric of sustainability.  And as we've discussed at the conference, some of that doesn't always look too good  
**[0:07:55-0:07:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:07:55):**  from an impact perspective.  Whereas in other, the publicly traded asset classes, including cash, fixed income, and  public equities, you're going to have to use diversified strategies that are giving you  not full exposure and expression to regenerative ag, but it's just one piece of usually broader  ESG strategies to be quite frank.  
**[0:08:16-0:08:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:08:16):**  And so we need to be cognizant of the limitations as well as the opportunities in each of these  asset classes, which are quite different.  David?  And through so much of the outreach that Josh and I do, we're talking to investors and asset  managers and family offices.  
**[0:08:34-0:08:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:08:34):**  And there are those who are already classifying or identifying as regenerative agriculture  investors.  And then there's a whole other class of folks who I guess maybe were identifying them as  maybe Regen curious.  And they're trying to figure out what this means, what this relates to their business  
**[0:08:50-0:08:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:08:50):**  models, what products they could be building.  And as we see it, what this ecosystem really looks like, and how do we begin to put the  pieces of this puzzle together so that we can actually grow the sector as a whole?  Yeah, and I think that's an excellent point in the sense that you make the comparison  or you look at the data from project drawdown of how much we need to actually draw down  
**[0:09:14-0:09:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:09:14):**  enough.  And it's a lot of money.  It's 700 billion, I think, over the next 10, 11 years, which sounds like a lot.  And at the same time, if you look at all the markets and portfolios, it's not that much.  And I don't think we're nearly ready to absorb that kind of money.  
**[0:09:28-0:09:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:09:28):**  If somebody would come into this space tomorrow with even 7 billion, it would be already an  issue.  But I think in a few years from now, we'll be looking back at this group, which probably  grow by tenfold at that time, and look back at hopefully be able to absorb a lot more  cash and put it to work.  
**[0:09:43-0:09:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:09:43):**  I want to ask, what's next?  You say this is part of a much longer program.  And this is probably just one of the papers you're doing.  What's next for the soil wealth team when it comes to total portfolio approach in terms  of regenerating and food?  
**[0:09:58-0:09:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:09:58):**  Sure.  So, as I mentioned, this is part of a three-year USDA-sponsored project.  We're in the middle of year two, so we got a little more than a year to go.  We'll be pulling together some more resources, both for different parts of that ecosystem.  And we're calling that the Regenerative Agriculture Investor Toolkit.  
**[0:10:18-0:10:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:10:18):**  And that should be available at the site, soilwealth.org, in the coming months.  But what we identified as part of the paper are these 67 instruments, approaches, and  mechanisms that could be used to kind of better connect the agricultural and finance systems.  And just in the last couple of months, Josh and I and a whole bunch of other folks took  one of those 67 and, you know, wrapped it up in a proposal and submitted it to a funder  
**[0:10:48-0:10:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:10:48):**  to develop more of these ways to move capital, appropriate capital, into the sector.  And there's 66 and probably many more left to go.  And so, that's where it's, you know, this is not something that's just going to happen  between Josh or myself or our broader networks, but it's really an invitation to the community  to think about how we can take our existing infrastructure, whether that be our financial  
**[0:11:15-0:11:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:11:15):**  infrastructure or agricultural infrastructure, and begin to pivot it to one that is really  more biomimetic, one that takes the form and the function of nature and something that  we can really, going back to those regenerative roots, we need to create regenerative financial  systems and regenerative agricultural systems.  And for anybody who's listening and who's not, let's say, U.S.-based or not investing  
**[0:11:39-0:11:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:11:39):**  in the U.S., what would be advice to them to, I mean, definitely read the report, but  it's going to be, it's quite U.S.-focused.  Is there work coming on the rest of the world?  Or, you know, any resources you can point people to, to dive deeper into, not just farmland  focus, because it's quite, that's quite done well, but the whole asset class, I don't think,  
**[0:11:59-0:12:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:11:59):**  has been done before.  Well, yeah, absolutely.  A lot of the work that we do at Croatan Institute is geographically unconstrained and global  in potential scope.  And so, a lot of the work that we've been doing with Delta on this regenerative agricultural  
**[0:12:17-0:12:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:12:17):**  finance has had a very strong domestic lens.  But at the same time, there's a broader global conversation, obviously, going on, particularly,  I think, in Europe around agroecological finance.  Obviously, there's a lot of really thoughtful regenerative agricultural practitioners who  are kind of working on the, you know, the basic economics and business case of how to  
**[0:12:39-0:12:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:12:39):**  do thoughtful regenerative ag, you know, across, you know, no-dig market gardening and, you  know, thoughtful livestock husbandry and rotational grazing.  And I think there are a lot of young agrarians, as well as senior folks, who have kind of  figured out how to make those businesses viable.  And I get the sense from research that we've been doing with some other civil society groups,  
**[0:13:01-0:13:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:13:01):**  including Moliere des Francais in the Netherlands, that there's an increasing, you know, opportunity  not just to, say, oppose land grab investments, which is often what a lot of the folks in  the agroecological sphere are concerned about globally, but also how do you do constructive  investment in agroecological regenerative agricultural solutions.  So that's a project not only, you know, for the U.S., but also, you know, across the developing  
**[0:13:27-0:13:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:13:27):**  world.  And I think the soil wealth framework and the risks that are embedded within poor soil  health and problematic rural community wealth destruction, to be quite blunt about it, has,  in fact, dominated the way that many conventional long-term investors have, in fact, gotten  exposure to farmland.  
**[0:13:48-0:13:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:13:48):**  And you think of blue chip endowments, you think of some of our largest pension funds  in the U.S., like TIAA and Nuvine.  These are not just U.S. investors, even though they invest a lot in the U.S. They invest  in what now is, you know, Brazil on fire, basically.  And they're investing in timber in Australasia.  
**[0:14:09-0:14:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:14:09):**  I mean, the U.S. capital is flowing around the globe, obviously.  And I think there's a huge opportunity to, again, very much parallel to the fossil fuel  divestment movement to kind of stop investing in conventional ag, conventional farmland,  and to actually invest more in solutions that are not only going to create soil health,  but also what we hope would be rural community wealth, hence the reframing of this whole  
**[0:14:35-0:14:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:14:35):**  constellation around region of ag as soil wealth.  And our colleague, Tim Crosby, who's here at this conference as well under the umbrella  of the Global Alliance for the Future of Food, is actually, you know, what is primarily a  convening of philanthropic actors are getting, you know, really ramped up to also talk about  other ways of using the capital that they have.  
**[0:14:58-0:15:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:14:58):**  And so, through kind of the lens of impact investing from foundations, they're about  to do a global scan of what some of these opportunities are, I think, mirrored on some  of the findings that we saw from the soil wealth report.  So not sure what the timeline on that is or when it'll be coming out, but know that there  is other interest from the global community.  
**[0:15:19-0:15:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:15:19):**  And I think that so much of the, at least the principles that drive or that drove the  creation of the soil wealth report in terms of what regenerative agriculture is and what  regenerative finance is or might look like, those are cross-boundary.  And whether that is, you know, in the U.S. or somewhere else, it matters, I think, a  lot less, but we know that we just have to move closer and closer to, again, those biomimetic  
**[0:15:45-0:15:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2019/10/09/soil-wealth-report/#t=0:15:45):**  systems, and that's where we're going.  I want to thank you so much for the report, and thank you for your time today to share  a few insights and where it's going.  Thank you.  Good to see you.  