### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2021-00-02)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com slash course or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  Welcome to Soil Builders, a series where we follow who is building soils at scale.  This is an experiment, so please share any feedback.  
**[0:00:22-0:00:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:00:22):**  Why this show Soil Builders?  I believe that most change in regenerative agriculture and food will come from and is  coming from entrepreneurs building ways to regenerate soil at scale.  I call these Soil Builders.  Soil Builders are entrepreneurial farmers, agtech companies, investment funds, food startups,  
**[0:00:38-0:00:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:00:38):**  new seed cooperatives, teams within food companies, robot startups, investment vehicles, etc.  All regenerating soil beyond their own farm gate and with more than their own money.  This series allows the community of the podcast, which is you, full of funders, investors and  fellow soil builders to follow their progress.  Their challenges and their breakthroughs.  
**[0:00:58-0:01:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:00:58):**  I hope you enjoy it and please reach out with any comments, feedback and ideas.  Welcome to Soil Builders, a series where we follow who is building soils at scale.  Today we're checking in with an investor in the new African farmers bond Emiliano has  raised in Ghana, which we featured a few months ago.  And we go deep into the role of small robots in regenerative agriculture and why not all  
**[0:01:19-0:01:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:01:19):**  weeds are created equal.  But first impact investor Brent Kessel on why he invested in the new African farmers bond.  Hi Brent, thank you so much for agreeing on sharing your story.  Could you please briefly introduce yourself and what brought you to impact investing?  My name is Brent Kessel.  
**[0:01:38-0:01:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:01:38):**  I'm the CEO and co-founder of Abacus Wealth Partners, which is an impact investment advisory  and financial planning firm in the US.  We have clients all over the country and a few in Europe.  What brought me to impact investing is, I'd say originally growing up in apartheid South  Africa and seeing the inequity of that systemic racism.  
**[0:02:03-0:02:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:02:03):**  And then, you know, more recently, well, when I was an adult after graduating from college,  I really wanted to combine heart and purpose and meaning with finance and impact investing  as a term anyway didn't exist back then.  But as I initially started with negative screening in public securities and then moved on to  microfinance investing and other kinds of impact investing starting in the 90s, really,  
**[0:02:32-0:02:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:02:32):**  I realized I could have both.  I could help myself and help clients have meaning and purpose and earn appropriate financial  returns oftentimes better than the alternatives.  How did you meet Emiliano and how did you get in touch with work?  I met Emiliano originally, oh boy, I want to say it was like 2015, maybe 14, somewhere  
**[0:02:54-0:02:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:02:54):**  back then.  We were introduced by a mutual friend, Cristiano Cardenare, who I had met in my Tibetan Buddhist  meditation travels.  I actually met him in Kathmandu, Nepal, where we were both on a pilgrimage together.  And I loved Cristiano, my family loved Cristiano and we had actually traveled the world, my  
**[0:03:14-0:03:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:03:14):**  family, in 2013 and stayed with Cristiano in Argentina.  Anyway, he's an impact investor and a philanthropist and we just really hit it off on lots of levels.  And so when Emiliano was making a trip through the States a year or two later, he said, you  guys have to sit down with each other.  And we did and really did connect very well.  
**[0:03:34-0:03:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:03:34):**  What attracted you as an investor and made you decide to invest?  I really believed and still believe in Emiliano and Jorge's passion and vision and sincerity  for helping the West African subsistence level farmers help themselves.  What originally attracted me to Impact Investing 20 years ago and the fact that they were there  so soon after the civil war that had devastated Sierra Leone and had just started to build  
**[0:04:07-0:04:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:04:07):**  Warkup and then Ebola hit and everything shut down and they had to leave.  In my mind, that would have been an easy time to just say, look, we gave it a few years.  We gave it a really good shot.  Let's go back to our higher paying jobs and our families and our country of birth.  But they didn't.  
**[0:04:23-0:04:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:04:23):**  They came back and continued trying to help these farmers and still to this day are continuing.  I think they're just incredibly bright.  It's rare that you find such a great combination of intelligence and worldly experience along  with heart, along with this incredible empathy and compassion to solve one of the world's  most pressing problems.  
**[0:04:47-0:04:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:04:47):**  So that's what attracted me and made me want to invest in Wark.  And I was born in Africa myself.  So I have this heart connection to the continent.  There has always been one of the big causes in my life that I've wanted to try and shift  to make a difference in.  
**[0:05:06-0:05:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:05:06):**  And after traveling to Sierra Leone in, I think it was about 2017 or so, that just really  solidified it for me.  Meeting the people, seeing how resilient and warm and hardworking they are, even after  Ebola and the civil war just really redoubled my commitment.  Where do you see the biggest risk?  
**[0:05:26-0:05:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:05:26):**  I'd say the biggest risks are things outside of the company's control.  So political risk is one, it's a different kind of legal system and property rights system.  I think they're managing that very well in terms of their relationships with communities  and chiefs and things like that.  But it's a part of the world where another civil war could break out or you could have  
**[0:05:51-0:05:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:05:51):**  a large foreign power come in and put a lot of capital to work or disrupt things in some  kind of way.  So I'd say systemic risks are the biggest ones.  And I don't see risk with management or Milena or Jorge's capabilities.  Obviously in regenerative ag, there's always risks around weather and which seeds are going  
**[0:06:12-0:06:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:06:12):**  to take or not take and work out.  At the more kind of unit economics level, I think there's some risk around repayment.  And because so much of the foreign money that's come in has been philanthropic money or development  aid, I sometimes wonder if this really does well and the farmers are feeding themselves  and are able to make money from the excess crops.  
**[0:06:39-0:06:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:06:39):**  Would they perhaps some of them renege on their repayments to work for the inputs that  they've been provided and the training they've been provided and sort of take the stance  that this is really like aid and why should I pay it back to you?  Up next, Ben Scott-Robinson of the Small Robot Company.  I'm always very, very interested in technology which makes farmers more profitable and regenerative  
**[0:07:02-0:07:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:07:02):**  at the same time.  So I was very happy to check in with Ben.  Hi Ben, welcome to the show.  Could you briefly introduce yourself and what brings you to work on soil?  What brings me to work on the soil?  
**[0:07:14-0:07:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:07:14):**  Well, I've been working in digital tech since 1997 when the UK government very kindly paid  for me to do a six-week course in how to build internet pages after I had been unemployed  for about a year after university.  And then in 2000, I'd progressed to working for a Boston-based digital agency called Digitas  and they kindly sent me on a course to MIT to understand what was then called human-computer  
**[0:07:44-0:07:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:07:44):**  interaction and that just caused me to catch the bug.  I just got into the idea of user-centered design and the importance of designing and  developing digital products and services starting from the needs of people rather than starting  from the technology.  And because of that, I was lucky enough to work in some really groundbreaking places.  
**[0:08:04-0:08:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:08:04):**  I started at Hutchison Telecom in 2001, which became three, to design the first mobile on-phone  app store, the first mobile mapping applications, the first mobile music applications, all sorts  of amazing stuff which had only really been made possible by the speed of 3G telecoms.  I started an avatar-based messaging startup called TagText, which predated personalized  messaging like Instagram was completely designed around the needs of tween kids and what they  
**[0:08:37-0:08:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:08:37):**  wanted to do with their phones and that allowed us to partner with people like Sony and Cartoon  Network and a number of youth fashion brands.  We were also invited to be a trial app on the iPhone 2, which dates it.  My agency that I started a little bit later called WeLoveMobile built some of the very  first interactive multiplayer augmented reality games and we were lucky enough to be able  
**[0:08:59-0:09:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:08:59):**  to build them for clients like McDonald's and Coke and Peugeot and all sorts of large  brands and companies who wanted to try this and they were really successful.  We had tens of thousands of users.  Certainly, it was most successful in the Nordics, which at the time and up until maybe about  sort of 2011, 2012, were really leading the world on the mobile charge and all that predated  
**[0:09:24-0:09:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:09:24):**  Pokemon by about eight years.  And so the success of my products or my clients' products has always been driven by not adopting  latest technologies, but by understanding how those technologies best fit into people's  lives.  And it's something that technologists and entrepreneurs tend to forget in the excitement  
**[0:09:45-0:09:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:09:45):**  around this sort of new wave of technology that behind it, there is a sophisticated need  that somebody needs to answer before you can start building something to make their lives  better.  So when I was introduced to the problems in farming and the potential methods and technologies  that could possibly resolve those problems, it really struck me that once again, the answers  
**[0:10:08-0:10:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:10:08):**  existed or at least the nascent sort of structure for those answers existed.  There are emerging technologies around robotics and AI that could carry out precision crop  analysis and application.  And there were a number of universities that were exploring this and there was also a number  of farmers and agronomists and growing networks that realized on the other end of the scale  
**[0:10:31-0:10:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:10:31):**  that reintroducing more holistic practices, practices that had maybe been abandoned in  the last 50 or 60 years, would allow soils and ecosystems to regenerate while being part  of a farming process.  And by aligning those soils and ecosystems and listening to them, you could build a sustainable  farming system.  
**[0:10:54-0:10:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:10:54):**  But they are both a huge challenge to implement in a cost effective way.  The technology is expensive, it's unreliable and it's difficult to get value out of it,  certainly to start with.  You know, farmers are fearful of this technology breaking down or becoming obsolete.  And certainly for a long time, there wasn't the early stage support to go through the  
**[0:11:16-0:11:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:11:16):**  pain of making that technology reliable and safe.  And then at the other end of the spectrum, regenerative approaches require a very deep  understanding, not just of the complex systems that allow regeneration to happen, but how  they apply to your specific farm.  And they also take a long time to get right.  
**[0:11:38-0:11:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:11:38):**  And it takes a while before you know if you're even on the right path.  So while there are an increasing number of farmers who are going down that route and  all power to them, ultimately, that will always be limited.  So what was needed really is a system that could sort of bring those together, that could  simplify the process of implementing soil saving, chemical removing and sustainable  
**[0:12:04-0:12:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:12:04):**  farming practices in a way that removed the risk for farmers.  So that's how we came up with the concept of farming as a service as a model and per  plant farming as a concept and started to put it into action.  What is the Small Robot Company?  Well, Small Robot Company is the brainchild of myself and Sam, who is a fourth generation  
**[0:12:30-0:12:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:12:30):**  arable farmer.  And it was formed as a result of six months worth of extensive interviews with farmers  looking to improve the way they grew arable crops.  And those interviews allowed us to develop a model, a system that we call farming as  a service and do that through an integrated platform of robots, AI and software.  
**[0:12:53-0:12:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:12:53):**  So we've been going for nearly four years now and we've delivered the first part of  our service, the per plant monitoring of wheat, plants and weeds since October last year.  We've got a team of about 42 engineers, roboticists, scientists who are building our service, robots  the AI and software, and who are also running the service part, so getting the robots out  to the field and making sure they do what they need to do.  
**[0:13:19-0:13:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:13:19):**  We have 35 farmers who prepaid for our service in advance.  They include the UK supermarket Waitrose and the UK's largest landowner, the National Trust,  and a further 160 who have signed letters of intent.  And on top of that, we have 600 farmers who've invested in us through three crowdfunding  rounds.  
**[0:13:40-0:13:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:13:40):**  How is your approach with integrating robots into regenerative agriculture different from  other approaches?  And what do you mean by per plant farming?  So the first generation of agricultural robotics is driven by a need to simply automate existing  tasks.  
**[0:13:56-0:14:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:13:56):**  And there are significant financial gains to be made by reducing labor in higher value  crops.  However, it doesn't really answer those existential problems facing the farming of the world's  staple crops.  So what we wanted to develop was something that is transformative, a real sort of breakthrough  
**[0:14:20-0:14:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:14:20):**  in using this technology in a new way.  And we call that per plant farming.  So this is a radical approach and it's focused on using lightweight autonomous vehicles to  provide a near real time view of each crop plant as it grows through the season.  And then using this view to deliver precise, timely interventions to make sure that that  
**[0:14:45-0:14:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:14:45):**  plant reaches its full potential.  And by doing this, we can strip out all the inefficiencies and the vast overuse of herbicides  and pesticides and fungicides and fertilizer.  And because we don't disturb or compact the soil, we allow the ecosystem of a field to  do what it does best, which is fix itself.  
**[0:15:10-0:15:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:15:10):**  And so this radical but simple vision ultimately can increase yields.  It can increase nutrient levels within the food.  It can reduce the cost of production.  And it can also support the regeneration of soils and sequester carbon dioxide.  And with this combined with an integrated agronomic system based on the data from a  
**[0:15:39-0:15:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:15:39):**  specific farm, it can allow for regenerative farming to be applied at scale.  How do you select which plants, less weeds compete with the cash crop and thus figure  out which one to kill?  So conventional farming has a very specific view of weeds.  In essence, anything that is not a crop plant is a weed.  
**[0:16:02-0:16:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:16:02):**  And the approach to weed control has always been one of complete systematic destruction  of anything in the field that is not a crop plant.  And even other robotic systems out there are using either tillage to take out non-crop  plants, which obviously also damages the soil structures and reduces carbon dioxide, or  they use the precision spraying of glyphosate or similar herbicides.  
**[0:16:31-0:16:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:16:31):**  And ultimately, this is an incremental improvement on what we had before, but it's not really  understanding the ecosystem of a field in its entirety.  It's still taking this very old school farming approach to things.  Now, in the UK, arable fields, there are around about 23 weeds that commonly occur.  Ten of those are nasty, things like black grass and cleavers and brome, which out-compete  
**[0:17:00-0:17:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:17:00):**  crop plants that spread rapidly and are becoming increasingly resistant to herbicides.  So for example, black grass on its own in the next five years is looking to be a problem  that removes a quarter of the wheat production from the UK, a billion pound problem.  So it's massive.  Interestingly, four of those sort of bad weeds are actually volunteers from the previous  
**[0:17:25-0:17:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:17:25):**  year's crop.  So that's whether that's barley or oilseed rape, and they need to be controlled as a  weed for this year.  Three, like things like chickweed and fat hen are only really a problem if they're allowed  to get too competitive.  
**[0:17:41-0:17:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:17:41):**  If you allow too many plants per square meter to grow, if they get too dense or also if  they get too close to the crop plants.  Nine of the plants in that 23 are either little threat like dead nettles or field pansies,  or like clovers are actually beneficial to the soil and the ecosystem.  And leaving all of those nine in fields actually has the advantage of creating a diverse ecosystem.  
**[0:18:11-0:18:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:18:11):**  That supports the soil matrix and pollinators.  And simply by being there, they create an ecosystem that is more attuned to a meadow  than a monoculture.  So our target is to use our per plant view to recognize the different species of weeds  as they emerge and take out the bad ones completely, thin out the ones that are neutral and leave  
**[0:18:38-0:18:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:18:38):**  the beneficial ones alone.  Now to do this, we've developed a weeding system that uses electricity.  We work with a company called Rootwave who've developed this electric weeding probe and  automated it so that we can aim it at the target weeds that we have identified in field.  And then we can use these electric probes to literally blow out the plant.  
**[0:19:05-0:19:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:19:05):**  So it systematically kills the plant, taking out the roots and the leaves with no real  damage to the surrounding plants or soil.  So that means at a stroke, we can convert this wheat field, we can convert this green  desert monoculture into a vibrant, diverse and self-regenerating ecosystem that also  happens to support the crop.  
**[0:19:28-0:19:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:19:28):**  What has been your progress so far as we're speaking at the beginning of 2021?  Well, January 2021 or February 2021 as it is now, we have developed two of our robot  types.  The TOM robot, the monitoring robot is at a commercial specification.  So we've spent the last four years working through a number of different iterations,  
**[0:19:51-0:19:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:19:51):**  making each one lighter and more reliable and smarter and more capable of working at  a commercial pace.  So this TOM, for example, is quarter the weight of a NIO robot and has an operating  width of six meters.  It puts a third of the amount of pressure on the ground as your foot and about a tenth  
**[0:20:11-0:20:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:20:11):**  of a tractor.  Dick, the non-chemical weeding robot is third generation prototype.  So we have spent three years understanding the most effective way to deliver non-chemical  weeding as a service and how to create a modular system that allows this to be delivered.  As for Wilma, it's commercially deployed and in use.  
**[0:20:31-0:20:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:20:31):**  It's capable of handling terabytes of data and converting it into a geospatial information  and then allowing us to create a per plant map of the field.  We can differentiate between the crop plant and broadleaf weeds at emergence.  We can also identify grass weeds at emergence that are indistinguishable from wheat visually  by using specific light spectra and AI techniques.  
**[0:20:56-0:21:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:20:56):**  We can also convert the weed locations into a route for the Dick robot and a targeting  regime for the electric weeding.  So the rest of the season will be spent evolving our AIs for greater subtlety and picking up  other information around the crop plant, pests, soils, and working on other elements of the  robotic parts of the service.  
**[0:21:19-0:21:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:21:19):**  Where would you like to stand in 12 months?  What will 2021 bring you?  So 2021 is a big year for us.  As well as working through getting Tom ready for manufacture, we will also be developing  and evolving the commercial specification Dick robot and the electric weeding capability  
**[0:21:41-0:21:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:21:41):**  so that we can deliver our first full weeding service.  There's lots of subtleties within that and lots of other parts that we aim to be included  in the platform and the service, but we'd have to be a little quiet about those for  the moment.  But with any fast moving hardware startup, we have a funding round.  
**[0:22:01-0:22:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:22:01):**  We are starting now with an aim to close in the next few months, probably June or July.  And that money will get us to having a complete per plant service for key arable crops in  Europe and allow us to be collecting the data for roll-out in North America and Brazil.  If you found the investing in regenerative agriculture and food podcast valuable, there  are a few simple ways you can use to support it.  
**[0:22:31-0:22:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:22:31):**  Number one, rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast.  And it only takes a few seconds.  Number two, share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number three, if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means, please  
**[0:22:48-0:22:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:22:48):**  join my membership community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on cambro.com slash investing region egg or in the description  below.  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  
**[0:23:14-0:23:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:23:14):**  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course after a hundred interviews and more than a hundred hours of  audio asking the question how to put money to work in regenerating soils and have been  following the space since 2011 and recording these podcasts since 2016 we thought it was  
**[0:23:35-0:23:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:23:35):**  time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework, what to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees and what questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  
**[0:23:50-0:23:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:23:50):**  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space for whom is discourse?  You the soil builders and investors in this space, the soil builders, people working in  
**[0:24:02-0:24:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:24:02):**  this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers, vehicle builders, crowd investing  platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food companies, permaculture, key line  designers, holistic management, consultants, et cetera, et cetera.  People that are building soil at scale and the investors who are putting their own money  to work through their family office or as private individuals or people who are putting  
**[0:24:23-0:24:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:24:23):**  other people's money to work through foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies,  et cetera.  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  
**[0:24:34-0:24:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:24:34):**  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you.  And I'm very aware that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very  different means.  So I'm inviting you if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  
**[0:24:52-0:24:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:24:52):**  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides.  So you don't have to ride along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  
**[0:25:07-0:25:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:25:07):**  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  
**[0:25:28-0:25:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:25:28):**  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  
**[0:25:42-0:25:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-5#t=0:25:42):**  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking, click on  the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  