### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2020-00-01)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  Welcome to Soil Builders, a series where we follow who is building soils at scale.  This is an experiment, so please share any feedback.  
**[0:00:22-0:00:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:00:22):**  Why this show Soil Builders?  I believe that most change in regenerative agriculture and food will come from and is  coming from entrepreneurs building ways to regenerate soil at scale.  I call these Soil Builders.  Soil Builders are entrepreneurial farmers, ag tech companies, investment funds, food  
**[0:00:38-0:00:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:00:38):**  startups, new seed cooperatives, teams within food companies, robot startups, investment  vehicles etc. etc. etc.  All regenerating soil beyond their own farm gate and with more than their own money.  This series allows the community of the podcast, which is you, full of funders, investors and  fellow soil builders to follow their progress, their challenges and their breakthroughs.  
**[0:00:58-0:01:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:00:58):**  I hope you enjoy it and please reach out with any comments, feedback and ideas.  Hi, Emiliano, please briefly introduce yourself by sharing how come you're working on regenerating  soils in Sierra Leone and Ghana.  My name is Emiliano Mrowa.  I'm the founder and CEO of Wark.  
**[0:01:16-0:01:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:01:16):**  Wark is a social enterprise based out of Sierra Leone and Ghana.  Our main objective is to help farmers increase their incomes by introducing regenerative  agricultural practices.  My path to Sierra Leone and to dedicating my life to this cause started when I was a  teenager.  
**[0:01:37-0:01:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:01:37):**  I was living in Argentina and I did the first solo trip to Bolivia, I think I was 17 or  18.  And there I got exposed to the hazardous realities of silver miners in Potosi.  And something kind of changed in the way I look at things.  In many cases, I continued my studies in business economics, then I moved to Europe and I did  
**[0:02:01-0:02:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:02:01):**  a master's in economics.  So nothing really related to development.  Then I started working in a big multinational in Germany, Dusseldorf.  So again, nothing really related to development.  But while I was living there, my friends would go skiing in Chamonix and I would go backpacking  
**[0:02:19-0:02:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:02:19):**  in Afghanistan or in Africa.  So there was something else that I wanted to do in my life.  And in 2010, I did this backpacking trip in Sierra Leone and I got exposed to the realities  of rural poverty in a country like Sierra Leone, which is among the least developed  countries in the world, and got exposed to the realities of hunger.  
**[0:02:41-0:02:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:02:41):**  It was the first time in my life I was so deeply embedded into communities that were  exposed to chronic hunger.  And that trip changed me forever.  I went back to Germany, I quit my job, took a one way ticket to Sierra Leone.  I managed to convince my cousin to come with me and we started up work today's work.  
**[0:03:04-0:03:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:03:04):**  And what is work exactly doing?  Subsistence farming has two main consequences.  The first one is poverty and hunger.  And that's fairly straightforward.  A farmer that produces barely enough to feed his or her family had practically nothing  
**[0:03:23-0:03:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:03:23):**  else left to generate enough income to afford other basic things in his or her life, like  education or health or proper living, et cetera.  Just to put it in context, in Sierra Leone, more than 95% of the farmers live below the  subsistence line.  So in lay terms, this basically means that they don't even produce enough to feed their  
**[0:03:47-0:03:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:03:47):**  families and consequently, there is chronic hunger.  Up to 35% of the children in the entire country suffer from starving.  The second consequence of subsistence farming is related to sustainability.  And let me first bring an example to illustrate why we think that subsistence farming practices  can put pressure on fragile ecosystems.  
**[0:04:14-0:04:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:04:14):**  In southern Sierra Leone, before a farmer starts her season, basically, she would stand  in front of her a couple of acres of land, equivalent to a couple of football fields  of land.  And in front of her, she would have two or three meter high grasses covering the entire  farm.  
**[0:04:32-0:04:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:04:32):**  Grasses that she would need to clear or land that she would need to clear to prepare for  planting later on.  So at this point, she basically has two options.  One is either spend with her entire household working for an entire month or even longer  in some cases just to cut those grasses down, or they could simply burn them down in 30  
**[0:04:53-0:04:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:04:53):**  minutes or an hour.  So clearly, and actually understandably, farmers do burn their fields to clear the land before  planting and then they still need to prepare the land.  So they would need to spend another 30 to 40 days working manually with handholds to  prepare those lands for planting.  
**[0:05:12-0:05:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:05:12):**  Handholding has an extraordinary impact that is basically exposing the soils or having  naked soils, as we call it.  And this could be disastrous for the topsoils, especially in tropical environments where  rains are monsoonical and there would be an extraordinarily strong rain at the beginning  of the season.  
**[0:05:35-0:05:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:05:35):**  And when those soils are naked, you would see a river of topsoil simply eroding from  the farmer's farm.  This is happening year after year after year.  So actually, the fact that soils are not covered is tremendously important in tropical environments  in addition to heat and oxidation that has an even bigger impact on soils than what it  
**[0:06:00-0:06:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:06:00):**  would have on temperate environments.  So we as work, what we do is we seek to stack the decks for smallholder farmers by supplying  a bundle of inputs like seeds and fertilizer as a service to the smallholder farmers.  So again, if we take a look at their farm, so the number one thing that we try to do  is the farmer to be able to focus on his or her soil's health.  
**[0:06:28-0:06:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:06:28):**  So this bundle includes the first of all, a crop rotation so that this farmer can move  away from doing a monoculture that is very prevalent in West Africa so that she can move  away from doing rice after rice after rice into rotating rice with soybeans or maize  with soybeans or whatever the right crop rotation makes sense in her environment.  Secondly, introducing or bundling the right inputs.  
**[0:06:55-0:07:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:06:55):**  This means the rights in crop seeds and even organic fertilizers and other inputs that  are needed for her to increase her yields per unit of land.  And thirdly, it also includes the mechanization services.  So this basically means that we would come with a no-till planter.  So instead of her having to plow her lands within 30 days and then plant and spend a  
**[0:07:19-0:07:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:07:19):**  lot of time and resources doing that, which is on top and sustainable for the soil erosion  that we were discussing earlier, we do come and provide those planting services with a  no-till planter so that now she can adopt conservation no-till planting systems.  So conceptually, the no-till planting coupled with crop rotation and covering the soils  always covered with crops reduces significantly the soil erosion and actually helps the farmer  
**[0:07:48-0:07:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:07:48):**  to increase the carbon that she is able to sequester.  From a farmer's perspective, this bundle results in significantly higher incomes.  So the baseline is a farmer that was farming one or two acres by hand once a year with  only one crop like rice into one farmer that now is able to plant twice a year a crop rotation.  So let's say rice and soybeans that she can get much higher yields, in some cases five  
**[0:08:22-0:08:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:08:22):**  or even more, five times more.  It's a farmer that now can put more of her land under production instead of doing one  acre or two acres because that's how much she could do with her household, which is  basically her labor force.  Now she can mechanize this planting and she doesn't have to handhold the land anymore  
**[0:08:43-0:08:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:08:43):**  so she could do four or five acres instead of one or two.  And all this put together results in farmers increasing their incomes by up to ten times.  What are the main challenges applying regenerative approaches to countries like Ghana compared  to places like the US and Australia that we hear from much more often?  There are several challenges to adopting regenerative agriculture practices and scaling in a smallholder  
**[0:09:10-0:09:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:09:10):**  farming context, I think.  So first of all, there is the behavioral element.  To start with, farmers have been burning their fields to clear for generations now.  And not only themselves, but actually other parties, especially cattle herders burn down  land in order for fresh grass to come up and be eaten by their cattle.  
**[0:09:37-0:09:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:09:37):**  I think that this behavioral change requires an extraordinary amount of sensitization and  actually the creation of incentives from the parties.  And this is a challenge that we have been consistently facing in the areas in which  we operate.  A second challenge, I think it's related to the fact that we believe that mechanization  
**[0:10:00-0:10:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:10:00):**  is an important element to make regenerative agriculture the norm in Africa.  I think that farmers also, especially smallholder farmers, have been plowing the soils once  and again and again during generations.  And in cases where farming has been more intensive, especially in places in East Africa, the soil  erosion has been disastrous.  
**[0:10:25-0:10:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:10:25):**  In West Africa, we still have the opportunity to do it first and right to some extent in  some places.  But in any case, farmers, even in a micro scale, they have been exposing the soils to  erosion year after year.  And it could also require an important behavioral change to believe in the mechanization, especially  
**[0:10:43-0:10:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:10:43):**  on minimum tillage or actually no tillage mechanization.  And then, of course, it does require the business models, the capital, the machinery, the knowledge,  the skills to operate this type of mechanization to bring it to that scale.  So we think that's an important challenge.  And there has to be clear incentives to do this as well from the parties involved.  
**[0:11:08-0:11:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:11:08):**  And we do think that there is an economic incentive because we do think that if farmers  choose to adopt whenever they have the access to, obviously, the mechanization approach,  they would free up a meaningful amount of time that they could use to create or realize  other additional streams of income for their families that may even not be correlated to  farming in itself.  
**[0:11:34-0:11:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:11:34):**  So we think that that could be a very strong incentive for the smallholder farmers to adopt  mechanization, specifically not mechanization.  And then, what it has been proven, especially from Argentina where I'm from, that noted  farming can result in much lower costs, reducing the amount of fuel consumed in the farm.  And it can even result in in-veterials in the longer term.  
**[0:12:00-0:12:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:12:00):**  So I think that there is a very strong and compelling economic case for the farmers themselves  to adopt these production systems.  What regenerative approaches are you applying?  The baseline farmer here basically does a monoculture, usually rises Sierra Leone or  Mays in Ghana, over-tills the lands, as we were speaking before, and uses several cheap,  
**[0:12:26-0:12:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:12:26):**  in many cases unreliable and extremely toxic, hydrochemicals like paraquat, for example.  So the first thing that we do is to introduce a crop rotation so that 100 percent of the  land that farmers produce is rotated in places where we can squeeze two seasons in one year.  We will do a rotation of Mays and soybeans, for example, or rice and soybeans, or Mays  and other types of beans as one of the practices.  
**[0:12:58-0:13:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:12:58):**  The second practice is we seek to put 100 percent under no-till farming, so minimizing  the impact that we humans have on the soil.  And thirdly, we also introduce cover crops and we seek to avoid burning so that during  the dry season especially, the soils remain completely covered.  In addition to that, we are also working on a circularity of inputs as well, penetrating  
**[0:13:30-0:13:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:13:30):**  chicken manure and contributing that fertilization into the soils.  Those are the main practices.  In the future, we also are conceiving introducing cattle in specific periods of time.  But since cattle herding is not as widespread across the whole region as it is in other  environments, this is something that we have not started doing yet.  
**[0:13:57-0:14:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:13:57):**  Can you share what a new African farmer bond is?  No-till farming coupled with other practices such as crop rotation or covering the fields,  keeping the fields almost always covered or the entire time covered, has the potential  to significantly increase the organic matter on the soils.  And for one percent of organic matter on the soil, there are 10 tons of carbon that are  
**[0:14:21-0:14:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:14:21):**  sequestered for years or centuries in one acre of land.  So the 500 million smallholder farmers in Africa have the capacity to store gigatons,  over five gigatons of carbon in the soils.  So we see smallholder farmers not only as the potential drivers of economic growth,  of rural wealth and development, but actually as a future of food production for the world's  
**[0:14:47-0:14:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:14:47):**  increasing population, but at the same time, active actors in our quest towards mitigating  climate change.  But this will take a lot of money.  So from our side, we have launched the new African farmer bond that is precisely a financial  instrument designed to be able to provide these tools and inputs to smallholder farmers  
**[0:15:12-0:15:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:15:12):**  so that we keep on converting more and more land while producing more and more food following  regenerative agricultural systems.  The instrument is fairly straightforward.  It's a five-year bullet with a seven percent interest rate.  And basically, work as an organization is targeting socially and environmentally minded  
**[0:15:33-0:15:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:15:33):**  investors that are willing to contribute to making regenerative agriculture in Africa  the norm.  What will the bond be used for?  The bond is targeted to increasing the amount of farmers and the amount of land that is  under regenerative agriculture.  
**[0:15:50-0:15:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:15:50):**  So this basically means on one hand, capex investments, approximately 60 percent of the  bond value is going into procuring agricultural equipment, especially no-till planting, combine  harvesters to reduce harvest losses and other basic farming equipment.  And on the other hand, basically to cover the working capital and to source the inputs  so that the farmers can access better inputs and increase their ease of production.  
**[0:16:19-0:16:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:16:19):**  There is an important amount as well, approximately 10 percent that is used to build a knowledge  base so that we can transfer regenerative agricultural practice knowledge to smallholder  farmers.  What have you learned from the process and what would you do differently next time?  One of the key things that we learned over the last several years is how to develop the  
**[0:16:44-0:16:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:16:44):**  right criteria to define if this solution will work in that environment.  Just to give an example, we started our operations in Sierra Leone and we came to the conclusion  that in Sierra Leone there are structural constraints that are so deep and so embedded  that may make part of this solution unsustainable, especially here in Sierra Leone from a financial  perspective.  
**[0:17:08-0:17:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:17:08):**  What I'm trying to say is in Sierra Leone there are three extraordinary constraints.  One is skill gaps, two is agricultural or agronomic expertise locally, and third the  usual political constraints.  And especially the depth of the skill gap is so large that makes the rollout of some  of the elements of our model extremely slow and therefore quite expensive and hence very  
**[0:17:38-0:17:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:17:38):**  hard to make it profitable.  So we have become a lot better in defining those criteria and this is a key element for  scale so that now we can shortcut significantly the amount of time that we take into going  into one new location in our process of replicating the model and what we have learned.  I think the second element is that we learn significantly how to accelerate the behavioural  
**[0:18:07-0:18:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:18:07):**  change process.  I think there is still a lot to learn on this from our side and it's something that I feel  in many cases it's underestimated how tough it is to change behaviours, especially thinking  that smallholder farmers, especially subsistence farmers, when they make farming decisions  they are not making economic decisions, they are making life decisions because the consequences  
**[0:18:29-0:18:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:18:29):**  of making a wrong decision is having simply a lot less food to eat and it's not making  more or less money.  So that naturally results in a much higher risk conversion from the smallholder farmers.  And this is something that we understood over time and I think if I had to start again it's  something that I would consider a lot deeper moving on.  
**[0:18:52-0:18:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:18:52):**  I think as well it's very important to understand the partners or the potential partners that  are out there and I think in this process as well we learned a lot in identifying who  are those that really are committed to these specific social and environmental objectives  and have the patience and the resilience to navigate with us this path that is extremely  arduous and long.  
**[0:19:20-0:19:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:19:20):**  If you would like to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and  agriculture find our video course on investing in regenerative agriculture.com.com.  This course will teach you to understand the opportunities, to get to know the main players,  to learn about the main trends and how to evaluate a new investment opportunity like  what kind of questions to ask.  
**[0:19:43-0:19:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:19:43):**  Find out more on investinginregenativeagriculture.com.com.com.com If you found the investing in regenerative  agriculture and food podcast valuable there are a few simple ways you can use to support  it.  Number 1 rate and review the podcast on your podcast app.  That's the best way for other listeners to find the podcast and it only takes a few  
**[0:20:01-0:20:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:20:01):**  seconds.  Number 2 share this podcast on social media or email it to your friends and colleagues.  Number 3 if this podcast has been of value to you and if you have the means please join  my membership community to help grow this platform and allow me to take it further.  You can find all the details on gumroad.com.com.com or in the description below.  
**[0:20:23-0:20:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:20:23):**  Thank you so much and see you at the next podcast.  Dear friends of the podcast I am super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food.  How to put money to work in regenerating soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while  doing it.  
**[0:20:47-0:20:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:20:47):**  Why are we doing this course?  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to put money  to work in regenerating soils and have been following this space since 2011 and recording  this podcast since 2016 we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in this space over the last years?  
**[0:21:05-0:21:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:21:05):**  How have we built our decision making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  What questions should you ask?  What is happening in this space?  
**[0:21:15-0:21:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:21:15):**  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  
**[0:21:23-0:21:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:21:23):**  You the soil builders and investors in this space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management, consultants, etc.  People that are building soil at scale.  
**[0:21:43-0:21:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:21:43):**  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  No.  
**[0:21:57-0:22:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:21:57):**  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you.  And I'm very aware that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very  different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  
**[0:22:15-0:22:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:22:15):**  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to write along.  
**[0:22:28-0:22:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:22:28):**  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  
**[0:22:50-0:22:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:22:50):**  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  
**[0:23:04-0:23:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/30/soil-builders-3/#t=0:23:04):**  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  