### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2020-00-03)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  Welcome to Soil Builders, a series where we follow who is building soils at scale.  This is an experiment, so please share any feedback.  
**[0:00:21-0:00:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:00:21):**  Today we check in with Fabio Sakamoto of Rizoma Agro, who just raised a 25 million brazilian  row, which is about 3.7 million euros or 4.3 million dollars, Green Bond, the first ever  in agriculture, certified by the Climate Bond Initiative, led by Sean Kidney, who we interviewed  last year.  And we're checking in with Ian McSweeney of the Agrarian Trust, who shares how much has  
**[0:00:41-0:00:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:00:41):**  happened at the Agrarian Trust around land ownership in the commons in the US, how they  have been acquiring farms into the commons and how they've launched 12 community-centered  agrarian commons throughout 10 states in the US.  Why this show Soil Builders?  I believe that most change in regenerative agriculture and food will come from, and is  
**[0:01:01-0:01:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:01:01):**  coming from, entrepreneurs building ways to regenerate soil at scale.  I call these Soil Builders.  Soil Builders are entrepreneurial farmers, agtech companies, investment funds, food startups,  new seed cooperatives, teams within food companies, robot startups, investment vehicles, etc,  etc, etc.  
**[0:01:18-0:01:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:01:18):**  All regenerating soil beyond their own farm gate and with more than their own money.  This series allows the community of the podcast, which is you, full of funders, investors and  fellow soil builders to follow their progress, their challenges and their breakthroughs.  I hope you enjoy it and please reach out with any comments, feedback and ideas.  First up, a short update from Fabio Sakamoto.  
**[0:01:40-0:01:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:01:40):**  Why am I so excited about green bonds in Region Ag?  Because it shows that Region Ag can attract traditional, maybe even lower cost capital,  and thus scale.  Green bonds are an enormous market and so far have largely ignored agriculture.  So this could be the first, and let's hope this, of many green bonds in the space.  
**[0:01:56-0:02:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:01:56):**  Hi Fabio, congrats with the launch of the first ever green bond certified by the Climate  Bond Initiative in agriculture.  How did this come about?  Why did you decide to raise a green bond?  Hi Keren, thank you.  
**[0:02:10-0:02:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:02:10):**  We've been thinking about a green bond for quite some time now.  As you know, our central thesis at Risso Magro is that regenerative agriculture will scale  because it is a good business and in being a good business, we should be able to access  mainstream capital.  Yeah, so we've been studying this topic for a while.  
**[0:02:31-0:02:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:02:31):**  I know CBI had been looking at this and developing the criteria for agriculture for some time.  They're very serious.  So when they opened the criteria, we were ready.  We had all the information.  We were, you know, hats off to my team for being very quick.  
**[0:02:50-0:02:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:02:50):**  And yeah, so this is how we got to admit the first green bond in the world for agriculture.  And it is an honor.  And yeah, and for me, what was great about the process was that it confirms our hypothesis.  The green bond was sold out in two hours.  It was oversubscribed by more than four times.  
**[0:03:11-0:03:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:03:11):**  And we didn't know any of the investors that bought the bond and when we talked to some  of them, we realized they were not investors that usually invest in agriculture or investors  that are necessarily impact investors looking for sustainability.  When I talked to them, they said, well, we bought the bond because we think you have  a good business, which to me is the biggest compliment I could receive and which makes  
**[0:03:36-0:03:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:03:36):**  me very optimistic about how fast Regen Ag can grow with this type of market access.  And what will you use this green bond for, which was, by the way, heavily oversubscribed?  This green bond will be used mainly on investments on our existing farm.  So here at Rizoma Agro, we are trying to produce regenerative organic at the same cost as conventional.  And right now, our priorities are in expanding our bio inputs factory where we multiply fungi  
**[0:04:10-0:04:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:04:10):**  and bacteria that we use as crop protection.  We're also expanding our composting and compost tea operation.  We are investing in ag tech tools to digitalize our farm management.  We're also investing in a few machines.  So that's our priorities here.  
**[0:04:29-0:04:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:04:29):**  And a smaller part of the green bond will also be used to exchange short term working  capital debt for longer term debt.  So thus strengthening our balance sheets and creating a more resilient operation.  And what will you do differently next time?  What have you learned, obviously, if you're going to raise another green bond at some  
**[0:04:49-0:04:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:04:49):**  point in the future?  I think there will be a next one, Koen, because we've been pretty busy with our expansion  plans for 2021.  And because this first experience was very positive for us, not much I would change.  What I am considering is opening this next green bond for investors abroad.  
**[0:05:10-0:05:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:05:10):**  We had some inquiries, but the first emission was just for investors in Brazil.  And if there are any investors listening out there that are interested, please reach out  and it would be great to get a sense of level of interest.  Anything else you would like to share with the podcast community?  Koen, I'm just excited about everything that's happening in the space and how quickly it's  
**[0:05:34-0:05:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:05:34):**  developing.  My business partner Pedro helped co-produce the Kiss the Ground documentary that's on  Netflix now.  And I see a lot more people joining the conversation.  I also see people in the industry, the food companies and in the investment industry,  
**[0:05:51-0:05:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:05:51):**  understanding the role and the opportunity that is here.  So I'm just excited about everything that's happened, even though it wasn't an easy year  for the world.  It was very positive for Regen Ag.  And it was a pleasure talking to you again.  
**[0:06:06-0:06:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:06:06):**  Stay safe and take care.  Next up, an update from Ian about the thorniest of thorny issues in agriculture, land ownership.  Why are some people born into lots of land and not interested in farming at all?  Why are some people who want to farm cannot access any land?  And why are others pushed off their ancestral land?  
**[0:06:23-0:06:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:06:23):**  And what can we do about all this and what's the role of money?  The Agrarian Trust is taking on this long and difficult work in the US to make land  more accessible, not extractively managed and equitable.  They have made huge progress since we last talked over two years ago.  So enjoy this update.  
**[0:06:36-0:06:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:06:36):**  Hi, Ian, could you give us an update on what has happened since you were on the podcast  more than two years ago?  So what has happened over the last two years at Agrarian Trust?  We as an organization have grown.  We've grown our staffing capacity.  
**[0:06:52-0:06:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:06:52):**  We've grown and manifested our work through the different initiatives we're involved in.  Agrarian Legal, Faith Lands and Agrarian Commons have really developed into their own bodies  of work.  Each has active work underway.  Each has staff and focus attending to them.  
**[0:07:15-0:07:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:07:15):**  Agrarian Commons and Faith Lands both through committee work and network creation and collaborative  learning has developed a body of knowledge.  And that knowledge and learning for both of those individually are being developed into  online open source resource toolkits that should be available right around the end of  this calendar year to really provide resource examples and knowledge to those in faith communities  
**[0:07:52-0:07:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:07:52):**  and those with interest in commons and community centered farm ownership.  And those toolkits will provide examples, models, templates, resources, learning as  open source kind of assets for all communities that seek to use them to expand their work  on land ownership, access and tenure.  Most significant growth over the last two years has been the Agrarian Commons work.  
**[0:08:28-0:08:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:08:28):**  We've developed relationships, brought together partners and stakeholders in communities.  And on May 1st of this year, we incorporated 10 community centered local Agrarian Commons  in 10 different states across the United States.  We've since added two additional Agrarian Commons where we now have 12 community centered  Agrarian Commons 501c2 land holding entities in 10 different states, California, Washington,  
**[0:09:03-0:09:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:09:03):**  Montana, Minnesota, West Virginia, Tennessee, Virginia, Vermont, New Hampshire and Maine.  And those Commons are community centered land holding entities with their own boards, their  own identity, their own mission and are moving forward with farm land projects.  In June of this year, we launched forward our first crowdsource capital raise, a philanthropic  capital raise to raise the capital needed to acquire a 104 acre organic farm in central  
**[0:09:44-0:09:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:09:44):**  Maine.  We launched that at the end of June.  At the end of August, we had raised $480,000 from over 1500 donors from across the country,  from across the globe, who donated in on average $144 to make this possible.  So with that capital raise, we were able to acquire the 104 acre organic farm into the  
**[0:10:15-0:10:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:10:15):**  main Agrarian Commons, the little Juba Agrarian Commons, where the majority of that board  is new American Somali Bantu community members in Lewiston, Maine.  And on October 1, we conveyed secure equitable lease tenure to Liberation Farm, a collective  farm initiative of the Somali Bantu Community Association.  So they now have secure tenure and a home to continue to grow food and to expand their  
**[0:10:51-0:11:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:10:51):**  ability to address food security and to move towards a community that can hold up and live  into a food sovereignty.  So that farm ownership is in the Agrarian Commons structure.  We had also taken donation of a farm into the Agrarian Commons structure, donation of  a farm on Whidbey Island at the end of 2019.  
**[0:11:19-0:11:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:11:19):**  So presently, the model has two farms in ownership within the model.  We have a number of other farm projects.  In total, we have 17 farm projects that we've done initial evaluation and vetting and exploration  of and have agreements in place to move forward, engage people, raise capital, acquire the  farm, complete the real estate due diligence, in some cases accept the donation of farm  
**[0:11:49-0:11:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:11:49):**  in, in others.  It's a discounted acquisition of farm in, but to acquire those farms into the structure  and convey lease tenure out.  Regarding the Agrarian Trust, what is the key news here?  Well, really, as we're sharing the key news of Agrarian Trust is the launch of the Agrarian  
**[0:12:11-0:12:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:12:11):**  Commons model.  The fact that we have 12 community centered nonprofit boards that have come together local  to their community valuing a new way to hold land, to own land and farms, a new way to  convey tenure and a new way to address equity is, is considerable.  The fact that there's recognition for the importance of addressing ownership, tenure  
**[0:12:43-0:12:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:12:43):**  and equity in farming and expanding the work of land trusts to focus in these areas is  significant.  This is a new innovative model in the United States.  This type of structure does not exist in the United States until we brought it forward.  So, you know, there's kind of significance to that.  
**[0:13:11-0:13:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:13:11):**  It also doesn't exist at this scale at all either.  So the kind of scale of 12 community centered Agrarian Commons across 10 states across the  United States of America is significant.  Additionally, really the way we've stepped forward with this work and engaged with a  crowdsource capital raise to raise philanthropic dollars that, you know, there is a lot of  
**[0:13:40-0:13:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:13:40):**  activity with online fundraising platforms that exists over the last 10 years or so.  What we did was we created our own internal platform to raise that capital.  So that is unique in and of itself.  And we also raised significant capital over $480,000 in a very short amount of time from  over 1500 donors.  
**[0:14:10-0:14:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:14:10):**  That's significant.  The crowdsource platforms that exist do not raise money to acquire farms or land in general.  Those that are focused on agriculture, it's much smaller dollar raises for buildings,  infrastructure type needs.  So our work to create our own version of a crowdsource fundraising structure and then  
**[0:14:38-0:14:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:14:38):**  raise the significant amount of capital needed to acquire a farm is really significant and  unique in the model.  Also speaking to just the number of people that gave to that campaign, over 1500 people  is significant.  And the reality is that of these, you know, we have 17 total farms we're moving forward  
**[0:15:05-0:15:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:15:05):**  on.  Of these 17 total farms, the farms involve their farm communities, their CSA membership,  and the other board members and stakeholders on each of these local agrarian commons, their  communities and networks.  We have a kind of aggregate community now engaged in the agrarian commons that has over  
**[0:15:37-0:15:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:15:37):**  a quarter million social media followers in total across all these entities.  So you know, our ability to replicate those type of crowdsource fundraisers where the  average donation was $144 and engage multiple other communities across the United States  to give similar, you know, to give $50, to give $100, to give $200 towards transformation  of how we connect with land, how land is owned, how tenure is conveyed on that land and how  
**[0:16:15-0:16:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:16:15):**  we consider and hold equity in that whole equation has significant promise and it has  a real developing and growing energy and momentum towards this work.  So we finished the project in Maine.  We also own a farm in Washington on Whidbey Island.  We're about to launch forward a fundraiser to acquire a farm, a philanthropic fundraiser  
**[0:16:45-0:16:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:16:45):**  to acquire a farm in West Virginia, followed by fundraise work and farm projects in Tennessee,  Virginia and New Hampshire.  So that kind of, you know, ready queue of projects that are vetted, that have community  engaged and the coalesced communities we have around each of these commons and the farms  and the structure by which we can and how we've shown that money can be raised to really  
**[0:17:18-0:17:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:17:18):**  transform ownership, equity and tenure is significant.  And what is happening around the Agrarian Commons in the US?  So the Agrarian Commons across the United States are really unique and specific to place.  From one Agrarian Commons to the next, their focus and priorities and stakeholders involved  differ.  
**[0:17:45-0:17:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:17:45):**  And so each has their own work, their own story and their own vision and priorities.  You know, from the main little Juba Agrarian Commons that I touched upon that's really  focused on bringing food security to the Somali Bantu community in Maine.  Maine is the least diverse state in the United States of America.  Maine is a state where first generation black Mainers are 52% food insecure.  
**[0:18:18-0:18:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:18:18):**  And those rates increase significantly when you deal with new Americans, refugees and  immigrants.  So, you know, the Somali Bantu community in Maine faces significant obstacles yet has  come persevered and really developed community and shaped identity of place and is really  manifesting an American dream that we all should learn from and be inspired by.  
**[0:18:50-0:18:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:18:50):**  So centering the work on bringing land security, creating a home and creating a farm for the  Somali Bantu community in Maine is significant.  We have other New England Agrarian Commons in Vermont and in New Hampshire.  Those Agrarian Commons are really focused on larger organic diversified food production  community engaged farm operations.  
**[0:19:21-0:19:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:19:21):**  So in Maine, there's bread and butter farm, and there's a Eagle's Flight farm in New Hampshire,  Brookford farm, Vernon family farm and Normanton farm.  All of those farms represent kind of a focus on organic regenerative agriculture, a focus  on community engagement, and really food production to serve that local community, and in a number  of cases to serve the broader regional food system as well.  
**[0:19:54-0:20:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:19:54):**  So those projects are moving forward with the due diligence of the real estate moving  forward to develop fundraising steps forward.  And so that's the work of those Commons.  One of those farms will be coming into ownership, it's a donation of farm that will come into  this common structure in the near term in the next few months, and others will move  
**[0:20:21-0:20:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:20:21):**  forward as fundraising launches and success is achieved in raising the capital.  Moving from there that a West Virginia Agrarian Commons and fundraise that I mentioned, that's  a partnership with county, with nonprofit, with other governmental stakeholders in Fayetteville,  West Virginia, and it's around bringing ownership of land and resources locally into the community  in a way that's secure and can assure that the land will not be extracted from, the land  
**[0:21:06-0:21:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:21:06):**  will not be exploited for a benefit, financial or otherwise, from those from afar, that bringing  land into local centered ownership, ensuring secure and affordable, equitable tenure for  a farmer led producer cooperative, and a nonprofit farm will allow food production, farm business  training, education, food access areas address.  So really that is the work of West Virginia in what is West Virginia and Montana, another  
**[0:21:46-0:21:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:21:46):**  Agrarian Commons, we have a real examples of states across the United States that have  seen significant extraction of natural resources to really create the United States, create  urban centers, create extractive natural resource wealth that exists.  So healing those lands, regenerating those lands, bringing ownership into local centered  structures, ensuring equity locally is critically important and layering that on regenerative  
**[0:22:24-0:22:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:22:24):**  farming that's producing food is that much more important.  So that's the work of those commons.  In Tennessee there's two farms, Windy Acres Farm and Long Hungry Creek Farm that represent  two of the oldest and first organic farms in the state of Tennessee.  And Windy Acres Farm represents one of the only organic non-GMO grain farms in middle  
**[0:22:50-0:22:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:22:50):**  Tennessee.  Both are serving local community and the larger regional food systems that serve Nashville  and Nashville Metro.  Nashville is one of the fastest growing mid-sized cities across the country and land pricing  and land development creates significant pressures in a city that values its food, values its  
**[0:23:16-0:23:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:23:16):**  land.  And so ensuring these legacy inspirational organic farms can be held in this model to  ensure the practices and stewardship continues forward and to ensure that they can transition  from one generation to the next.  Both of these farms are exiting landowners that Windy Acres, Alfred Ferris, the primary  
**[0:23:44-0:23:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:23:44):**  farmer just passed away earlier this year in February.  The other farmer on Long Hungry Creek, Jeff Poppin is nearing retirement in farming.  So ensuring that next generation farmers have access and secure equitable tenure on the  land and ensuring that the legacy and career stewardship that both the Ferris's and Jeff  Poppin have carried forward on their land and their farms and with their community will  
**[0:24:18-0:24:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:24:18):**  continue on is the work there and continue on as farmland is lost, land transitions into  other uses and more people develop and live across the landscape and there's a greater  need for local food security and food access.  Ensuring these farms are islands of health and islands of organic food production and  community engagement is critical there.  
**[0:24:52-0:24:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:24:52):**  So that's some examples, there are more examples of what the commons are up to, but that really  paints a picture of the diversity across the commons.  Companies also work on agrarian commons in the Richmond, Virginia area that's focused  on manifesting land justice and addressing racial equity in a way that the commons through  a nonprofit can.  
**[0:25:23-0:25:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:25:23):**  That there's limitations of a nonprofit, there's limitations of the commons, but the structure  and what it can bring to bear to manifest a just land ownership tenure relationship  that is centered on equity is critically important and land trusts have a significant role to  play in that and this agrarian commons and others will be illustrating models by which  of that can be addressed.  
**[0:25:58-0:26:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:25:58):**  So many examples, but those are some of the work of the agrarian commons and the uniqueness  of place and people involved.  Thank you so much for listening to another episode of Soar Builders.  Please let me know any of the feedback you have.  Reach us through investinginregenerativeagriculture.com, reach us through Twitter, reach us through  
**[0:26:19-0:26:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:26:19):**  Instagram, LinkedIn, and I hope to see you next time.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  
**[0:26:37-0:26:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:26:37):**  After a hundred interviews and more than a hundred hours of audio asking the question  how to put money to work in regenerating soils and I've been following the space since 2011  and recording these podcasts since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision-making framework, what to focus on with the podcast?  
**[0:26:57-0:27:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:26:57):**  How have we picked interviewees and what questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  
**[0:27:07-0:27:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:27:07):**  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  You the soil builders and investors in the space, the soil builders, people working in  this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers, vehicle builders, crowd investing,  platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food companies, permaculture, key line  
**[0:27:25-0:27:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:27:25):**  designers, holistic management, consultants, et cetera, et cetera.  People that are building soil at scale and the investors who are putting their own money  to work through their family office or as private individuals or people who are putting  other people's money to work through foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies,  et cetera.  
**[0:27:43-0:27:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:27:43):**  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you.  And I'm very aware that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very  
**[0:27:56-0:27:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:27:56):**  different means.  So I'm inviting you if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  
**[0:28:07-0:28:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:28:07):**  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides.  So you don't have to ride along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  
**[0:28:31-0:28:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:28:31):**  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  
**[0:28:47-0:28:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:28:47):**  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  
**[0:29:02-0:29:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/11/03/soil-builders-2/#t=0:29:02):**  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking, click on  the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  