### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2021-00-12)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  Welcome to Soil Builders, a series where we follow who is building soils at scale.  This is an experiment, so please share any feedback.  
**[0:00:22-0:00:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:00:22):**  Why this show Soil Builders?  I believe that most change in regenerative agriculture and food will come from and is  coming from entrepreneurs building ways to regenerate soil at scale.  I call these Soil Builders.  Soil Builders are entrepreneurial farmers, agtech companies, investment funds, food  
**[0:00:37-0:00:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:00:37):**  startups, new seed cooperatives, teams within food companies, robot startups, investment  vehicles etc. etc. etc.  All regenerating soil beyond their own farm gate and with more than their own money.  This series allows the community of the podcast, which is you, full of funders, investors and  fellow soil builders to follow their progress, their challenges and their breakthroughs.  
**[0:00:58-0:01:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:00:58):**  I hope you enjoy it and please reach out with any comments, feedback and ideas.  Today we check in with Lecci Ricci, co-founder of Ag Talent and the Carbon Farming Foundation,  who is getting ready to spend 40 million to kickstart carbon farming in Australia.  And we're checking in with Tyler and Tim Nuss, who are transitioning their 1000 acres  row crop vegetable farm in California to regenerative approaches.  
**[0:01:22-0:01:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:01:22):**  But first up Lecci.  Hi Lecci, long time no see.  Lots has happened.  Could you give us a short update on what has been happening over at Ag Talent since we  last talked in November 19?  
**[0:01:34-0:01:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:01:34):**  And what is the Carbon Farming Foundation?  Thanks Koen.  Yeah, it has been a huge year for our team.  So I'll keep it short and start in chronological order for you.  Last time we spoke, Ag Talent was very squarely focused around jobs and training and recruitment  
**[0:01:51-0:01:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:01:51):**  in the regenerative agriculture niche.  What we realized pretty quickly was that regenerative ag as an industry is still obviously a very  small global niche, and that jobs and training alone wasn't going to be a big enough market  segment for us as a business.  So not too long after we spoke in November last year, we pivoted slightly and we expanded  
**[0:02:14-0:02:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:02:14):**  to become RegenFarming.news and we've started curating global news on regenerative agriculture.  So we basically hunt the world every day for the best news in industry information that  people need to know, and have started curating, summarizing and broadcasting that out.  We're also started creating original content.  We do pharma interviews and a range of other content pieces just really trying to spread  
**[0:02:41-0:02:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:02:41):**  knowledge about regenerative ag and become, I guess, that central focal point for people  who are interested in getting started on the regenerative ag journey.  We also have a business directory where businesses involved in regenerative agriculture can list  themselves, promote themselves.  And the other component is a global library of resources.  
**[0:03:02-0:03:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:03:02):**  So we have a searchable resource base of podcasts, videos, academic reports, studies, just all  this kind of information that people might be looking for in regenerative ag.  So we pivoted to this, I guess, broader regenerative farming central platform for the world.  And it's been really successful.  Traffic has boosted massively.  
**[0:03:25-0:03:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:03:25):**  I mean, obviously, everyone experienced the challenges around COVID.  Oh, and that was obviously a huge impact on our business.  There wasn't a lot of people willing to spend money on advertising at the time.  So I mean, we've been able to ride through that pretty well just because as a small startup,  costs are low.  
**[0:03:42-0:03:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:03:42):**  So we're riding along pretty well through that.  And what we've experienced is, I guess, a huge boom towards the agricultural community  moving online.  We've had a lot of agronomists in particular who previously spent a lot of time traveling  interstate or even internationally to deliver services.  
**[0:04:00-0:04:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:04:00):**  And now they're all...  Same goes for training providers.  Now they're all scrambling to be online.  So we've had a lot of interest in them.  And one of the new features that we're building on Regen Farming News is online coaching.  
**[0:04:13-0:04:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:04:13):**  So allowing agronomists to basically coach people without having to travel, either in  a group setting, which the idea would be you might have a small group of, say, 10 people  with one agronomist coach, which brings the cost down for everyone.  And of course, also doing one-on-one coaching online.  Now none of this will ever replace face-to-face, we all know that.  
**[0:04:34-0:04:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:04:34):**  But the idea is that it might augment and support face-to-face.  So yes, we've had big changes, and things are all tracking along really well.  But I guess the biggest piece of news is that our business has been acquired by a newly  established carbon farming foundation.  So basically, carbon farming foundation was started off the back of a very generous philanthropic  
**[0:05:00-0:05:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:05:00):**  pledge from a gentleman named Norman Padder and his family to contribute $40 million over  10 years to kickstart or I guess boost the carbon farming industry within Australia.  So the aims of the foundation are twofold.  It's to support farmers to reduce their carbon footprints.  Because as we know, agriculture is one of the largest emitting industries as a whole.  
**[0:05:27-0:05:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:05:27):**  So one side of it is this emission reduction focus.  And then the other side of the foundation is focusing on carbon sequestration through  generating carbon credit units, either through revegetation or soil carbon is a main initial  two focus methods.  And I mean, really, the foundation is newly formed October 2020.  
**[0:05:48-0:05:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:05:48):**  And I'll be heading up the foundation.  And basically, the Regen Farming News team will all fold into the foundation and keep  operating as Regen Farming News.  Now, the foundation is a not for profit.  So it just basically means that our business is now effectively fully owned by a not for  
**[0:06:09-0:06:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:06:09):**  profit, it'll still run as a for profit business, but all proceeds or profit basically fold  into the not for profit, and it's broad emission.  Yeah, so it's big news for us.  So why did you decide to fold Act Talent and Regen Farming News into the Carbon Foundation  instead of simply between brackets, raising capital for Act Talent and Regen Farming News  
**[0:06:31-0:06:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:06:31):**  and continuing to scale and grow that business?  It's a really good question.  The main decision for us to fold into the Carbon Farming Foundation, and I guess, as  founders of Regen Farming News, we had put a lot of heart and soul over many years into  a startup unpaid as everyone does.  
**[0:06:51-0:06:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:06:51):**  And I guess, you're doing that in the hope that one day, there might be an equity position  for you, obviously.  But for us, the main motivator to merge with the Carbon Farming Foundation and give up  all of our shareholders, it really came down to impact.  We obviously started Regen Farming News to try and support the growth of regenerative  
**[0:07:12-0:07:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:07:12):**  agriculture as a whole.  That was firmly a mission oriented startup.  And I guess when the opportunity comes along to dedicate a $40 million philanthropic contribution  to the thing you care most about in the world, it's pretty hard to walk away from that opportunity.  So whilst Regen Farming News would have kept chugging along as a startup, and it was growing  
**[0:07:36-0:07:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:07:36):**  nicely, slowly, but steadily, and was looking really positive, I think, yeah, the main thing  for us was that with $40 million behind us, we can really boost the impact of what Regen  Farming News as a platform could do.  And it also means that Regen Farming News now becomes a piece of a bigger puzzle that  we can tackle with the broader Carbon Farming Foundation.  
**[0:08:00-0:08:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:08:00):**  So the foundation strategy is still getting better down, but it's got some pretty exciting  projects on the horizon.  We are going to look at, for example, supporting a greenhouse gas measurement tool.  So there are a number of those that are on the market in different parts of the world,  but we will help to see something commercialized in Australia that allows farmers to measure  
**[0:08:23-0:08:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:08:23):**  their greenhouse gas footprint.  And we think that can be huge to help with behavior change and capacity building for  farmers to help change the way they're managing the land to reduce emissions in the first  instance.  Now, longer term, that could obviously also feed into supporting carbon farming projects  
**[0:08:41-0:08:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:08:41):**  by giving, you know, if the tool was expanded to be able to measure soil carbon changes.  So there's a lot going on.  So that's one piece of the puzzle.  The other thing that we're going to be looking at is investing in large scale commercial  demonstrations of carbon farming done in a holistic mosaic approach.  
**[0:09:01-0:09:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:09:01):**  One of the things we're trying to avoid with carbon farming as an industry is the tendency  to buy big blocks of farmland and plant a whole lot to trees and effectively take out  large areas from agricultural production.  We don't see that as the future of carbon farming.  We see the future of carbon farming being a more mosaic type approach where carbon farming  
**[0:09:24-0:09:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:09:24):**  components, be those tree carbon or soil carbon, are integrated in a patchwork in and around  productive, regenerative agriculture.  And the other component is that we think that, especially currently with the carbon farming  bus over the carbon credit price in Australia, is that a carbon credit payment alone is not  enough of an incentive for a farmer to change land use on part of their land.  
**[0:09:51-0:09:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:09:51):**  So we'll be looking at how do you layer up the different values for a farmer, be that  can you get them a higher price for their food?  Can you get them green finance to reduce the cost of debt?  And then can you get them certified carbon neutral, for example?  And then the carbon credit payment?  
**[0:10:11-0:10:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:10:11):**  And then is there a possibility for other market payments for ecosystem services more  broadly?  So what we'll basically be doing is investing in large scale pilot projects around the country  where we try and develop out and prove these models.  And then we will open source all of our lessons from a financial perspective to, oh, it's  
**[0:10:31-0:10:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:10:31):**  really hard to get seedlings to plant trees.  So we'll look at what's going on in the industry as a whole and identify the major bottlenecks,  share these problems, and then we'll call for people to come up with solutions to some  of these bottlenecks in the carbon farming value chain.  And then we may invest in those or launch other projects and initiatives.  
**[0:10:54-0:10:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:10:54):**  So the strategy is still unfolding, but that gives you a little bit of a taste of what  the foundation will do with its generous endowment.  And how can listeners of the podcast help?  Yeah, we would love the help of all the listeners.  And at this early stage, really just keeping in touch with what's happening with Regen  
**[0:11:13-0:11:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:11:13):**  Farming News is a really good place to start.  Moving forward, the broader foundation as a whole will be seeking impact investment  from philanthropically minded donors.  So as we learn more about carbon farming projects, develop more projects, we will be structuring  different types of investment vehicles with varying risk return profiles to suit different  
**[0:11:38-0:11:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:11:38):**  impact investment hurdle rates.  So as that all develops, we'll certainly be presenting opportunities for investment.  As a tax deductible not for profit foundation, we will also be seeking donations, philanthropy,  blended finance.  So anyone who is interested in supporting the growth of the carbon farming industry  
**[0:12:00-0:12:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:12:00):**  in Australia, we'd love to hear from you.  Please stay in touch.  The best way to stay in touch is to subscribe currently to RegenFarming.News.  We have a wonderful weekly newsletter that presents updates of everything going on in  the world of regenerative ag.  
**[0:12:18-0:12:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:12:18):**  We scour the internet for the best news to save you having to do it.  And then through that same channel, we will broadcast updates about the Carbon Farming  Foundation, various initiatives, projects, opportunities to get involved and support  the growth of the carbon farming industry as a whole.  And look that will include the opportunity to purchase or forward contract for really  
**[0:12:41-0:12:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:12:41):**  high quality carbon credit units.  So we will be producing carbon credit units with additional co-benefits for biodiversity  outcomes, our social impact outcomes and other ecological outcomes.  So there'll be a lot going on with the foundation as we find our feet.  We're brand new, but 2021 will be a big founding year for us.  
**[0:13:04-0:13:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:13:04):**  So yeah, please stay in touch.  And next up a deep dive into a farm in transition with Tyler and Tim, who have an amazing podcast  as well called The Modern Farmer.  We're using the regenerative agriculture continuum framework of Ethan Soloveev, which we'll link  below if you want to know more.  
**[0:13:22-0:13:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:13:22):**  Basically it looks at regen as not a destination, but a continuum from degenerative practices  and approaches to regenerative practices and approaches.  It doesn't help asking a farmer, are you regenerative?  But it helps asking what regenerative approaches are you applying and what would you like to  change in the future?  
**[0:13:37-0:13:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:13:37):**  And that's exactly what we're doing here.  Enjoy.  The framework uses different questions divided in characteristics like resilience, economic  sustainability, inputs, fuel, fertilizer, seeds, animals, et cetera, and practices slash  approaches tillage, pest and disease.  
**[0:13:52-0:13:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:13:52):**  Could you please describe briefly your farm, where you are, what's your size, what are  you farming and since when you and your family have been connected to this land?  Yeah, this is Tim.  Thanks for having us, Kon.  Our family, Nuss Farms, farms in Northern California in a town called Lodi, which is  
**[0:14:06-0:14:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:14:06):**  about an hour and a half east of the San Francisco Bay Area.  We farm about a thousand acres of row crop specialty vegetables.  Tyler and I both represent the fifth generation of a farming family.  This particular ranch that we're farming, we farm for close to 50 years.  Yeah.  
**[0:14:22-0:14:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:14:22):**  So this is Tyler.  Tim and I grew up in and around agriculture and being on the farm doing odd jobs growing  up and we both actually went away from the farm to develop our careers.  Tim studied international business and got into the produce industry, did category management,  import and export of produce across the globe, and most recently has been involved in a few  
**[0:14:45-0:14:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:14:45):**  ad tech startups and is currently at Appeal Sciences working in supplier relations.  My background is in engineering.  I got into the tech industry several years ago working for Apple in supply chain operations,  supporting the iPhone, iPad programs, and most recently I work in an electric car startup  called Rivian supporting commercial operations, things like retail, service, digital commerce.  
**[0:15:12-0:15:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:15:12):**  But a few years ago, Tim and I became more interested in what was happening back at the  family farm, talking to our dad, talking to our oldest brother.  And as we started talking and researching about what was happening in the industry,  we felt like there wasn't a great place for the next generation to really learn and connect  from one another.  
**[0:15:28-0:15:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:15:28):**  So we actually started a podcast of our own called The Modern Acre, where we interview  people all around the ag industry on and off the farm, entrepreneurs, founders, thought  leaders, farmers, and really learn from what they're doing and how they're growing and  scaling their businesses.  And along that journey, we've been doing the podcast now for almost three years.  
**[0:15:49-0:15:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:15:49):**  We've become much more actively involved in our farm's operation and through the podcast  really learned more about regenerative agriculture and have been transitioning the farm over  the past year or so.  Looking at the economic sustainability of the farm, how would you describe your current  situation and where would you like to see it in five to 10 years?  
**[0:16:07-0:16:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:16:07):**  Well, it's actually an interesting story.  The economic sustainability of the farm has been quite a journey.  About 15, 20 years ago, our farm really heavily invested in the asparagus industry.  It was a huge crop in the Central Valley of California.  In fact, one of the adjacent towns Stockton had an annual asparagus festival.  
**[0:16:29-0:16:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:16:29):**  So it was a huge part of the culture and the economic sustainability of the area.  Our dad made a decision to really double down on that crop.  We invested heavily in infrastructure and equipment.  And as we scaled up, we became more vertically integrated grower, packer, shipper.  We actually exported to Japan, had a Japanese label.  
**[0:16:50-0:16:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:16:50):**  But then a series of events happened to really hurt the business.  One was NAFTA, the trade agreement that was agreed to that really shifted production of  asparagus in large part to Mexico and South America.  And number two was just the ongoing labor challenges that you talk a lot about on the  podcast, especially in California.  
**[0:17:12-0:17:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:17:12):**  And three was we actually had a series of arson fires that took out our offices on the  farm.  It was just a crazy sequence of events that happened.  We were just kids and our dad was managing to figure out how to handle all that.  But that really hurt the business.  
**[0:17:28-0:17:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:17:28):**  From there, our dad and our oldest brother really had to rethink the business and build  it back from scratch with very little working capital to do so.  So the past decade or so has been our oldest brother and our dad working their way back  to profitability by slowly and incrementally improving the deals, the contracts that we  have on the farm.  
**[0:17:49-0:17:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:17:49):**  So going from things like corn, which is a lower value crop, to things like garlic and  tomatoes and cucumbers.  And so that's where we sit today as a profitable operation.  But as Tim and I became a little bit more involved and interested in where the direction  of the farm was going, our dad was actually involved in an equipment accident on the farm  
**[0:18:08-0:18:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:18:08):**  where he broke every rib in his body.  And it was a pretty scary moment for us as a family.  He thankfully has made a full recovery, but it was a really big turning point for us as  a family because we had to look at each other and decide what we were going to do with the  farm and where was the farm going in the next five to 10 years.  
**[0:18:24-0:18:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:18:24):**  And so it was around this time where we were learning about regenerative agriculture and  how that could be a solution and provide not just a direction, but a vision for the farm.  And so we're profitable today, but with our transition to regenerative agriculture, we  hope to not only be more profitable, but also increase revenue with some of the different  business approaches we're doing.  
**[0:18:45-0:18:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:18:45):**  In terms of ecological sustainability, when you look at the level of degradation in your  ecosystem, where do you stand now?  Where did you stand when you started farming and where do you plan to go in 10 years?  So historically we've been a conventional farm, farming conventionally for quite a few  years.  
**[0:19:01-0:19:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:19:01):**  We've always strived to do well by our soil and crop rotations have been a part of our  process for a very long time, as well as conservation easements to enhance the land for wildlife  and that kind of thing.  But really going forward, we want to really double down on regenerative and start incorporating  these practices at scale by introducing cover crops, by reducing our tillage and also reducing  
**[0:19:20-0:19:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:19:20):**  synthetic inputs over time.  So we've made a number of pretty big moves here in 2020, doing our first livestock integration  and planting pasture, really doing our first cover crops at scale at the end of this year,  and also looking at different ways we can no-till plants coming spring.  How is the level of diversity on the farm and where would you like to take it?  
**[0:19:40-0:19:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:19:40):**  Yeah, this is Tyler.  I think this is actually one area that we've done really well in our existing conventional  system, but I think we want to double down and really lean into that because it is something  we do well.  We're a grower of annual crops, so having a diverse rotational system is something that  
**[0:19:59-0:20:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:19:59):**  we're super accustomed to.  So take a given field, one year it could be garlic, the next year cucumbers, the next  year tomatoes.  And we think there's a ton of advantages of that, but in terms of scaling regenerative  agriculture, it really hasn't been done at this scale, in the 100 to 1000 acre range  
**[0:20:17-0:20:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:20:17):**  of how to figure out how to manage everything from planting to weed control to harvesting  to off-season cover crops.  And that's really what we're working through right now to figure out how to do that.  Another thing that we're incorporating into this annual rotation is the livestock integration  that Tim alluded to.  
**[0:20:37-0:20:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:20:37):**  So we're partnering with a company called Pasture Bird, and we're actually doing something  that I think is quite unique in the space of incorporating what we call a rotational  pasture.  So instead of garlic, tomatoes, or cucumbers being in a given field, we're actually dedicating  100 acres of our farm to pasture raised poultry.  
**[0:20:56-0:21:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:20:56):**  So this will incorporate movable coops that will move to a fresh patch of pasture every  day and methodically and systematically move through the field and almost supercharge the  field in terms of soil health.  So that's going to be another piece of this whole puzzle is moving this rotational pasture  throughout the farm, supercharging the soil, and then after we rotate out of the pasture,  
**[0:21:19-0:21:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:21:19):**  going back in with vegetables, which is pretty exciting, especially as it relates to tracking  those changes in soil health and nutrient density over time.  Another thing we've also done is really doubled down on our R&D trials and really try to experiment  and explore with what new varieties we can be bringing into commercial production, testing  things like radishes, horseradish, different kinds of squash, peppers, a lot of different  
**[0:21:43-0:21:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:21:43):**  things that we're trialing at small scale to see how we can work those into our regenerative  system in the future.  So when thinking about resilience on the farm, what comes to mind?  Definitely starting with the soil, I think our focus on the soil here going forward is  going to make us resilient to a couple different factors, reducing our reliance on traditional  
**[0:22:00-0:22:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:22:00):**  inputs and weaning ourselves off those over time where it makes sense, and also building  up the organic matter in the soil to mitigate against certain weather instances and lack  of rainfall where we have moisture captured in the soil that can help us navigate certain  events better than without it.  Yeah.  
**[0:22:16-0:22:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:22:16):**  And another thing, when I think about resilience, I also think about business resilience and  something that Tim and I are really trying to do is optimize the business.  So we're focused on improving the sales channels in a few different ways.  One is we want to be the premier regenerative ingredient producer of vegetables and specialty  crops.  
**[0:22:39-0:22:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:22:39):**  So we really want to market ourselves as being able to provide high volume, regeneratively  grown ingredients to food brands that are really interested in this space and connecting  with consumers and working directly with farms.  We're actually doing that today with a few different food brands and talking about how  we can work together and navigate the supply chain.  
**[0:23:00-0:23:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:23:00):**  That's really where the focus of the business is going.  But also we're exploring a few different other areas of really getting closer to the consumer.  So one area we're doing that is by produce box delivery.  So we just started doing that this year, shipping some of our specialty crops.  We trialed some row seven seed squash varieties and we're shipping those through a company  
**[0:23:21-0:23:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:23:21):**  called Fruitstand.  So anyone in the US could actually order a Nesfarm squash box directly to their door.  So that's super exciting for us and fun to connect directly with people that care about  how their food is grown and where their food is coming from.  And then lastly, we're also developing a brand focused on regenerative agriculture, a brand  
**[0:23:43-0:23:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:23:43):**  that sources their ingredients directly from regenerative farmers.  And so we're going to be sharing more about that in the months to come, but we're trialing  a product, doing product development today.  And we really want to be a leader in the CPG space and be one of the first and biggest  regenerative brands out there.  
**[0:24:02-0:24:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:24:02):**  So that's another key area of the business.  And when we think about resilience, it's about having business diversity and being able to  have different revenue streams.  And so you're not dependent on that one deal or that one contract.  We really want to go in that direction.  
**[0:24:18-0:24:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:24:18):**  What waste and pollution does the farm currently produce and how are you planning to work with  that in the future?  A couple of things come to mind here.  First one being fuel, obviously the diesel to get the tractors moving around the farm.  So I don't see us moving away from that very quickly.  
**[0:24:32-0:24:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:24:32):**  But there is some developments happening in the space.  We've talked to a number of companies like Monarch tractor and Z tractor, small robot  company that are all doing some really interesting things in the space where we see a really  viable path there in the future to start replacing kind of the traditional tractor with zero  emission vehicles.  
**[0:24:48-0:24:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:24:48):**  Another thing that I think about when I think about waste is water waste and irrigation  on the farm.  We do it a number of different ways, but one of the primary ways is flood irrigation, which  isn't the most effective.  So in the future, looking at ways where we can incorporate overhead sprinklers as well  
**[0:25:01-0:25:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:25:01):**  as drip irrigation, obviously those come with a pretty big cost.  So that's kind of what we're balancing, weighing the investment to improve the water infrastructure  versus the present state.  What kind of crops or produce are you currently farming and how do you see that changing over  the next years?  
**[0:25:16-0:25:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:25:16):**  This is Tyler.  Currently we're growing garlic, tomatoes, cucumbers, sunflowers, wheat, and we're also  doing the pastured poultry integration that I talked about.  In addition, we're doing the trials of specialty vegetables and unique varieties.  And I think what's important to mention is because we're in an annual crop system, we  
**[0:25:39-0:25:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:25:39):**  have a lot of flexibility with what we can grow and introduce.  And so it gets me really excited talking to some of these food brands that I mentioned  and learning about their ingredient needs and how we could fill those.  So I think in the future, we are definitely open and interested to evolving our rotation  and what we put into the ground.  
**[0:25:59-0:26:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:25:59):**  And so definitely excited by that prospect.  But I can tell you in 2021, we'll probably have an increased number of peppers, doing  a few different varieties of peppers, which we're excited about.  Yeah, definitely like our ability to iterate quickly year over year and trial and experiment  with new things, especially being able to double and sometimes triple crop.  
**[0:26:16-0:26:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:26:16):**  Like a lot of these crops that we're looking at, radishes are a 30 day crop, cucumbers  are a 60 day crop.  So you do have the ability to cycle numerous crops off the same field in a given year and  really incorporate that crop rotation and build the soil health.  Where do you source your inputs from?  
**[0:26:31-0:26:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:26:31):**  International, regional, local, or on the farm?  So we primarily source our inputs pretty traditional here in California, sourcing from a multinational  ag retailer.  One of the large guys that has a local regional presence, which obviously offers us a level  of service being close and local, being able to get us product when we need it on time  
**[0:26:49-0:26:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:26:49):**  and have the distribution and capabilities to do so.  That's really a main reason why a lot of farms are still on this model where there's such  a level of high service, high touch to facilitate what's happening on the farm.  But we are looking in the future of ways that we can incorporate biologicals and not be  so reliant on synthetics.  
**[0:27:07-0:27:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:27:07):**  Obviously as we build our soil, the rates are going to come down, the resilience against  pests and weed pressures are going to come down naturally.  So we're still looking at that as our North Star, but still in the traditional model as  it relates to procuring inputs.  Yeah, I think we view it as a balance, right?  
**[0:27:21-0:27:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:27:21):**  It's something that needs to happen over time.  But something about the traditional model is the PCAs we work with, the retailers we  work with aren't incentivized, right, to reduce our inputs over time.  That's how they make their money.  And so trying to balance that and work with them to reduce our inputs over time is something  
**[0:28:02-0:28:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:28:02):**  that we're really looking at.  Yeah.  Yeah.  Yeah.  Yeah.  
**[0:30:32-0:31:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:30:32):**  Yeah.  Yeah.  Yeah.  Yeah.  Yeah.  
**[0:33:02-0:33:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:33:02):**  Yeah.  Yeah.  Yeah.  Yeah.  Yeah.  
**[0:34:32-0:35:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:34:32):**  Yeah.  Yeah.  Yeah.  Yeah.  Yeah.  
**[0:36:01-0:36:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/soil-builders-4/#t=0:36:01):**  Yeah.  Yeah.  Yeah.  Yeah.  Thank you very much for taking the time to listen to our story today!  